
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



iiiiiiii|isiiijiiiiiii!iii:iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 

08158757 2 



'T 





r^ TKon\as B A\o/'Ker <^ 



1 






^<£ ky^jL.Oft^li^ 



J '■' 



LEICESTER. 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 



POEMS. 

5/. 



ELLIOT STOCK, 62, PATEENOSTER ROW. 



LEICESTEE 



Jin JUttobiographs 



FRANCIS WILLIAM L. ADAMS 



'AiiminrlopMM 
Che son ImcIo g**T*»*"** penooft TlYft' 
Damtb 



IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. I 



LONDON 

GEORGE REDWAY 

YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN 

1885 



THE NEW YORK 
PUBLIC LIBIIARY 

489315K 

AarOB, LENIX AK* 
TiLVEN V%\WiUAfim% 
B 1)41 L 



Empedokles. 



TJ* 



X 

05 



A. L. A. 



CONTENTS OP VOL. I. 



I. - - - - - 1 
U. 35 

ni. 63 

IV. 87 

n. 

I. 106 

II. - - - . - 133 
III. - - - - .169 
|V|C 208 

m. 

L 249 

n. 279 

ra. 314 



LEICESTER. 

I. 

CHAPTER I. 

At Bome time in my earliest childhood I 
masty I think, have lived near a wind-mill : 
for I have, at times, ever since I can re- 
member, seen one in the middle of a tender 
yellowy-golden band of snnset on a sandy 
elevation. Somewhere, perhaps below in 
the house in which I am, a canary, cage- 
less, with upward -throbbing throat, sings. 
And then I know a darker vision than that 
of the wind-mill in the middle of a tender 
yellowy-golden band of sunset on a sandy 
elevation : a darker vision of a slanting 
planked floor, with an uncertain atmo- 

VOL. I, 1 



2 Leicester. 

Bphere and a sound therein, and perhaps from 
thereout, as of on the sea- A dim-light- 
rayed lamp oscillates in the middle, A 
woman is up in one of the berths giving 
suck to and soothing a child half-fractious 
with sleep and misery. In the far comer 
is a huddled tartan - petticoated lump 
rounded, with two protruding bare knees — 
a boy unkempt, dirty, miserable, afraid of 
some heavy coming footstep. I know in 
some way that I am the boy. 

And then comes another lighter vision 
in a broader scene. A red-cheeked woman 
rolls a perambulator and a quiet boy down 
a cindery path in the shine of a moist sun- 
set. They stop by a grey-sweating-barred 
gate (there are four or five bars : not less). 
"When, in a little, the boy struggles out 
from the tarpaulin of the perambulator on 
to the moist earth, crosses the tall wet rank 
grasses and climbs on to the gate, to look 
at a band of tender yellowy-gold down by 
the horizon, which is to him a revelation of 
heaven. And on that day that tender 



Leicester. 8 

yellowy-gold band and far sky of light seemed 
to him to contain faint outlines of great- 
winged angels : beyond, a chasm of clearer 
pnrer light : and beyond, God. 

Now everything changes. My next re- 
collection of a certain fixed occasion brings 
with it an acquaintance, often strangely 
minute and distinct, of myself and of the 
life that was around me. Thus : — 

From standing with some wistfulness in 
the twilight road I turn slowly away; 
shoulders rounded, collar awry, hands deep 
in pockets: slouch to the right, along the 
second side (at right angles to the road) of 
the wall, and there stop — ^thinking about 
things. 

A white duck hurries waddling, filled 
with anxiousness, across the grass further 
on : to paddle her beak in the edge of the 
stream. And I walk with big strides till I 
am parallel to her : reach the wooden bridge 
(duck the while paddling her beak in the 
border of watery mud of the stream) : 
give one glance at a hole in the bank from 

1—2 



4 Leicester. 

which trickles the thick inky sluggish fluid : 
and enter the porch. 

No one in the kitchen. The clock tick- 
tacking with big silent swing : the plates, 
with their ruddy flickering fire-light, in 
rows. The lamp not lit yet. 

Then I hear a motion as of some one 
shoving a jar on to a shelf in the pantry : 
cross quickly through the kitchen: down 
the red-tiled passage (up come two or three 
loose tiles with a collapsed fall), catching a 
semi-earthy smell from under the cellar 
door (some one's in the pantry : Anne, I 
think) : run upstairs two steps at a time : 
turn down the dark passage : reach my 
ladder foot : climb up : shove open the 
door : enter the dim garret : go on to the 
window : look out over the graveyard : 
and then turn and begin to take in, half- 
unconsciously, the red-painted lines on the 
card over the washing-stand : * I love them 
that love Me, and those that seek Me earhj 
shall find Me.' 

I turn again : go back to the window. 



Leicester^ 5 

and, with a knee on the white-painted 
window-gill, look out into the twilight sky, 
in which are vaguely the tall dark wild 
rook-trees with their black broad tops, the 
many gravestones, and the small church to 
the right — all vague, semi-existent to me. 
Then : 

* Ber-tie V 

The word, rising a note, startles me, 
half-thrills me. Anne is at the foot of the 
ladder. 

Up she steps : shoves the door open al- 
together : and at once begins : 

* Lor', Master Bertie, why you look as if 
you'd bin seein' a ghost out in the grave- 
yard, you do. Gracious alive, the eyes of 
him I Did you ever now? Master 
Bertie ' 

* Don't be a fool. What do you want ?' 
I ask. ' If you want me for tea, I'm not 
coming. Tell Mother Purchis so.' 

Anne urges that Mrs. Purchis is in ever 
such a bad temper this evening : and it 
being his last night too, eh ? And it isn't 



Leicester*. 



good for him to drop off his victnals like 
that; and he going away to school to- 
morrow, and hasn't eat anything to speak 
of this week, considerin'. 

I9 remaining obdurate, take to my old 
attitude, with my knee upon the white- 
painted window-sill, now faint and dim, and 
look through the dark rook-trees into the 
dimmer fields. Anne continues : Which she 
does hope he doesn't bear any malice, Master 
Bertie, and him going away to-morrow, to 
school, and might never see her again, but 
they both be dead and buried before then, 
and if it wasn't that . . . (Then, sharply) : 
But she always did say, and we'd see 
who was right or not, that that boy would 
come to no 

I leap to her. 

* I will throw you down the ladder,' I 
say, catching her by the arm, * if you 
don't . . . Gor 

She» rather frightened, goes. 

All that evening I sat on the sill look- 



Leicester. 7 

ing out across the chorchyard to the hedge 
and the rook-trees. The black shadows 
grew broader and deeper. There was no 
moon. Only a light wmd in the evening : 
singing throngh a crack in the lead-work, 
close by my ear : till Timothy Goodwin, the 
sexton, came Umping along the London 
Bead with a lantern : to unlock the gates. 
Then he locked them again, carefully, after 
him : limped to old Mr. Atkin's grave and 
began cutting the grass on it with a clink- 
ing shears, having put down the lantern by 
him. 

I watched him and thought about things. 

Presently he lifted up his light, put it 
down again and began on another patch : 
I still watching him and thinking about 
things. Then he took up his light and 
stood for a moment, brushing the knees of 
his corduroys with his hand : then turned 
and limped towards the gates. I smiled 
throngh the tears thi^t were in my eyes 
and on my cheeks. If I had been there 
with old Timothy I would have put 



is Leicester. 

my arms round his neck and kissed 
him. 

On he limped over the grass, through the 
tombs, over the sanded walk, the lantern- 
light passing before him ; till now he 
reached the gates : unlocked them : went 
out : re-locked them, — And there he goes, 
jogging over furrows and hollows Uke a 
"Will-'o-the-wisp, up the London road. 

When I had lost sight of the small light 
behind the hedge, I returned to my think- 
ing somewhere about where I had left it 
off, but brokenly. 

. • . They were not kind to me. I was 
going away to school to-morrow morning ; 
at seven. To a boarding-school. P'r'aps 
they'd love me there. . . . But I didn't 
know. I thought I should die some day 
soon. I shouldn't mind dying so much — 
no one knew what sort of things I wanted 
to do. I didn't think anyone ever would. 
That was it — no one. . . . Yes : one. God. 
He knows! God knows 1 God can see 
everything I 



Leicester. 9 

An impulse came in me. I went to the 
bed and slipped down onto my knees to tell 
Him about it ; but then, remembering that 
He was up in the sky, I clasped my two 
hands together and looked up to Him ; and 
said: 

' Dear God, You are a long, long way 
away from me : right up in the deep, blue 
sky, farther away than even the sun, and 
the moon, and the stars. — ^But I love You I 
oh, I love You I because You know every- 
thing I think about, and everything that I 
want to do. And I pray that You won't let 
me die till I am very old and have done all 
the things I want to do. But please help 
me to be a great man. Through Jesus 
Christ our blessed Lord, Amen.' 

Then I got up, and undressed, and got 
into bed. And was soon asleep. 

The morning after my prayer up in. my 
little evening room at Furchis's farm, Mr. 
Furchis and I came up by train to some 
large station, where we got out and crossed 



10 Leicester. 



to another platform. As we were going, he 
having me by the hand, he told me to tie a 
white comforter round my arm, bo that <the 
Colonel's man ' might know me at the 
other end. Then I was put into a third- 
class compartment : Mr. Purchis gave me 
a shake by the hand, lingered purposelessly a 
moment looking into the carriage, and then 
turned and went away down the platform. 
I did not care to watch him more than ten 
yards or so. I did not care to look at the 
other passengers. It all seemed like a sort 
of half-dream, and I did not think I was 
going anywhere in particular. 

There were a good many other people in 
the carriage. Some got in : some got out : 
I didn't notice them much. I sat thinking 
about things. 

After a long time (it was growing darker 
now) an old lady next me, who'd been 
asleep, awoke and took a basket from 
under the seat and put it upon her knees, 
and, in a little, said to me that we were 
^ close to London now, my dear.* I said : 



Leicester. 1 1 

'Thank you!' and looked out of the 
wmdow* 

Then the train stopped by a long planked 
platfonn, and the people (three now) all 
rose np. A clergyman got out first and 
pulled a glazed bag along the floor down to 
him. Then the old lady got out, and her 
daughter (as I thought) handed her down 
the basket and got out too. 

After a Uttle I went up to the other win- 
dow and pressed my nose against the pane 
and looked out for ^ the Colonel's man." 
Then I thought that he mightn't be able to 
know me without the white-comfortered 
arm, so I put it out through the door, and 
waited. 

All at once a man with thin legs in 
brown trousers (they looked thin : perhaps 
it was only because the trousers were tight) 
came out from between two old ladies with 
band-boxes and right up to me. He touched 
his hat. This was ' the Colonel's man.' 

We took a cab and went across London, 
and stopped in a square before another large 



12 Leicester. 

station, but not so large a one as the first. 
A porter undid the door, and we got out, 
and the box was taken down, and put onto 
a trolly, and we followed it into the station. 
There it was tilted beside two others onto 
its head (the trolly I mean), and we had ten 
minutes to wait before the gate was open. 

^ The Colonel's man ' began talking to 
the porter about something. I went on a 
little and stood and looked at some pictures 
hung up by a newspaper stall. One was of 
a great ship in the docks, going to be 
launched. As I was looking — 

* Come along,' said ^ the Colonel's man,* 
taking me by the hand. * The gate's 
open.' 

We went up the platform together and 
got into a carriage pretty far up. I sat 
down, and sat silent : and every now and 
then my eyelids came down, and my head 
moved forward, and I nearly fell. I should 
very much like to have lain down and gone 
to sleep in a cool white bed. 

At last we came, after many stops, to a 



Leicester. 13 

dead stop, and ' the Coloners man ' put his 
hand on my arm : and then I was Ufted 
down : and we went out, I just behind him 
and a porter carrying the box. At the door 
in the cool evening wind 'the Colonel's 
man ' agreed with a boy to take the box np 
to Park Boad for sixpence. And then we 
all set off. 

After a Uttle ' the Colonel's man ' and I 
were ahead. It was rather a steep hill, 
and I felt rather tired but not so sleepy 
now. We went on slowly : till he stopped 
and said : 

' Give ns a hand. It is a bit of a pull 
np this hill, young 'un, ain't it — eh V 

I gave him my hand and we went on 
again silently till, passing through the 
lamplight from a tall lamp-post and through 
an open gate, we stood on the flagstone 
before a low doorway. * The Colonel's man ' 
pulled at the bell-handle. A bell rang. 
Then, in a little, we heard steps and the 
door was opened by a maid with a white 
apron and cap. 



14 Leicester. 

* Well, good-bye, mi lad,' said * the 
Colonel's man," turning to me, * I'm about 
at the end of my part o' the business, I 
suppose. Good luck to ye, sir : good luck 
to ye.' 

He put his hand on my shoulder : and 
then was out through the gate and into the 
darkness. I looked after him, slowly. 
The maid stamped her feet on the ground. 
Then: 

* Where's your box ?' said she. 

At that moment the boy with the wheel- 
barrow and the box appeared under the 
lamp-post at the comer, some little way 
ofif. She must have seen him. 

' Oh, that's it,' said she. * I suppose 
he's paid aU right ?' 

* Yes : ** the Colonel's man " paid him,' 
I said. 

^ Then you'd better go into the dining- 
room. Give us your keys first/ (I found 
and gave her the key of my box) — * That's 
it.' She pointed to the door in the left 
side of the hall. 



Leicester. 15 

I crossed the glazed carpet^ opened the 
door, and went in. 

A large fire was burning with a flicker- 
ing light. It flickered on the black glazy 
table-cloth of a long thin table in the 
middle of the room ; on another running 
at right angles to it across the right side 
of the room, in a broad half-bay window. 
Outside there was a veranda, and the 
dark evening. 

At last I went to the bench and, half 
npon it, leant my face in my arms on the 
cool table-cloth. The things around me 
were all in a sort of noise above my ears. 
I could not weep soft tears : the tears 
were dried behind my eyes. But, after a 
little, I seemed to grow dreary ; and could 
have wished to sleep. 

I took to no one. One or two fellows 
made up to me a little at first ; but I just 
answered them and turned away, neither 
oaring to talk to them or let them talk 
to me. It was not that I was homesick : I 
had no home. . I don't know what it was. 



16 Leicester*. 

^ I like Wallace better than any of the 
others. Neither of us ever have jam or 
cake: he not even 3d. a week like 
me. He loves his little belly. Hell 
always go to Harris's, the grab shop, for 
anyone who'U give him a good big bit 
of the stuff they're getting (of course 
you're licked if you're caught going, ex- 
cept on Saturdays and Wednesdays from two 
to three). And I have often told him that 
I think it is beastly of him to do it; but he 
doesn't care, so long as he gets the grub. 
That's one reason why I don't care to talk 
to him about some things I know of. I tell 
him tales, and all that; but that's different. 

* Whittaker is an old beast. He's fond 
of caning us I'm sure. When you go into 
the library on Saturdays after school, to 
get three strokes if you've had more than 
twelve mistakes in dictation, he won't let 
you kneel down loose, as if you were pray- 
ing, but he makes you bend up over till 
you're quite tight. It's very nasty going 
tight again after the first one. 



Leicester. 17 



*Mrs. Whittaker is a humbug. She 
says " 'umble " and '' 'otel " and " 'ospital/' 
and says it's right to say them that way. 
She listens to what the fellows say, and 
then tells the Eeverend, and they catch it. 
She reads fellows' letters. She corrects 
fellows' letters home, and makes them say 
that Mr. and Mrs. Whittaker are very kind 
to them, and other things. Besides, she 
tells lies. She has two babies, little brats 
that squawl. On the whole, I hate her. 

* I don't mind the work much, especially 
the history. Latin's rather rot, and so is 
geography and arithmetic. I like poetry 
best : we have a book full of it. The first 
poem is called The Universal Prayer , by 
A. Pope. The one I like best is called 
A Psalm of Life by Longfellow.' 

One Saturday night when Cookie was 
washing me. — ^You see, that particular 
night I was rather funny: having been 
out on the heath alone, (of course I 
should have been punished^ perhaps licked, 
if I'd been caught. We were never allowed 

VOL. I. 2 



18 Leicester. 

out except we got leave, in twos), and 
tliinking about all sorts of things, and 
particularly that I should die before I was 
twenty. So, as Cookie was washing me, I 
asked her if she knew what, 

For the sovZ is dead that slumbers 
and things are not ivhat they seem, 

meant ? She didn't. — Then I asked her 
about the other things in it, one by one ; 
but she didn't seem to understand them 
much either. 

Well ; after I'd gone up to the dormi- 
tory (I was first that night), while the 
others were up at prayers, she came in 
quite quietly as I was lying thinking and 
looking at the white ceiling, and sat down 
on the bed by me and took out a little 
round hot pasty, and said I was to eat it 
while she was cutting my nails. So she 
drew back the curtain, and I got out of 
the clothes, and she began to cut my nails. 
And while I was sitting in that way, eating 
Ihe hot pasty and thinking, I thought I'd 



Leicester. 19 

like to tell her the Psalm of Life : bo I 
asked her if she'd care to hear it. She 
said ^ Yes/ So I began to tell it her. 
She'd finished cutting by the time I'd got 
past half through : and sat with my foot in 
her lap, looking at me, till I'd done it. 
Then we heard them coming down from 
prayers : so she told me to jump into bed, 
aod tacked me np and gave me a kiss, and 
said: 

* I hope it won't make yon conceited, 
Master Leicester, but you're the best-look- 
ing of the boarders. And I hope you'll be 
happy.' 

I didn't think of all this till Wallace told 
me on Monday night that Cookie had left. 
And afterwards Mrs. Whittaker told me 
Cookie was a thief and had stolen a lot of 
her things, but I didn't believe it. 

At the end of the term we were examined 
by a gentleman who came from Colchester 
School, where Whittaker was when he was 
a kid. Blake was his name. I liked him; 
We were all examined together in English 

2—2 



20 Leicester. 

and Scripture : and he said that I was the 
brightest boy of the lot, and to the 
Keverend too, when he came in at one 
o'clock and they were standing talking 
together at the door. 

The next day was Speech-day. We 
most of us had pieces of poetry, Shak- 
spere or out of the poetry-book, to say. 
We were supposed to choose our own 
pieces. I was just head of my form by 
the term marks, (there were only five in it, 
Black, Campbell, Morris, Wallace, and I), 
and I chose the Psalm of Life. Currie 
(the undermaster) didn't mind; and so I 
learnt it again, a little excited : I mean, 
read it over with the book, and repeated it 
again and again, to make sure I hadn't for- 
gotten any of it. 

I remember how I sat in my place, wait- 
ing for my turn, with my lips rather dry, 
and every now and then I shivered as if a 
draught came upon me through an opened 
door ; but I wasn't really afraid. I was a 
little excited, I say; and yet it seemed 



Leicester. 21 

somehow like a dream and I couldn't notice 
anyone's face. 

^ At last my turn came. It was after 
Whitman's. I got up shivering, and I 
thought I shouldn't have breath to say it 
all with. But when I got up onto the 
green-baize platform, and stood in the 
middle, and looked down over them, the 
ladies in their white and coloured dresses, 
and the men, and the boys — all at once the 
shivering went away from me altogether : 
and I turned my head straight to Mr. 
Blake at the table at the side, and smiled 
to him. He smiled too, but only in his 
eyes. And I began : — 

Tell me not in maumfvZ numbers, 
' Life is but an empty dreams P 

For the soul is dead that slumbers, 
and things are n^t wh/U they seem. 

And my voice rose, growing stronger 
and clearer, and at last I did not see any- 
thing there at all, not even the coloured 
mass of the dresses, but only a warm gold 
air idl round me, and something singing 



22 Leicester. 

softly all round me like far off sunshiny 
water. 

Then all at once I laughed : and though 
Ine tears were quite full in my eyes, I could 
have shouted out, I felt so bold and 
brave and ready for it all, even for when I 
should have to die and be buried in the 
cold dark earth. And my voice rang as I 
said : 

Lives of great Toen all remivd us 
we can make owr lives sublivie^ 

and, departing, leave behind us 
footprints in the sands of time ; 

Footprints thai perhaps another, 
sailing o'er life's solernn main, 

some forlorn and shipwrecked brother, 
seeing shall taJce heart again. 

— Let us, then, be up and doing, 

with a heart for any fate ; 
still achietnng, still pursuing, 

learn to labour and to wait 

Towards the end I had grown sadder a 
little : and, now it was all said and over, I 
stood there for a moment with my head 
bent down looking at the ground of the 
room below the green-baize platform. It 



Leicester. 23 

seemed some time, but I dare say it was 
only a moment. But when they all began 
to clap, and I looked up quickly and saw 
them all round me — ^I hated them all in 
my heart and could have seen them die and 
not stirred. — Not all! All but one: Mr, 
Blake. I seemed to love him a little. 

And he nodded and smiled to me again 
with his eyes, and I smiled back to him as 
I went down. And after that I did not 
hate the others any more; for I did not 
think of them — I forget what came then. 

Then next thing I remember was that 
I heard the Beverend saying : 

* This Prize is adjudged by Mr. Blake to 
Leicester but, as he is only a new boy this 
term, he retires in favour of Whitman 
(whose recitation of Marc Antony's speech 
over the body of Csasar is highly creditable 
to him) and he receives the certificate.' 

I cared neither for the prize nor for the 
certificate now. I do not quite know what 
I was thinking about: but it was about 
something very far away, by the tops of 



24 Leicester. 



blue misty mountains, and down the middle 
trickled a black stream from bowl to bowl. 
It was very sweet. So that when the 
prize-giving was over, and they went out 
crowding, I still sat in my place for a little, 
puzzled because the mountain and the 
black stream had gone away with a trail of 
sort of mist. 

Then, as I sat like that, thinking about 
the trail of sort of mist that went away 
with the mountain and the stream, Mr. 
Blake came, bending his head, in through 
the far doorway. I looked at him. 

Seeing me, he stepped down the passage 
between the chairs, and to me on the form, 
and put his hand onto my shoulder lightly, 
and smiled, with his lips. But I couldn't 
smile back again ; for the mountain and the 
stream had gone away from me. 

* You did very well, my little man,' he 
said at last ; * where did you learn to recite 
poetry like that T 

* Yes, but I did not understand it all,' I 
said ; * the two first verses, I mean : and I 



Leicester. 25 



don't care for the rest, till the last bit. 
But that is grand.' And I looked up into 
his eyes. 

He patted my shoulder, twice, gently : 

* You go too quick : you go too quick, 
child. What can't you understand in the 
first two verses ?' 

' " And the sovZ is dead that slumbers" ' 

' Well ?' 

* What does it mean ?' 

* And that the soul, which only slumbers, 
is dead.' 

* But what does that mean ?' 

^ Dead : that is, that there is an end of 
it. Some people (such foolish people !) say 
that when you die, there is an end of you. 
That is, that you have no soul — no such 
place as heaven ! No such person as God ! 
Longfellow says : Do not tell me that that 
man's soul, which when we die only slum- 
bers and will awake, perhaps soon, perhaps 
late, perhaps never at all, in a perfected 
state of beauty in heaven — is dead, finished, 



26 Leicester. 

ended, over, when a man dies and his body 
corrupts and turns into dust. • • • Do 
you see ?' 

* Yes,' I said, * I see/ 

There was a pause for a moment. 
Then: 

* Would you like to go to Colchester 
when you are older ?' he said. 

'Is Colchester a big school? How 
many fellows are there there T I asked. 

'Not so big as many others: mxj old 
school, for instance, Winchester. But 
there are quite enough : two hundred. 
What do you think ?' 

* Would you be there ?' I asked. 

' Yes,' he said. ' I should be there.' 
He did not seem to be thinking about me 
then. 

I looked at him. My look seemed to 
recall him from somewhere. He looked at 
me. 

* Listen !' he said suddenly, brightening 
and bending down. ' Don't brood so much, 
my little man. You hear me, don't you ? 



Leicester. 27 

Don't go thinking about things till they 
grow hateful to you. Try to be bright and 
merry. Be with the other fellows more — 
I was right, there, hey ? You am't much, 
hey ? " Therjre such fools /" hey ?' (He 
laughed.) * Well, you mustn't mind that. 
You're not always wise, are you ? . . . You 
don't think I'm sermoning you ?' 

* No,' I said, * I see.' But I was think- 
ing of some things. 

A pause. 

He smiled again. 

* At any rate,' he said, and pinched my 
cheek gently, * Mr. Whittaker has given me 
permission to write to your guardian, as 
well as promised to write himself, about 
your going to Colchester soon. You would 
like to go ?' 

* Yes,' said I * I should — if you would 
be there.' 

* In all probability, I should,' he said. 

* I,' I began, * I ... ' but did not go on. 
And it was somehow with this that we 

parted. 



28 Leicester. 

I watched him go up along the passage 
between the chairs and, bending, through 
the far door. And then I felt that I wished 
I had said something to him, bat I did not 
know what. 

In the holidays we (Wallace and I) had 
breakfast and dinner with the Keverend and 
Mrs. W., but had our tea alone. I liked 
that : only Wallace talked too much. And 
we might go out as we liked onto the heath 
or into Greenwich Park, but not down into 
the town. Three or four times I chanced 
it, and went to the Painted Chamber, which 
Campbell had told me of, saying that there 
were fine pictures of searfights there and 
some of Nelson. I liked to be there: 
I liked most of all to look at the picture of 
Nelson being taken up into heaven, for I 
thought I too should be taken up into 
heaven some day, when I had done great 
things and was dead. Then there was the 
picture of him all bloody and wounded, as 
he ran up on deck in the middle of the 



Leice8t€t\ 29 

fight: and the relics. I liked the 
holidays. 

Next tenn wasn't much different from 
last ; except that some of the fellows were 
allowed, in June and July to go down to 
the Greenwich baths early on two mornings 
in the week to bathe. I tried to get the 
Beverend to let me go, but he wouldn't. 

In the next holidays he, and Mrs. W., 
and the brats, and Jane (the new cook) 
went to the sea-side, leaving Alice (the 
maid) to look after us two. (Thomas, the 
page-boy, didn't stay in the house then. I 
don't know why.) I liked that better still. 
I was out almost all day long, on the heath, 
in the Park, down by the river. Once I 
went up the river as far as Westminster in 
a boat. That was rare sport. Some men 
played on a harp and a clarionet, and the 
music almost made me cry. Wallace hadn't 
the pluck to come : though Alice offered to 
lend him the money. 

The next term was very bad. I had 
chilblains ; only on the feet though. Wal- 



30 Leicester. 

lace had them on his hands and ears. And 
it was so cold and dull in the Christmas 
holidays, that I was almost glad when the 
term began again. 

A week after it had begun, I had a letter 
from Colonel James, and Mrs. W. said I 
must answer it. So I had to write an 
answer in prep, one night and show it to 
Mrs. W. after prayers in the drawing-room. 
She said it was * so 'peculiar^' and scratched 
out most of it, and told me what else to 
write. So next day I made a fair copy and, 
having shown it her, it was put in an en- 
velope which I directed as she read out and 
spelled to me : and then she put a stamp 
on it, and I went out and posted it. 

Mr. Blake didn't come to examine us 
this term : another gentleman did, Mr. 
Saunders, a friend of the Reverend's, who'd 
been at Oxford with him. But the first day 
of the holidays I had a letter from Mr. 
Blake : and he said that he was sorry he 
hadn't written to me before ; he had often 
thought about it, but he had such a great 



Ldcestei*. 31 

deal to do that he fonnd it very hard to 
write to anyone. Perhaps when I had 
grown np, and had a great deal to do, I 
should find it the same. Bat what he was 
sorriest ahoat was, that he was going away 
from Colchester to another school. Fen- 
hurst, and so we should not see one another 
there as he had hoped and, he hoped, I had 
hoped we should; hut I would perhaps 
find when I got there that I was not quite 
a stranger, hut that there was at least one 
fellow who would take an interest in me 
and help me, as much as it was good that 
I should he helped. And I was to be sure 
and write to him whenever I liked, for he 
would always be glad to hear from me. I 
thought it was a very kind letter, and it 
almost made me cry, that about being sure 
to write to him whenever I liked for he 
would always be glad to hear from me. I 
hadn't known till then that I was going to 
Colchester, but, when I asked the Reverend 
if I was, he said, Yes : in another two 
years or so, perhaps. — ^But I didn't write 



32 Leicester. 



to Mr. Blake : I didn't like to, some- 
how. 

In the midsummer term I was allowed to 
go to the Greenwich baths in the early 
mornings twice a week with the fellows 
that went. Langham, a big fellow of 
eighteen who'd been at a public school, 
promised the Beverend he'd look after me 
and teach me to swim. So he did. And 
I soon learnt. And he said I was the 
pluckiest little devil he ever saw in his 
life. I liked him to say that. 

So passed by two years. 

In the middle of that midsummer term I 
had a letter from Colonel James. (He 
used only to write to me once a year, about 
Christmas.) He told me that I was going 
to Colchester next term, and a lot of stuff 
about industriously pursuing my studies, 
and that ^ a good knowledge of the classics, 
more especially of Cicero, was the founda- 
tion of all that was worth knowing in the 
humaniora :* which I didn't understand, and 



Leicester. 38 

didn't want to. On the whole, Cicero was 
rather a fool, I think. — ^Mrs. Whittaker, he 
said, would see that my clothes, etc., were 
in a fit condition, and she had also been 
informed that I might have two shillings 
oyer and above my nsaal pocket-money. I 
felt rather older after that. I didn't tell 
anyone about it though. Wallace's father 
had come back from India, and so Wallace 
was going away for the holidays. 

The Whittakers went away to the sea- 
side, as usual, leaving me with Margaret 
(the new maid. We were always having 
new maids, and cooks too ; but only one 
new page-boy, John). I enjoyed these 
holidays. I bought a pipe and some to- 
bacco, and smoked it one day in Greenwich 
Park, but I was very nearly ill and very 
dizzy, and thought I would never do it 
again. I did though, not liking to be 
beaten by it; but at last I found the 
tobacco and matches came expensive, and 
so left off. 

The Whittakers came back early in 

VOL. I. 3 



34 Leicester, 



September, and then I had a new suit 
bought, and a lot of shirts and drawers 
and things, so as to be ready to go to 
Colchester, 



CHAPTER II. 

At Colchester I first kept a diary. Here 
is an extract from it : 

* I don't like any of the fellows. The 
fellows in my study are fools, all in the 
third ' (form), ' and so of coarse we are 
always having our study windows cata- 
pulted, and then get it stopped out of 
allowance.' (Pocket-money.) * I haven't 
had a penny since I came, and that's a 
month ! Then look at the big fellows. 
• . . They none of them care a bit about 
fairness ! — I was sitting on the table in the 
hall yesterday evening after call-over when 
Leslie, a big bully in the Remove, shoved 
me off as he was going by, for nothing at 
all I I fell onto the form, and the form 
went over and I hit my head against one 

3—2 



36 Leicester. 



of the iron posts there. I got up and ran 
after him up the stairs and caught him up 
in the passage just before the door of his 
bedroom. Then I said to him, " I beg 
your pardon, Leslie ; but why did you 
shove me off the table ? I did nothing to 
you." In a moment he said, " What damned 
cheek I" ' (AJl the fellows say * damn ' 
here. No one thinks anything of it.) 
VAnd caught me a kick would have 
sent me over, if it hadn't been for the 
wall. As it was, I got my coat all whited 
and bumped my head.' 

I kept this diary for the first month I 
was at Colchester with great volubility. 
After that, repetitions become more fre- 
quent, and at last one half-holiday late in 
October, more than a week behind, I in 
a pet gave it up, and the book containing it 
was consigned to the back of my locker in 
the hall. 

The term dragged on wearily. 

It grew colder and colder. I got chil- 
blains, first on my feet and then on my 



Leicester. 37 

hands, at last Buffering torments with them. 
They were with me everywhere and almost 
always. I see myself on one occasion up 
in the bedroom, learning Greek grammar 
for ' first lesson ' next day, and at last 
jumping up half frenzied and plunging 
my tingling hands into the icy water-jug 
to get some relief. I had a weariless 
cough too: twice costing me my vomited 
break&st. And the bread was often 
quite uneatable, and what else was there 
to live on ? 

It was a somewhat strange feeling that 
which came over me after I had eaten my 
first dinner in the holidays in the house of 
Mr. Jones, the lawyer : a feeling as of un- 
known fulness not unconnected with dreami- 
ness. I suppose Colonel James paid for 
me. I didn't care for them much. Mr. 
Jones was only at home in the evenings, 
and didn't speak to me much then. But I 
was happy enough ; for I could just go 
where I liked and Mrs. Jones didn't bother 
if I didn't come into lunch in the middle of 



38 Leicester. 

the day bo long as I told her I wasn't going 
to. At first I felt rather odd going ^ out of 
bounds '; but that wore off. Mrs. Jones is 
ft fat lady, good-humoured and, altogether, 
not bad ; but she's always asking me ques- 
tions about myself and Craven and Mrs. 
Craven and the other masters and the ladies 
they're married to. As if I knew anything 
about them ! 

The show was down then everywhere : it 
was cold too ; but I had some new thick 
red woolly gloves, and my chilblains were 
much better, and I didn't mind it. One 
day I asked Eliza the cook (I liked her 
pretty well. Of course she was rather a 
fool. All women are fools, at least ser- 
vants. But then she reminded me of 
Cookie !) to give me some bread and butter 
and an apple ; for the sun was shining and 
I wanted to go out for a long walk into the 
country. I like walking along the roads 
like that, looking at the snow all glistening, 
and now and then a little bird hopping 
about or, out by Baymond wood, even a 



Leicester. 39 

rabbit loppetting along over the white 
under the trees. Well, after I'd been walk- 
ing some way, a big man cracking a whip 
in firont of a horse and a mannre-cart caught 
me up : and I walked beside him a little, 
for he had a nice face, till he spoke to me. 
And then we got on so well together that I 
told him a great many things that I had read 
in books about lions, and tigers, and rhino- 
ceroses, and boa-constrictors and many 
other animals ; and, at last, that I myself 
was writing a book, in which a good many 
of these things I had been telling him were 
to be introduced, but more especially about 
the snakes, some of whom were to try to 
stop Jugurtha in a secret passage as he was 
coming to kill his brother. For Jugurtha 
was the name of the hero. He was an 
illegitimate son of Mastanabal, king of 
Numidia: that meant that his father and 
mother weren't married ; but in those days 
(many many hundreds of years before Our 
Blessed Lord came) people sometimes did 
have children without being married. I 



40 Letceste7\ 

had read about some others like that, in a 
Classical Dictionary. 

But the carter kept silence and I, fearing 
from this and a look I had taken at his 
solemn face, that some weakness was im- 
plied as existing in this early stage of my 
book, hastened to add that I knew it was a 
little fanny, that part, but as it happened 
hundreds of years before Our Blessed Lord 
came or any of us were bom, perhaps it 
wouldn't matter so much, after all ? The 
carter agreed that * it was odd, too ; — at 
they early times !' Which rather relieved me. 

It couldn't have been much further on 
than that, that I said good-bye to him and 
turned back to get home again. But I 
lost my way. 

It was colder now, and darker. The 
sunlight had gone away from everything 
but a few clouds behind overhead and, 
after a little, when I turned to look, it had 
gone away from all of them but two. I 
trudged on again. After another little, I 
began to feel my legs tired, and turned back 



Leicester. 41 

again to see about the sanlight. It was 
all gone now. Then I wished I was at 
home. But the shadows were all coming 
down thicker and thicker, and the road was 
so slippery, and my legs more tired and 
more tired, and I couldn't hold my 
shoulders up. Then I saw a man coming 
along on the left side of the road under the 
trees and was afraid : then forgot that and 
went on to him but, when I saw him nearer 
and, at last, what an old man he was with 
bleared eyes and a red neck-cloth tied round 
his throat, although I was almost sure I'd 
lost the way, I was afraid he was going to 
catch hold of me : so how dare I stop and 
say to him: ^Can you tell me, please, 
which is the road to Colchester T He went 
on by me, and I went on by him, and 
under the trees, the many-branched many- 
twigged boughs just moving above me, 
and on along the road: and he did 
nothing. 

It was almost dark, black I mean, when 
I came to a farm. I had met no one else 



42 Leicester. 

but the old man with the bleared eyes 
and the red neck-cloth, I was very 
tired. 

I stopped at a gate and looked into the 
farm-yard, where the pond was frozen over 
and a light in one of the small farm win- 
dows. I did not like to go in and ask any- 
one to tell me the way : besides^ I had 
begun to think about some of the fellows 
and what they had done to me till I hated 
almost everybody, and could have lain 
down in the snow and gone to sleep and 
died and been carried up by angels past the 
moon into heaven. 

All at once a girl ran out with a flutter 
in her dress, across the yard into a dark 
outhouse. I did not stir : I stood thinking 
about dying and being buried. — And so, in 
a little coming back more slowlyj she saw 
me standing there with bent head looking 
through the second gate-bar. 

She stopped. Then came and asked me 
what I wanted. And then, somehow, she 
had the gate open, and was trying to get 



Leicesler. 43 

me in by the hand and I palling back a 
Utile. 

Well, the end of it was that we went to- 
gether up the yard to the door by the small 
window with the light in it, and in, into 
the light warm kitchen : and she sat me 
down in a chair by the fire, and, when I 
wouldn't answer anything to her but tamed 
away my head, I don't know qaite why (bat 
I wished I were dead and buried and no one 
knew anything about me), slie got up again, 
and cut a thick piece of bread, and put a 
lot of butter upon it and then sugar, and 
went with a glass and brought it back full 
of milk, and came and knelt down by me 
again and began to coax me. There was a 
big lump in my throat by that, and I kept 
swallowing it, but it kept coming back 
again. And at last, when I wouldn't look 
at her, she put down the bread and butter 
and sugar and the milk on the piece of car- 
pet, and lifted up my face with her hand 
under my chin, and laughed into my face 
with hers, her lips and her eyes, and then 



44 Leicester. 



called me ^ A saucy boy ' and gave me a kiss 
(and how fresh and red and soft her lips 
were !), why, I just threw my arms round 
her neck and began crying and laughing and 
laughing and crying and wondering where 
I'd been to all this time, and in the end 
gave her a kiss on the lips, and we were 
great friends. I don't know how it came 
about, but somehow or other I told her all 
about Robinson Crusoe, and ever so many 
other things besides. And then her husband, 
John, came in. — And, when I was going 
away with John, she put two great apples, 
one into each of my trouser pockets, and 
said I must be sure and come and see her 
again and tell her some more about all they 
fine things in the pictur' books. And so 
John and I set off together, turning every 
now and then to wave our hands to Mary 
at the door in the middle of the light and 
she waving hers ; till the road wound round 
and we went by it and couldn't see her any 
more. ' Then I began to be tired again and, 
in a little, John lifted me up onto his back. 



Leicester. 45 

and I fell asleep, I suppose, and didn't wake 
np till he put me down on Mr. Jones' door* 
step. 

And so we parted. For the term began 
two days after that and, as they were both 
snow-stormy, Mrs. Jones wouldn't let me 
go out to see Mary and John. And I did 
not know how to write to them, for they 
hadn't told me where to. You see I'd quite 
forgotten about its being so near the end of 
the holidays. 

We had a new monitor in the bedroom, 
Bruce. (Martin had left.) Everyone 
called him a surly devil, but I didn't mind 
him so much. This was how my liking for 
him began : one day, early in the term, he 
was taking Lower Bound (football is com* 
pulsory at Colchester. There are three 
Bounds, Upper, Lower and Middle. One 
or two fellows in the Team, or pretty high 
np in the Second Fifteen, always ^ take ' 
Middle and Lower Bound, that is, they see 
the small boys play up, kicking them, etc.) 
— ^Well, one day he was * taking ' Lower 



46 Leicester. 

Round, when Leslie, who's in the Team too, 
took to playing back on the other side, so 
as to show off- Then I thought I'd hke to 
see if I couldn't charge him or something 
and, when a chance came and Leslie had the 
ball and was dribbling past a lot of us small 
fellows, I ran at him with all my might, 
and we both went over. But I got the 
cramp. He was up and off again pretty 
quickly, but, of course, I couldn't do much 
but sprawl about. But Bruce, who must 
have been close behind, came up and put 
his hands under my armpits and lifted me 
me up like a child (I remember how I 
somehow liked to be lifted up in that way 
by him) and asked, was I hurt ? The game 
had swept off to the other side of the field. 

* No,' I said, looking up into his face, * it's 
only the cramp in my calf. It'll go in a 
moment. I've had it before like that.' 

He made me play three-quarters back 
for the rest of the game and, once or twice, 
as he passed me asked if I was all right 
now ? To which I answered, * Thank you. 



Leicester. 47 



yes/ I liked him after that in a different 
way to what I had before. 

Sometimes, if we were alone in the room 
together, as before dinner washing onr 
hands and brushing our hair, he would talk 
to me, about nice things. But the moment 
any of the other fellows came up, he always 
stopped and went on doing what he was 
doing in silence. ^ I don't mind that either,' 
I wrote, * I believe he thinks the other 
fellows are fools like I do. At night he 
never speaks without some one speaking to 
him, and then he won't make a conversa- 
tion. Everyone hates him, even the small 
boys. (I forgot to say I got second remove 
into the Lower Fourth from last term.)' 

The last few days of that term were very 
warm. There was even a talk of beginning 
cricket and river-bathing: at any rate 
rackets began and, I think, some boating 
was done. Football of course had stopped 
a few weeks before the sports, so as to get 
the field ready: I mean the Bounds had 
stopped; but there was always * little game' 



48 Leicester. 



in the Circus Field for anyone who cared to 
go npw I liked better going walks by the 
river or about the fields. I liked to whistle 
as I went along: sometimes even I hummed 
old tunes. The spring makes one feel so 
glad somehow. 

One half, I remember, I go as far up the 
river as Morley Mill. 

Just past there the bank is very high and 
thickly wooded. I began to go up, intend- 
ing to sit there and look around a bit : there 
was not time to go into the mill. Up I 
went by the narrow path : and all at once 
came upon Bruce, lying at fall length on a 
piece of grass with a bundle of flowers and 
a small microscope-sort-of-thing in his 
hand, through which he was looking at 
something. He did not notice me. — Then 
some earth rolled away from under my foot 
and went down rustling, and he looked up 
slowly with a frown, and saw me, and said : 

* Hullo, Leicester. Is that you T 

I could think of nothing to say but, 
Yes : and stood still. 



Leicester. 49 

. A pause. 

• What brought you out so far as this ?' 
he asked. 

' I don't know. I'm very fond of walk« 
ing, especially by the river.' 

' Ah ! So am I. « • • Axe you fond of 
flowers ?' 

' Yes. — ^You mean looking at them under 
microscopes and things ? I have never done 
that ; but I like flowers. They are so « . • 
80 nice somehow.' 

Another pause. His chin flattened on 
his coat as he looked down, holding a grass 
in the fingers of the arm he leant on. 

At last I said : 

^ Ybu have polished that stone very 
beautifully, Bruce.' 

He looked up. 

' I didn't polish it. It is a piece of 
limestone. Would you like to look at 
it?' 

* Thank you,' I said. * I would.' 

He held the piece of stone and the micro- 
scope for me to look. I expressed surprise 
VOL. I. 4 



50 Leicester. 

at the beautiful shapes inlaid on it. He ex* 
plained that they were shells. 

I asked if I might look at some of the 
flowers through the microscope. Certainly, 
said he: had I never looked through a 
microscope before ? 

^ Never, Bruce/ I said,. looking up and 
into his eyes. He turned his on to the dried 
grass.. 

Then somehow we began to talk about 
birds: and he told me about how they paired 
in the spring. 

He was sure birds had a good sense of 
the beautiful. Darwin thinks so. 

He paused, and ended, looking up over 
the tops of the trees below us. 

After a little : 

* Who is Darwin V I said. 

He looked round, and then to me : 

^ The biggest man, maybe, that has ever 

lived,' he said. 

^ Do you mean he's the greatest man 

who ever lived ?' I asked. 

* Maybe. — ^Yes.' 



Leicester. 61 

' I don't think he's as great a man as 
Sir Walter Scott/ I said. 

He smiled. , Then: 

•What do you know of Sir Walter 
Scott T he asked. 

* I have read two of his novels, " Ivan- 
hoe " and ^* The Talisman/' and I am going 
to read them all. There are thirty-one. I 
counted them yesterday.' 

*Yes?' 

A pause. 

Then, after a little, I asked him if 
he was not leaving this term. He said, Yes. 

'Are you going to Oxford or Gam- 
bridge r 

' To neither. I am going to London to 
work.' 

* Why don't you go up to Oxford ?' 

' Because I don't want to. I don't see 
the good of it.' 

Another pause. I sat with my hands 
clasped round my knees, looking over the 
'.river. Suddenly I thought I would ask 
him something. So I said : 

4—2 



52 Leicester. 



' Bruce/ 
c_Yes/ 

* Would you ever like • . • to be a great 
man ?' 

He looked at me oddly with a gather in 
his brows : 

* Well,' he said, * I suppose I might. 
Most people would like to be great — 
would be, if it wasn't such a trouble. « ; • 
Why ?' 

* Oh, I only wondered,' I said. * I shall 
be a great man some day, before I die. 
And I like to think about it when I'm low, 
low in my spirits I mean. Now yesterday, 
as I was standing by my locker, I got hit 
in the eye with a board ' (crust of bread) 
* by a fellow, and it hurt me very much 
and almost made me cry : besides, it seemed 
so unfair. But, when I got up into my room 
and thought about it a little, I didn't care 
much. For, when Leslie dies, no one will 
ever speak about him again or be sorry for 
him but, when I am dead, people will 
often speak about me and be sony for me 



Leicester. 53 

and like me. It's very nice to think of 
people liking yon when you're dead, I 
think. • % •' 

I sat looking into the lower sky^ not 
rememheiing Brace. But all at once I 
heard him talking in a strange, voice^ and 
started and looked at him. 

He saw me looking at him and jumped 
up, before I noticed what his face was 
like. 

* You're an odd child !' he said. Then 
sat down again, and went on : 

' Areij'.t you very lonely here V 
After a bit : 

* Well I don't know/ I answered. ' Not 
worse than I was at Whitt^^r's — ^now the 
winter's over. I only wish I was bigger. 
I should like to. £ght one or two fellows I 
hate; but you see I'm just like. a baby 
when they begin to knock me about : it's 
no good doing anything. Last Monday I 
hit Leslie a one on the bridge of his nosa 
for bullying me, and I tried to give him. 
another; but he knocked me over every 



54 Leicester. 

time I tried to get up again : and what's 
the good of that ? I'm not strong enough 
for him. I don't mind him at football you 
know, or running : don't hate him I mean. 
He's not a funk« But when he teases me, 
I want to . . • You know. — ^I wish I was 
bigger.' 

A pause. 

At last, suddenly : 

*Do you tell everyone all this sort of 
thing ?' he said. 

* No,' I said. * I've never told any- 
one of it before I don't think. Why 
should I ?' 

He blew softly through his lips : 

* Ph-o-o . . . Fellows do.' (Then sud- 
denly again.) * Do you know Clayton ?' 

' No.' — ^I shook my head. 

* Or i . • Gildea ?' 

' Well • • « a few days ago I was 
writing lines in my study after second 
lesson, and he came round for some ink, 
and we talked a little then. That's all I 
know of him.' 



Leicester. 55 

A pause. 

Then he : 

'Take my advice, Leicester, and have 
nothing to do with Gildea ' 

Another pause. 

* Why ?' asked I« * He's rather a nice 
fellow, isn't he ?' 

'Because . • • He'll do you no good, 
that's why I' 

' How ?' I asked astonished. 

'By — talking nonsense to you and 
making you conceited/ .(Adding with a 
little irritation) — 'You knew quite well 
what I meant.' 

I looked at him archly : 

' How could he make me conceited ? — 
I've nothing to be conceited about,' said I. 

' That's true,' he said, and paused. 

After a little he continued : 

' Take my advice and have as little to 
do with him as possible. You must know 
what I mean.-7-Have you no friends ?' 

' They are such fools 1' I said. 

'Ah?' 



56 Leicester, 

I looked at him as before : 

* Have you many friends, Bnfce ?' 
He smiled and looked away, saying : 

* One. — ^But she's more than enough.' 
*0h, it's a woman!' I said. *Well, 

that must be nice. I've had some women 
for friends : Cookie at the last school : and 
Mary, one I knew last holidays — a little. 
I'm going to see her again this holidays. I 
like women* They're rather fools too, 
but . • .' I stopped on the brink of an 
allusion to their embracing habits and 
kisses. Then became a little curious about 
Bruce's woman friend, and said : ^ 

*Will you tell me the name of your 
friend, please ?' 

* Ge is her name,' he said, looking away 
as before. 

*Ge?' said L . . • 'Why, Ge is the 
Greek for earth. What a fdnny name for 
a woman I' 

' The very person,' he said. * My mother, 
the Earth : and the more I see of her, the 
more I — like her.' 



Zeicester. 67 

^ I don't twig that quite/ 

' It's no mattepr/ he said. * You'll find 
plenty of things you can't twig, I expect, 
before you are a great man. — Now you 
had better be starting back/ said he, 
getting up, * or you'll be late for call* 
over/ 

He took out his watch and stood looking 
at the face for a little. 

I got up, turned away, and began to 
descend the hill. 

He passed me a few fields further on 
without even a nod. 

I never talked with him any more. A 
week or so after, the term ended and then, 
of course, he left* 

Those holidays began badly. I went out 
to Brerby to see Mary the first Monday* 
When I got to the farm I found it shut up, 
and, after I had tried at every door to see 
if there was anyone inside, went away 
rather sadly^ feeling lonely. I only walked 
out that way once again. in the holidays* 



58 Leicester. 

It was still shut up« I did not try to see 
if there was anyone inside. 

But I was happy enongh those holidaysi 
wandering about in the fields and especially 
by the river, or walking along the roads, 
thinkings or whistling, or dreaming. 

In the midsummer term I rowed bow in 
the 2nd School House boat, but we were 
bottom of the river. Some of the fellows 
said it was my fault. I don't see how one 
out of eight, and he the least important, 
could make all that difference: and I 
didn't care in the least what they said. I 
was in the Upper Fourth now. I knew no 
one, and didn't much want to; but now 
and then came hours when I longed to 
speak to some one about a great many 
things. What Bruce had said to me about 
the Earth being his one friend set me think- 
ing how to make a friend for myself: and 
at last I made one. A woman : and I 
thought she had clear fearless eyes and a 
sad mouth, and her shoulders held back and 
of a clear outline. She had no name for a 



Leicester. 59 

long time bat, one day that term, diving 
into a black pool I got caught in a bongh 
of a sunken tree and conld not get loose. 
And I thought I mnst soon drown : but was 
more afraid of being eaten by cold thin 
black snakes when I was dead. It was 
veiy feaifol. All at once the bongh broke 
above my back and I shot up. Coming up 
I saw her £ace in the darkness by mine and 
called her Nikd. Kik6 is the Greek for 
* victory/ but I don't think that had so very 
much to do with it. 

The midsummer holidays were by far the 
happiest time I had ever spent. I was on 
the river almost every moment that I could 
be, sculling about in a whiff procured by a 
contract with one of the boat-owners of the 
town, thanks to a JS5 note sent to me 
by Colonel James at the end of July. I 
bathed a great deal. I see myself swim« 
ming down the brown river between the 
thickly-wooded banks on either side : down 
past * the snag/ the sunken tree in a bough 
of which I had been caught on a certain 



60 Zeicester. 



occasion: to where the river grows shal« 
lower and the sunlight filters down. Gaa 
see myself dive, and go with large arm-^ 
strides oyer the pehbly weedy bottom : 
now rolling over a luxuriant wavy head of 
soft green, now turning to face the current ; 
and all in the fairy light of flowing water 
that is sun-shone upon.. Again, can see 
myself driving my light boat down the 
twilight stream, or, resting on my oars^ 
drifting slowly with soft harmonious-moving 
thoughts. Nike, in some shape or other, 
was nearly always with me. On the last 
day of the holidays I learnt that my friend 
Mary was dead, and that John had gone 
away with her little baby. I sorrowed for 
her. 

The next term opened with heavenly 
weather, lasting on far into October^ Then: 
came gales and the earth was strewn with 
vegetable decay* 

It was a dreary term. My hands got 
bad again, but not so bad, I thought, as. 
last year, which was comforting* We had 



Leicester. 61 

no snow, or only a little, bat a great deal 
of rain and frost. There was some skating. 
I liked skating fairly well. 

In the Christmas holidays I first took to 
writing much. I had before done little bits 
of things : as, for instance, Jagurtha ; but 
they were all put away very soon and for- 
gotten. Now I set upon a story of the 
Indian Mutiny, and wrote till I had finished 
it: there were over a hundred pages of 
exercise paper in it. After that, I had a 
series of nightmares, of a woman with great 
owl's wings and the skull of an owl, who 
come from a long way oflF to wrap me up 
and smother me : and I could never escape, 
but stood stone-still till, just as her shadow 
touched my feet, I shrieked and awoke 
breathless. The feelings these nightmares 
aroused made me write several poems, all 
about strange creatures who embraced me 
close and smothered me. But, the last 
week of the holidays being fine and bright, 
I was out a great deal, and this strange 
creature forgotten, and my girl- comrade 



62 Leicester. 

came back again (although I had never 
noticed her absence) and I was happy again 
with songs or .cheerful whistlings as I went 
along alone. 



CHAPTER m. 

The next midsummer holidays, to which I 
had looked forward somewhat eagerly, were 
a disappointment. The weather was had ; 
chill, windy, rainy: perhaps that had a 
good deal to do with it, I forsook my 
boating at last : took to long walks over 
the, generally, wet fields, with sometimes 
sadness through all my thoughts. In the 
end, dreams became almost nightly occur- 
rences, fantastic dreams, never quite night* 
mares although the shadow of nightmare 
was often in them like a polyp in a dim 
submarine water. I wrote odd things about 
this, fragments, half-understood by myself, 
almost always torn up after a few lines had 



64 Leicester. 



been put down, and then I sat bent over the 
table, the end of pen or pencil in mouth and 
eyes staring at nothing, till the fit passed. 
The dull or rainy weather held on almost 
uninterruptedly. I was somewhat relieved 
when the holidays were over. 

With the new term came finer weather. 
September, the end of it, and half October 
were soft and beautiful. Then two or three 
wind gales blew, whirling all the leaves and 
many twigs and some boughs off the roaring 
trees : nay, pulling some trees, and not small 
ones, to the earth. These gales past, the 
challenge matches began. I got my School 
House colours all right, as ^three-quarters 
back/ I enjoyed those games. The ex- 
citement of the fellows over the stiff tussles 
we. School House, had with Gough's and 
Mason's thrilled me every now and then. 
A certain viciousness and devilry came into 
me. I remember well how once, when 
Harper, after a splendid run down the left 
side of the Mere field (we had the wall 
goal), got past first one back and then the 



Leicester. 65 

other and was, at full speed, the ball not 
two yards before him, hurrying to pass me — 
the short run I took, so as to poise myself, 
and then how I went straight as an arrow 
for the ball and him. We met violently. I, 
half spun round, tottered : recovered myself: 
saw the ball, just turning, a yard or so to 
the right : was to it : kicked : saw it go, 
round, through the air, on over the heads 
of the yelling crowd of fellows a quarter way 
up the field; and then turned, to see 
Harper get up off his knee and move away. 
I could have given a shout of delight. 
That swift rush and violent meeting had 
gone into my heart and head like strong 
wine. 

Just for the two weeks we wanted fine 
cold dry weather, for the challenge matches 
I mean, we had it. Then it broke up : 
rain took the place of the sun-air, warm 
damp the place of the cold dry. The effect 
upon me was evil. The sometimes sad'* 
ness through all my thoughts was through 
me again. 

VOL. I. 6 



66 Leicester. 



One evening after tea, during which I 
had felt very hot-cheeked with now and 
then Bhiverdy as I was walking along the 
passage that led to the second boilding, 
all at once I felt something hot and watery 
distilling in my mouth and, in a moment, 
had vomited. I went on as if nothing had 
happened, not being quite sure that any- 
thing had happened : till I reached the 
door when, considering, I turned back and, 
seeing in the almost darkness something 
whitey on the earth, concluded that I had 
indeed been sick ; and continued my course 
into the hall again, where I rang the bell 
and waited till John came, and told him 
what had occurred and, saying I was sorry^ 
asked him to clean away the mess some- 
how, if he pleased. 

In preparation that night, hot, feverish 
even, unable to work, I could not get the 
incident nor myself and present doings out 
of dream-land. My throat was sore too, as 
if I had an inflammation there. Preparation 
and prayers over, I went up to the bedroom, 



Leicester. 67 

undressed, and lay in the cool sheets think- 
ing in a vague way about death coming to 
me sometime soon; for it was apparent 
that such incidents as vomiting up my tea 
did indeed arrive even at mine, like at most, 
nay I supposed all, existences. The thought 
was, like everything this evening, of and in 
dream-land. I spent a hot sleepless night 
that night. 

Next morning I went from bad to worse. 
It was a Saturday. I felt like what I 
thought a melancholy bird felt, moping 
with a malady. I went up to my room 
and lay on my bed till, after about an hour, 
being thirsty and getting up for some water, 
I saw my face in the glass over the wash- 
ing-stand, a scarlet patch upon my right 
forehead; so bright a scarlet that I won- 
dered a little. I had scarcely lain down 
again when there was a knock at the door, 
*Come in,' and entered — Clayton. I 
made a dissatisfied noise half to myself. 

Then he began to ask if I didn't feel 
well ? could he do anything for me ? would 

5—2 



68 Leicester, 

I like any books from the library ? (He 
could easily get the key from Monitor's 
room» you kn^w), and the rest of it. In the 
end he went off, and I thought that that 
was the end of him. 

I was dozing when there came a knock 
again, * Come in ' angrily from me, and 
there was Clayton with a pile of books in 
one hand and a bulging paper-bag in the 
other. 

^ I thought you might like some oranges/ 
he said, putting the books down on the 
next bed and opening the bag's mouth. I 
wished him at the devil. — Why can't people 
leave you alone when you're moping ? 

After a little : 

* You'd better skip first lesson to-morrow,' 
he said. ' And go seger. You look as 
though you were sickening for something or 
other. There's a lot of measles about in 
the town.' 

Another pause : Then up he got, and say- 
ing : * Well I see you're tired, I won't 
stay any longer ' — 



Leicester^ 69 

was past the second bed going for the 
door, before I got out : 

* Thank you for the oranges, bnt I don't 
want them, thank yon ; and for the books 
too/ I forget the rest of it. Somehow he 
came back for the bag, and took it away, 
and the door shut, and I turned round to 
the wall and fell into a doze. 

The next morning I felt I wanted to lie 
still: and so lay still. When Mother 
McCarthy came her rounds at about half- 
past eight to see who'd skipped * first lesson'; 
she recognised the fact that I had scarlet 
fever. I didn't care much. 

I was put into hospital, and the days 
passed dimly. But, on the seventh or 
eighth morning, when the rash was all but 
gone, Mother McCarthy told me as she 
brought in my breakfast that * Mr. Clayton 
had taken it.' That set me off laughmg : 
not that I wanted him to have it, I did 
not care a jot about him one way or the 
other, but it struck me as not bad sport 
in the abstract, that Clayton should 



70 Leicester. 

have- it and be cooped up here with 
me. 

They soon had him into bed, wrapped up 
in flannels and the rest of it. I couldn't 
help laughing to see his face, so elongated, 
as solemn as if at the celebration of a 
mystery. The idea of what he would look 
like later on, red all oyer and his tongue 
Hke a white strawberry, fairly overcame me. 
I think he thought he was not far removed 
from death just then. He closed his eyes 
with a resignation that was not without 
sweetness and his lips moved, in prayer I 
thought. Such a fit of laughter came into 
me that I had to stuff a piece of the sheet 
into my mouth. I ended by being rather 
ashamed of myself. 

But later on he cleared up amazingly. 
His attack was a very slight one. Despite 
my eight days' start he was convalescent 
before me ; for one night I, impatient at my 
itching hide, got out of bed and took to 
stalking up and down the length of the 
room in my nightshirt, despite his as- 



Leicester. 71 

sorances that I should catch cold and have 
dropsy and inflammation of the kidneys 
and the brain, with convulsions, and God 
knows what besides. Sure enough I did 
get something rheumatic in my joints and 
I was assured by the Doctor that some in* 
flammation of the eyes I had had not been 
improved by a chill I had somehow taken. 
I preserved silence, and made the best of it. 

Later on, one day when my eyes were 
still too weak to see to read well, Clayton 
insisted on reading aloud to me : and a 
half week's insisting turned it almost into 
a habit. The fact was I had rather begun 
to like the fellow. 

At last he was well enough to bear the 
journey home. I remember that last even- 
ing, or rather afternoon, we spent together, 
well. 

We had been playing draughts by the 
window, while the sun set in veins of gold 
and red-hued light, visible to us as we 
looked out in the pauses of the game. 
Then it had become too dark for my weak 



72 Leicester. 

eyes to see well, and we did not care to 
have the gas lit. We went to by the fire, 
I sitting back in the large easy chair, he 
beside me bent forward with his hand 
twirling a little piece of paper in the fingers 
resting on the wicker arm. We had been 
talking about different things that had taken 
place in the school : had gradually dropped 
into silence. 

All at once : 

'Leicester/ he said, making a move- 
ment. 

' Well.' 

*Why are you such an odd sort of 
fellow r 

I answered nothing. 

* Now don't scowl. You are^ you know. 
... Do you know I think you're very un- 
just to yourself ? almost as unjust to your- 
self, ... as you are to other people.' 

* Yes?' I said. 

* You're such a porcupine. You're al- 
ways putting up your quills at people. 
Why do you do it T 



Leicester. 73 

*DoI?'lBaid. 

* Now you know quite well you do.' 
I answered nothing. 

He went on : 

* If I were you, I'd give it up : I would 
indeed. Where's the fun in living day and 
night with your own sulky self ? Don't you 
-ever feel as if you'd give a great deal to 

laugh and and amuse yourself (you 

know what I mean) like other fellows ? . . • 
Instead of brooding over your wrongs in a 
comer . . • Eh ?' 

I kept silence. 

* Now answer me, do. Gome, now don't 
you often feel as if you'd very much like to 
have friends like other fellows have ?' 

^ No,' I said : ^ not like other fellows have.' 
Another pause : 
Then he, with a sigh : 

* Friends, then? You'd like to have 
friends, wouldn't you ?' 

* One 'ud be enough,' I said. 

Another pause : and another sigh as he 
said: 



74 Leicester. 

* You're in one of your bad humours to- 
night/ 

Then he burst out : 

* Upon my word, Leicester, you're a 
most confounded fool ! There you sit like 
a miserable old cynic hugging his conceit, 
as full of morbid nonsense as you can well 
hold, a fool • • • a . • • a • • / He stam* 
mered. 

' Go on,' I said. * What else ?' 

He came to a full stop : made another 

movement in his chair : and began again, 

with some resolution : 

* Now look here. There you are : a 
fellow who might be as liked as any one in 
the school, if you only cared. — ^Instead of 
that you're the most disliked in the school : 
And all on account of your confounded 
conceit 1 You think everyone else is a 
fool but yourself : and you think you think 
it doesn't matter in the least what thetj 
think, about you or anything else either. 
Now that's rot I' 

* I don't quite see it,' I said. * In. two 



Leicester. 75 

years, who will know whether I was liked 
or disliked at a school called Colchester ? 
Of coarse I don't care abont it 1 Who 
would V 

* Yon do care : Yon care a great deal/ 
. ' Yon think so, Clayton T 

' I know so. If yon didn't care, wonld 
yon take the tronble to tell yonrself so a 
hundred times a day like yon do, and make 
yonrself miserable abont it ? • . . Fooh-h ! 
Yon do care, right enough.' 

I kept silence. 

He proceeded : 

'Leicester, yon're a fool. And it's all 
the worse because yon needn't be one with- 
out you liked. Yon might be a very nice 
fellow. You can be — ^when yon like.' 

A pause. 

* Well r asked he. 

• Well,* I said. 

• Then I hope it may do yon good then !' 
he cried. *I am only saying it in that 
hope. I think too well of yon to beUeve 
Ijhat yon're blind to your own faults : And 



76 Leicester. 

it may do yon some good to see yourself as 
others see you. — ^And that's all I've got to 
Bay/ 

A pause. 

At last he, slowly and not unsofUy : 

* I'm going away this evening. . . . 
Mother McCarthy told you p'r'aps ? • . . 
For good. ... I shall be sorry to go. . . . 
My father is a silk merchant, and he wants 
me to enter his office. He's come up here 
to take me home. . . . The dear old dad ! 
. . . Well ' (He gave his shoulders a little 
shrug) V. . . I suppose I shall be going 
abroad soon. There's a branch out in 
China he wants me to go to . . . or some- 
thing like that.' 

Another pause. 
Then: 

* Do you want to go ?' I said. 

*No,' he said. 'No. I don't.' (He 
made a movement in his chair.) ' It's 
the last thing I should chose myself. But 
only one man in a thousand in this world 
can chose the profession he likes. . • • 



Leicester. 77 

I'm my father's only son. you see/ he 

added. 

- * Well ?' I said, not unsoftly, 

' Well, the long and the short of it is 
. . • that I wish you wouldn't • • • Yon 
know what I mean, Leicester. I don't 
want to preach to yon : But I somehow 
think you really might . • • might do so 
much better, if you liked. You'll be a 
great man some day . • • if you live, that 
is, and God wills it.' 

* Eh?' said I. ^Whatr 

* Did you ever know a man called 

Blake ?' he asked. 

' Yes,' I said, ' I did. Why ?' 

* Did you know he was dead ?' 

I was startled. I looked at him sharply« 
' Dead ?' I said. 

* Yes. He died a little while ago.' 

* How ?' 

^It was an accident. He fell off a 
ladder somehow, and his head struck upon 
a stone, and it gashed a great hole into 
the brain. A piece of the brain was hang- 



78 Leicester. 

ing out over his eye when they found him. 
It was in his garden. He had been train- 
ing up a rose-tree that had been blown 
down by the wind. That about the piece 
of the brain hanging out over his eye has 
haunted me ever since I heard it. • • 
Those clear stead&st eyes ! It is horrible!' 

I kept silence, scarcely thinking. 

He, in a low voice : 

* . . . The night before he went I was 
in his rooms, talking with him. He was 
heavy about leaving the old place. He 
said he felt somehow as if he were going 
away from the grave of some one he loved. 
I remembered that — afterwards. Well, 
among other things he spoke about you. 
He had seen you at some school he had 
been to examine, I forget the name now. 
You had recited a poem of Longfellow's, 
'' The Psalm of Life " I think. He seemed 
very much struck with you. He said he 
thought you would be a great man some- 
day. He said some other things about 
you: and asked me to look after you 



Leicester. 79 

^vhen you came here. He told me you 
were coming here soon. . . Well, bo I 
did as much as I thought I ought to for, 
don't you see, it's not good for a fellow 
high up in the school to do much for a 
small boy. It's not good for the small 
boy. It's better for him to fight out his 
battles alone. And I didn't think I was 
likely to leave — for some time at any rate. 
But my brother died: and my father, 
whose whole heart's in his business, asked 
me to — to give up my plan, and help him 
with it. So— I did.' 

* What did you want to be, Clayton ?' 
I said. 

*0h I'd a foolish idea of my own' 
(with a smile), ^ about going up to the 
'Varsity and studying Hebrew and Science 
and all sorts of things and then going out 
to Palestine. You see I should have liked 
to have helped Blake if I could and, when 
he died — ^Why, the idea came into my head 
of trying to do what he hadn't been able 
to do. You know he was very poor. . . 



80 Leic€8te7\ 

And he gave such a lot of what he had 
away. I believe he kept his mother and 
sister, too. I always thought so. Any 
how ' (with another smile), * there's an 
end to all those ideas of mine !' 

* Will you tell me what you wanted to 
do?' I said. 

* Oh 1' he said. ' It wasn't so much 
me : It was Blake. He put the idea into 
my head. He thought, and thought rightly 
of course, that the great need that the 
Church has at this present moment is some 
man who would devote his life to a real 
patient study of the origins of Christianity ; 
so that it might be shown forth, once and 
for all, that Christianity has for its founda- 
tion no vain legend, but events as histori* 
cally true, and as capable of being shown 
to be historically true, as anything thai 
has happened within the boasted ages of 
Science. That this might be done, could 
be done, and would be done, he felt sure, 
and so do I. But you see, at present, 
they all seem so taken up with themselves,^ 



Leicester. 81 

with their miserable grains of sectarian 
sand I mean, that such a man is not to 
be found, or if he is to be found. • • Well, 
God only understands these things ! It 
does seem hard, at times, that all should 
be so against us ! They all seem to think 
it's not worth the trouble ! or it can't be 
done ! or that there's no need for it ! 
fools ! fools ! fools ! Can't you see by 
the shore of what flood we are standing ? 
Can't you read the signs of the times ? 
Can't you see an Art that becomes day by 
day more and more of a drug, less and 
less of a food for men's souls ? A misty 
dream floating around it, a faint reek of 
the east and strange unnatural scents 
breathing from it ; but underneath mud, 
filth, the abomination of desolation, the 
horror of sin and of death ! my God, 
sometimes^ thinking of it, my brain turns 
and I fear I shall go mad. And to be able 
to do nothing! To see these devils in 

human shape ' 

Suddenly he stopped short : swallowed : 

VOL. I. 6 



82 Leicester. 

pat the back of his fingers to his lips. 
Then with a smile went on not nnsoftly : 

* Nay, he was right. There is no need 
for me or God would let me go, in such a 
crisis as this is. Yet there come these 
moments when I seem to hear His voice as 
from behind, down through the thick clouds, 
saying to me : " 6ro forth.'* It may be 
delusion. I'm not sure. I don't know. 
It is terrible to be so tossed in opinion.' 
(He was beginning to grow troubled: 
paused a little : and then with the same 
smile, his eyes all the while looking brightly 
before him, went on.) * Nay, he was right. 
And what should X have learnt from him if 
I could not ... To leave my post I . . .' 
(Smiling again: And after a moment's 
rest.) * ... I remember it so well ! I 
can hear his voice now. ** Wherever any man 
shall take his place, either because he has 
thought it better that he should be there j or 
because his captain lias put him there — ^there, 
as it seems to me, should he remain to face the 
danger, and take no account of death or of any- 



Leicester. 83 



thing else in comparison with disgrace.'* — 
And my captain is God/ he said : and with 
that bent forward a little and, with a faint 
light in his face and round his lips as of a 
bright smile, seemed to grow deeper and 
deeper in a dimmer dream that lacked not 
sweetness. So I sat for a time watching 
him ; till I too grew into a dream, a dim 
one, but it had no forms or shapes nor any 
sweetness. 

Suddenly I started up and out of it* 
Looking at him^ and perceiving no gap in 
our talk : 

' Who says that ?' I said. 

He answered slowly as if unaware of 
me : 

'Plato makes Socrates say it. . . . 
But I was thinking of a particular occa- 
sion.' 

— ^The door was unlatched, opened, and 
Mother McCarthy put in her head, to say 
that the Doctor had come up to say good- 
bye and shake hands with Mr. Clayton. 

* It's very good of him V cried Clayton, 

6—2 



84 Leicester. 

jumping up. * Isn't he afraid ? Although/ 
he added, turning back a little to me from 
half-way down the room, * there's not 
much fear of us two . • . Eh? I'll be 
back in a sec/ 

He nodded, turned, and went out. The 
door closed ; up went the latch ; fell ; steps 
crossed the planks ; another door opened 
and closed. Silence. 

I sat thinking vaguely about what he 
had been saying : vaguely, till my eyelids 
began to come blinkingly downwards, and 
head to nod, and at last must have fallen 
fast asleep. 

I woke up with a start. The fire was 
almost out. I was full of sleep : got off 
my things somehow : dropped into bed, 
the cool clean sheets : into sleep again : 
And slept like a top till morning. 

Mother McCarthy woke me bringing in 
breakfast. The gold sunshine was through 
the window. Her tongue was stirring 
already. — Mr. Clayton came in last night 
but found I was asleep and wouldn't have 



Leicester. 85 

me awoken. But he'd left a note for me. — 
I got it and opened it at once : 

' 8.30. P.M. 

* Good-bye, my dear fellow. I am sorry 
our conversation was interrupted, or rather, 
I should say my monologue ; your part of 
it would have come in later p'r'aps ! Write 
to me at 21, Norfolk Square, London, 
whenever you care to. I shall always be 
glad to hear from you. Indeed I do hope 
we shan't lose sight of one another alto- 
gether. But at present my plans are vague 
in the extreme. But I'll write again soon. 
I'm afraid I must have seemed rather a fool 
to you an hour ago ? at any rate, very con- 
fused and peculiar ? I was stirred you see. 
I feel strongly about those things. And be- 
lieve me, my dear fellow, those things are 
the only things in the world worth feeling 
strongly about. You'll think so too some 
day. — But I must dry up now. Excuse 
paper, also almost illegible pencil, also this 



86 Leicester. 



final scribble into a comer. And believe 
me that I am now^ as always, truly 
yours, 

* Archibald Clayton. 

* P.S. — ^Don't be a porcupine !' 



CHAPTER IV. 

Eably in the next term I received another 
letter from Clayton, There wasn't much 
in it, I thought. ' He was really about to 
leave old England, going to learn his occu- 
pation in life, where every man should learn 
it, under fire, and in the smoke of the 
battle.' 

I put the letter into my pocket intending 
to answer it that evening at preparation : 
indeed, did begin upon it, but, after the 
first seven lines or so, tore the sheet up a 
little petulantly and went on with my work. 
I didn't care about the fellow now enough 
to write to him any of my thoughts, and if 
I couldn't write them I didn't want to write 
anything. 



88 Leicester. 



I believe he said or wrote things about 
me to one or two of his friends ; especially 
Scott ; for Scott is every now and then 
polite to me, when the chance occurs, as 
Clayton himself used to be ; but that sort of 
politeness has no relish. 

The midsummer term I remember well 
enough — by its general dreariness. Dull 
skies and rain, and our wretched School 
House crew, pulhng up the river, and down 
again, and on home mostly sulky. Once or 
twice I almost gave it up ; but the thought 
of the good the exercise did me restrained 
me. Then the Bumping Races came. 
On the fourth night we bumped Gough's ; 
and kept our place as head of the river for 
the remaining four nights. 

As I was passing through the hall after 
the last night's races I saw two or three 
letters on the end table and, stopping, I 
don't know quite why, to glance at them, 
saw one was for me. I recognised Colonel 
James' handwriting at once. He wrote to 
me usually in the first week of August 



Leicester. 89 

enclosing a ^5 note (to which allusion 
has already been made^ in Chapter lU.), 
for which I as usually thanked him, in a 
jerked letter which invariably caused me 
not a little impatience ; for, as I have 
already said, when I didn't care about 
people enough to write to them any of my 
thoughts, I didn't care about writing to 
them at all. The letter was somewhat 
after this fashion : 



' Junior United Service Club, 
'July 2l8t, 18— . 

'Deab Leicester, 

^A communication has been for- 
warded to me from my lawyer's, purporting 
to come from Mr. Bobert Oholmeley, of 
the Myrtles, Seabay, Isle of Wight : who I 
am thereby informed is the only brother of 
the late Mrs. Leicester your mother. He 
has I believe been residing for some time 
abroad, owing to the weak state of his 
health, and is, as he is good enough to 



90 Leicester. 

inform me, by birth an American. He has 
received from me what information I thought 
fit to give him about your affairs, and you 
may shortly expect to receive a direct com- 
munication from him yourself. He desires 
that you should be allowed to pass the first 
fortnight of your Midsummer Vacation with 
him at the Myrtles, Seabay, Isle of Wight, 
and I at present see no objection to your 
accepting his invitation ; but you are, as 
far as I am concerned, at liberty to please 
yourself in the matter. He is, I under- 
stand, likely to go abroad again very 
shortly, having only come to England, as 
he informs me, in order to transact some 
urgent business which requires his absolute 
presence in England ; so that, as there need 
be no further acquaintance between you, 
beyond perhaps some small correspondence, 
I have not, as I have said, seen any objec- 
tion to your accepting his invitation to pass 
the first fortnight of your Midsummer Va- 
cation with him : At the same time I 
desire you to understand, that, as long as 



Leicester. 91 

you are under my care, I must insist that 
your acquaintance with any of the late 
Mrs. Leicester's, your mother's, relations 
be nothing beyond what ordinary courtesy 
to them shall require. Any intimacy with 
them was strongly deprecated by the late 
Major Leicester, your father, during his 
lifetime, and both as his friend and as your 
guardian I feel myself bound to follow out 
his wishes on the subject, even if my own 
did not coincide with them, as, I may add, 
they do most completely. 

' I enclose my accustomary allowance of 
jB5 to you for the year's pocket-money. 
You can apply to the Revd. Dr. Craven for 
the necessary funds for your travelling ex- 
penses, an account of which I shall expect 
you to forward to me. 

* I remain, 

* Truly yours, 
'Thos. B. James. 
'Bebtbam Leicester.' 

As I stripped myself, ran down to the 



92 Leicester. 



wash-room, took my place behind the last 
fellow on the stairs, and as I was washing 
in the wash-room before I went under the 
tap, I thought in a half-dreamy way about 
this uncle of mine and then about my 
mother and Colonel James, and then about 
my father but, going under the tap and 
standing there with the cool water gushing 
all over my chest and down my body, 
thoughts arrested took another turn, and it 
was not till I was in bed that night that 
they reverted to the matter. Who was my 
mother? My father was in the army, a 
* friend ' of Colonel James : something like 
Colonel James seems to me, perhaps : a 
stiff-bodied, stiff-kneed, steel-grey headed 
old gentleman modelled upon Major Fen- 
dennis. • . . Was my mother the woman 
up in one of the berths of that second 
darker vision, the woman up in one of the 
berths giving suck to and soothing the half- 
fractious child, the child half-feactious with 
sleep and misery ? The baby-boy, then, was 
my brother or sister ? Had I a brother or 



Leicester. 93 

sister ? I felt that I had not« Had I a 
mother ? I felt that, on the other side of a 
broad, shelved and dim atmosphere, I had. 
Sometimes she stood still, tamed towards 
me ; bat neither of as made any great effort 
to see the other. ^ My father lies dead in 
the close dark in the groond with a frown 
on his face. • • . And my thoughts of 
them," I said to myself, ^ are this much 
worth : that my mother is dead, ^^ the late 
Mrs. Leicester," and my father's face probably 
past all frowning now : Nay, they probably 
are semi-dissolved bodies together.' On 
which thoaght I fell asleep, and had a hor- 
rible dream of propping np the body of my 
father, great, naked, flabby, which woald 
come upon me, and the skin depended a 
little on the only part I coald see of him, 
the thighs and belly and upper portion of 
one broad leg. This dream disturbed me 
for the whole of the next day With a feeling 
of flabby death near and not near me, by 
and not by me, my father and not my 
father, just as that shadowy woman with 



94 Leicester. 

great owl -wings and the skull of an owl, of 
which I have already spoken. 

The morning after that, at breakfast, 
Armstrong, who sat next me, getting up to 
look at the letters when they were brought 
in, returned and threw one into my plate. 
It was addressed to B. Leicester^ Esq.y in a 
thin scratchy hand, and the envelope was 
large and oblong and of glazed white paper. 
In a little I opened it, supposing it to be 
from Mr. Cholmeley, and rightly. 

' The Myrtles, Seabay, Isle of Wight, 
' 22nd July, 18—. 

' Deab Mb. Leicester, 

* I dare say that by this time my 
name, Cholmeley, will convey some impres- 
sion to your mind ; for I must suppose that 
your guardian, Colonel James, has not left 
you in complete ignorance of the corres- 
pondence that has been passing between us. 

* I prefer coming at once to the point, or 
rather one of the points ; for there are two. 
The first is, some explanation of what you 



Leicester. 95 



mnst suppose to have been nothing short of 
absolute neglect of yonrself on my part; 
the second is, as you are probably aware, 
to ask you to confer upon me the pleasure 
of your society here for the first fortnight 
in August. I should, indeed, have been 
happy to have given you a somewhat larger 
invitation ; but, as my health requires me 
to hasten south again to those parts which 
alone seem able to make my wretched old 
body an endurable habitation, you will see 
that this is impossible. 

^ I now return to the first point. I saw 
but very little of my sister, Isabel, your 
mother; for having very early shown a 
decided inclination for the study of the 
classics, that chiefest laborum dulce Uni- 
men, and my father's father having himself 
been a scholar of no despicable pretensions, 
although of a somewhat more artificial, if 
sounder, character, than those at present in 
vogue, and moreover money not being a 
want to us, I naturally desired, and at last 
gained, my father's permission to return to 



96 Leicester. 

England, ultimately proceeding to Cam- 
bridge, where I obtained the distinction of 
Chancellor's Medallist and Second Classic, 
terms doubtless familiar to yon a member 
of a school in which, I believe, the old 
classical tradition is still handed down un- 
sullied by the barbaric bar-sinister of either 
science or, what they call, a * Modem Sidel' 
Shortly after my matriculation I had heard 
that my father's health was a little shaken 
by a severe chill caught at some festal 
gathering, but the evil eflTects were, ap- 
parently, rooted out by care and a good 
doctor, and I had given up any anxious 
thought about the matter. Indeed, the 
account I had of him for the next few years 
was encouraging in the extreme. You may, 
then, imagme my consternation and grief 
when, shortly after my last University suc- 
cess, I received intelligence of his sudden 
death and of my sister's desire to come to 
England as soon as possible, in order that 
she might take up her residence with an 
aunt of ours at that time residing near Man- 



Leicester. 97 

Chester. This voyage was actually per- 
formedi and I myself stayed for a few days 
at my amit's house, from the experience of 
which few days I formed that estimate of, 
what appeared to me to be, your mother's 
natural disposition, which, despite all sub- 
sequent events, I have seen no proper 
reason to cease to hold as being, in the 
main, a correct one. I can say with the 
most absolute sincerity, that I believe that 
the greatest of her faults was thoughtless- 
ness, and that I have so far considered, and 
shall in all probability continue to consider 
to the end of my life, that all attempts to 
make her out as either naturally or by her 
early training depraved are as unfounded 
as they are ungenerous and unjust. I 
make no doubt that you already know at 
any rate the general outline of your un- 
happy mother's subsequent career, and I 
shall, therefore, make no further allusion 
to it than that which I have already 
made. 

* You will I think easily perceive, that her 
VOL. I. 7 



98 Leicester. 



marriage with your father and their almost 
instantaneous departure for Cork where his 
regiment was then quartered, and my 
scholastic labours and ultimately my own 
marriage, to say nothing of our most op- 
posed spheres of life, made any close inti- 
macy between the two families all but im- 
possible. After a short, too short ! period 
of happiness I was left to face life with the 
motherless pledge of mutual affection and a 
frame shattered by an, alas useless, attend- 
ance on the sick bed of my beloved wife 
and companion. I felt that change of 
scene and change of climate were absolutely 
necessary to me. I left England therefore ; 
and so it came about that, unhonoured by the 
confidence of my sister, your mother, I re- 
mained for long in ignorance of anything 
more than the general facts of her history. 
It was only through inquiries, instituted by 
me shortly after I had received intelligence 
of her deaths that I learnt of your existence 
at all and then, being informed that you 
were well cared for, and being myself at the 



Leicester. 99 

timd engaged upon a most laborious and 
absorbing undertaking, I thought it no 
great neglect of you to wait till, that under- 
taking completed, however unworthily, 
and my presence in England being from the 
nature of the thing (I need not scruple to 
inform you that I refer to my forth-coming 
edition of the plays of Sophocles) an abso- 
lute necessity, at any rate for a short 
season, I could make your acquaintance 
personally instead of being compelled 
to know you and be known of you 
through nothing more intimate than the 
post! 

* There are other things which I desired 
to say to you but, for the present, I must 
forbear, for my exertions of the last few days 
have so worn out these wretchedly shattered 
nerves of mine, that I find both energy and 
acumen to be pitiably lacking in me. Let 
this, I pray you, be some excuse for the 
paltriness of this letter : and more especially 
for the abrupt ending which I am now about 
to give to it. I hope to hear from you 

7-2 



4893lSli 



100 Leicester. 

shortly, and, in the meantime, ask you to 
believe me, dear Mr. Leicester, 

* To be yours very sincerely, 

^ Ghables K. Cholmelet/ 

The letter made no impression upon me at 
the time ; for it did not seem to have much, 
if any, concern with me. I had read it with 
half-absent thoughts : then I put it into my 
breast-coat pocket : finished my breakfast : got 
up to my locker : took out one or two books : 
and went up to my study to look through 
some Cicero, the Pro Milonej which we had 
for exam, at second lesson. It was not till, 
the exam, over, I stood at my locker in the 
hall again, putting away my pen and blot- 
ting-paper, that my mind recurred to Mr. 
Cholmeley and his invitation. I shut to 
the locker door : took my hat off one of the 
pegs : and went out into the quad, with my 
hands in my pockets, thinking. — ' I suppose 
I may as well go down there. . . And 
yet I don't know. There's the boating, 
and I reckoned on a . . . Well, it's only 



Leicester. 101 

for three weeks at the worst : And I sup- 
pose as he's my nncle I • • . And he 
might tell me something about my mother ' 
(I lifted up my head) ; * I have just enough 
care about her, or her history, or whatever 
it is, to call it curiosity/ It was on some 
doubt consequent on this thought that I 
went in to Craven. 

I found him in the study taking off his 
gown. He received me affably. Yes, he 

had received a latter from Mr. Mr. 

Cholmeley, yes Mr. Cholmeley — my uncle ? 
Ah yes : my uncle — asking permission from 
him to allow me to spend the first fortnight 
of my midsummer vacation with him at 
Seabay in the Isle of Wight. Colonel 
James had been gpod enough to make his 
(Craven's) permission a requisite ? Well 
(looking up from his inspection of the letter) 
he had no objection to my going : no objec- 
tion : No. Mr. Cholmeley was my uncle ? 
Did I know if he was any relation of • • • 
Ah, it must be the same, he saw : Charles K. 
Cholmeley. — He had not noticed the initials. 



102 Leicester^ 

* Are you aware, Leicester/ he said with 
a blink and a blinking smile, 'that Mr. 
Cholmeley is one of the greatest authorities 
on the Greek tragedians that we have ? 
What ? What ? You werent aware of it ? 
. . • Now I hope you'll be carefal not 
to. • / And so on : The end of it being 
that he informed me, after a pause, that he 
thought a fortnight at Seabay would do me 
good. I was not to forget to warn Mrs. 
Jones of the change in my plans. There 
were some charming pieces of scenery in 
the neighbourhood of Seabay : 

* That is,' he said with another 

smile, * if you care for charming pieces of 
scenery, Leicester ? What ? What ?' 

I thought that it would be purposeless 
to say to him that I did and how much I 
did : so kept silence with my eyes on the 
ground, waiting for the old fool to finish. 

' Well, well ;' he said, * perhaps that 
will come later on. — ^You may go, Leicester.' 

I went out and up into my study, and 
sat down in a chair, tilting it back and 



Leicester. 103 

pntting my feet against the table by the 
window looking oat onto the quad., and 
began to think whether I really wanted to 
go and see my nncle, or wasn't it foolish to 
give np the pleasure of an extra fortnight 
alone on the river ? * Well/ I said, getting 
np, ' I mast go now I suppose/ 

* And yet/ continued I in thought, * why 
should I trouble myself with a journey 
down there, and he most probably a dry 
old stick who'll correct my pronunciation 
and make quotations I don't understand ? 
I really don't know. . . I suppose I'd 
better go. Craven '11 think it odd now if 

I Confound it I let him I What do 

I care ? I won't go ! — Just to show I 
don't care ? No, that's foolery. And my 
mother ? . . I'd better go after all. — What 
a fool I am !' 

The remaining week passed, to me, with 
imperceptible fleetness. I read a good 
deal : stalked out and over the fields to 
the bathing-place twice or three times : 
sculled a little up the river. 



104 Leicester. 

I remember, the last night, going in to 
Mother McCarthy to get my hat from the 
capboard : how I came along the dark 
passage: opened the door, with Gordon 
(the monitor) under the gas, leaning against 
the iron-work of Armstrong's bed, reading 
a book and biting his nails : went on to by 
my bed, threw the hat onto it, turned to 
the opened window and looked out — ^through 
the branches of two of the dark deep trees, 
into the quad, all there in the moonlight 
with the shadowed houses and, beyond, the 
opened heaven paley blue, lit with some 
self-containing radiance : 

And a feeling of soft peace grew in me, 
something which was unspeakable and 
which could not be left, to turn round to 
the bright gas-light, and the bedded jugged 
room and the fellows ; so that the thought 
of them left me, trailing and fading away 
as some half-pulsing sort of tentacle in a 
dream, and I remained with the fulness of 
that soft peace unspeakable : until there 
was a start, my attention taken backward, 



Leicester. 105 

a book snapped np» and I knew the butler 
had been in and pnt out the gas. 

I went from the window in the space 
between the beds^ and nndressed in silence, 
thinking. 



n. 

CHAPTER I. 

Abmstbono lived in London, As we were 
getting np in the early morning he found 
oat that I had to go to London, and asked 
me to have breakfast with him at Miller's, 
where they give yon a decent tuck-in for 
1/6, and besides Knight's is so dirty, and 
he hadn't paid his tick there yet for last 
term. I agreed to go with him : though 
in a glum sort of a way ; for I was in an 
irresolute humour, half dissatisfied with 
everything and everybody, particularly my- 
self. Well, into Miller's we went together : 
through the shop into a small poky gaslit 
room where, round a table, sat some four 



Leicester. 107 

or five fellows ' tacking in ' at coffee, 
bread, eggs and bacon, and jam. In a 
little, I got a seat next Tolby-Jenkins, a 
fat monitorial beast, of ignoble sort. 

Armstrong and I were coming down the 
grey-morning hill to the station before I 
returned to myself again. And then there 
was an entry into a tobacconist's jast 
opened and a purchase by Armstrong of 
bird's-eye and some cigarettes. 

* Am't you going to get anything ?' 
asked Armstrong, half-turning to look at 
me looking out of the door across the 
station yard to the station steps and door- 
way. I half turned and met his look. 

* Very well,' I said. * Give me a box 
of cigarettes.' And took out a shilling 
and ' lifted ' it from where I was onto the 
counter. 

We crossed into the station. A good 
many fellows were about. Armstrong had 
talk with some, and, in the end, I got 
into one of the London carriages after him 
and sat down next the fellow at the far 



108 Leicester. 

end facing the engine. Directly opposite 
me was Norris our stroke, of the School 
House I mean ; and in the comer David- 
son. In the other comer of that side, 
friend Leslie on his last joumey home 
from Colchester School. Armstrong next 
Leslie. Jones junior on my right : and 
Jacobson next him in the comer. 

For the first hour we had a loud time 
of it. Norris sang solos of popular or 
^ smutty ' songs and the rest joined in 
deafening choruses, enlivened by occasional 
horse-play. I was set off smiling more 
than once at the thought of my soleinn 
self sitting there * drawing ' every now. and 
then from a desultory cigarette, and send- 
ing out a faint whiff of smoke into the 
rush of air that passed through one window 
rollingly out of the other. It wasn't that I 
didn't care for mirth, I thought ; for there 
have been times when I have felt ready for 
a witch's sabbath over the hills, or any 
laughter-devilry you please; not to recall 
other times, when the readiness for a gibe 



Leicester. 109 

at some young woman of the Beatrice 
stamp was all bat irresistible and prompted 
shouting and mirthfulness only ended by 
sheer exhaustion. But what was there in 
these * earthy ' fools (I mean, as if they 
were not unlike fat^ half-lousy Flemish 
revellers among the barrels of a cellar : 
And yet not quite that !) to inspire mirth, 
or even laughter ? — So I sat thinking, till, 
all at once, Norris set up a ringing sea* 
song that, after a little listening, made a 
cold shiver go down my back, and my eyes 
light up, and the necessity for a loud shout 
in the chorus a simple half-conscious satis- 
faction. 

The rest of the journey was a quietness, 
by comparison perhaps. Norris and Leslie 
left us at Bridgetown : Davidson got out 
soon after. We could hear the other 
London fellows in the next carriage sing- 
ing for a little after that ; but the fellows 
here grew quieter, reading or talking : 
while I sat still thinking. And so the 
time went. 



110 Leicester. 



At London there was a general shaking 
of hands and quick parting. And I changed 
to my second train. 

At Portsmouth I went on board the 
boat. It was a heavenly afternoon; that 
is, with a mild sky streamed with tender 
colours, and the air mild, not hot or cool. 
I stood leaning against the side forward, 
while the gentle scene went by. Faint 
unreality was with me and something not 
undreamy. 

* Altogether,' I thought (at Kyde), sit- 
ting in the engine-side comer of the wait- 
ing train with my hand in my cheek and 
my elbow in the window-ledge, * to-day 
has been a day of dreamy changes : one 
unlike any one I know, save perhaps three 
or four of my fever days/ When forth- 
with the faint unreality was with me once 
more and something not undreamy; and 
was with me till I, looking not undreamily 
forth, saw Seahay on a long board as we 
passed it on: Then stopped. I put my 
hand out of the door, turned the handle, 



Leicester. Ill 

Bhoved open the door with my knee and 
got out. It was not a hot late-afternoon : 
a gentle breeze was blowing. The sky 
was fall of rare colours. A porter pnlled 
my box ont o^ the luggage-van and landed 
it, over the stone border, on the brick-red 
gravel. 

I stood by the box and the train went 
out, and away : stood for some little, re- 
flecting that I had forgotten Mr. Chol- 
meley's address and had neither Colonel 
James's nor his letter to refer to. It didn't 
trouble me. I still stood thinking, about 
things, in a half vague way. Then took 
to looking at the station and a tall grass 
bank opposite. There seemed no one in 
the station now. A hen fluttered out of 
some furze a little farther on into the 
line. Some ducks came paddling their 
bills along in a broad rut on the other side 
^f the line : I could hear a telegraph clock 
tibk-tick-tick-ticking. 

As my slow gaze went to by the door- 
way and a small book-stall towards the 



112 Leicester. 

other end of my side of the station, an old 
gentlemen's head» bent shonlders, and black* 
clothed body came from just past the book* 
stall : He had a. white stock round his 
neck. And then, between him and the 
bookstall, stepped a fair girl. — They came 
on slowly along the brick-red gravel. 

I half observed them with a new feeling : 
them, neither the old gentleman particularly 
nor the girl. Till, all at once, he stopped. 
She stopped. 

He said : 

' My dear. I don't see him.' 

The girl raised her head, looked towards, 
to me. Our eyes met. Everything in me 
stood still, effortlessly though. Then she 
looked down to him : lifted her hand to his 
arm, on it, and said with a lower tone : 

' I expect' that is Mr. Leicester there, 
father.' Up went his head, out came two 
homed glasses onto his nose, and he had a 
look at me. I smiled. 

* God bless my soul,' he said, * of course, 
of course ! My dear, I'm as blind as a bat,' 



Leicester. 118 

And on that we all were together^ and he 
had shaken my hand with his two, and 
then ; with * This is my daughter Kayne/ 
she and I had shaken hands. And we had 
all tamed together and were on our way 
over the gravel to the other end of the 
station. 

He was saying : 

* You see, it was my fault that we weren't 
up here to meet the train. — ^Yes, my dear,* 
he proceeded, ' it was my fault, I acknow- 
ledge it.' 

^ But Where's your luggage ?' said the 
girl, staying. 

Mr. Cholmeley was seized with a sudden 
and violent fit of coughing, and in the end 
spat out a patch of yellowy stuff not unlike 
matter into the hollow by the near rail. 
The sight I took of that patch of yellowy 
stuff not unlike matter introduced a new 
feeling in me. 

' There is my box,' I said, turning and 
looking towards it : And, at that moment 
seeing a porter come out of a small room 

VOL. I. 8 



) 



114 Leicester. 

we had just passed, called to him ; and 
turning back to them : * Shall I tell him to 
. . . How ? Are there cabs ... or . . .' 

* Well/ said Bayne, with a light of laugh- 
ter in her eyes, * there's the pony carriage 
outside, but • • . I'm afraid your box will 
be — rather too much for it,' she said. 

I half laughed. 

' Eh ?' said Mr. Cholmeley. ' What ? 
Eh ? The box, my dear ; you said it was 
too big?' He turned also, adjusted the 
two homed glasses, and took a look at it. 
The porter was waiting by us. 

^ Well,' I said, turning and speaking to 
him, *will you manage to bring it up 
to ' 

* Yes, sir. I'll see its brought up. 
Where to, sir?' 

I paused : looked at Bayne : half laughed : 
and said : 

* Upon my word I don't know. You see, 
sir,' I went on to Mr. Cholmeley, ' I forgot 
the address of the house I was going to, 
and I hadn't either your letter or Colonel 



Leicester. 115 

James' in my pocket to prompt my memory 
with/ 

* The Myrtles/ saidEayne to the porter : 
And then (he gone with a queer look and a 
* Yes, miss/) to me : * It was lucky we came 
to meet you then/ 

*Very/ I said. Mr. Oholmeley had 
started slowly on in the original direc- 
tion. We were up to him in a few steps, 
one on each side. 

* I can't make out/ I went on, * what 
could have made me so forgetful.' 

* In the over-wrought condition of our 
nerves nowadays,' said Mr. Oholmeley, ' the 
wonder is that we remember anything/ 

And with such talk we were out of the 
station and by a small pony-carriage and a 
small brown fat pony. Rayne drew back. 
Mr. Oholmeley got in, and made a motion 
to sit down in the front seat. I ran round 
to the other side to stop him, and succeeded. 
Then Bayne was in, had taken up the reins, 
touched up the pony, and we were off at a 
smart trot. 

8—2 



116 Leicester^ 



Mr. Cholmeley was leaning back wi& 
his eyes closed. 

Then Bayne asked something about my 
journey. And I answered in sort : till Mr. 
Cholmeley came into the conversation, and 
it drifted to Colchester. Mr. Cholmeley 
asked me a good many questions about 
Colchester : the system of teaching the 
classics in use, the subjects taught in each 
form, the amount taught, and other things : 
I answering as I best could. 

All at once : 

^ I do not care for Latin,' said Bayne. 
' It is dry.' 

Mr. Cholmeley lay back again with his 
eyes closed, smiling peacefully. 

* Nor do I, Miss Cholmeley,' I said, * I 
must confess. I can't understand Latin 
properly, I do think. It seems all so life- 
less to me, as if they had all sat down and 
written it to pass away the wet afternoons. 
But Greek now ! — Homer, or even Xeno- 
phon. You remember that bit in the seventh 
book, I think, where they see the sea ' 



Leicester. 117 

Mr. Cholmeley murmured : 

* Kai Tcf^a 817 cucovovci fiowvrtop twv arpart- 
»Twv, daXarra, OaXarra, tcai 'n'opefyvtovrwif. 

— a beautiful little touch, that irapej^ 

yvwvTtttp,* 

* What does it mean V she asked. 

I, looking at Mr. Cholmeley and perceiv- 
ing his eyes still closed , answered rather 
diffidently : 

^ It means, passing it on to one another 
like the watchword, I think. We did 
it the term before last, the seventh 
book/ 

'Yes/ said Bayne, 'but I never got as 
far as that. I did read some Xenophon 
last January :' she added to me. ' But it 
was rather uninteresting, I thought. No- 
thing but : Thence he marches nineteen stages, 
twenty-seven parasangs to — some place or 
other ; a city populous, prosperous and great.. 
And the river Scamander (or Menander, or 
whatever it is), flows close to it, and there is 
a park and a palace in the middle of the 
city:* ' 



118 Leicester. 

* My dear /' said Mr. Oholmeley, smiling 
with still closed eyes. ** Menander /" ' 

^ I don't think I shall ever want to read 
any other Greek than Homer/ she went on, 
flicking with the whip-lash. 

In a little : 

* Perhaps, Miss Cholmeley/ I said, 

* you'll like to read Plato some day : like 
Lady Jane Grey did. I have only read 
part of the Apology and the Crito ; but it 
seemed to me that it was very beau- 
tiful.' 

* Eh ? hey ?' said Mr. Cholmeley , opening 
his eyes and erecting his head and body, 

* why, here we are.' 

I gave a glance at the house. It was a 
small house at the other end of a garden 
pretty with bright flowers. There was a 
not unfaint noise heard, like the wind in a 
row of tree-tops. Looking on, as I got 
down, I saw a line, about a quarter way up 
the house, with a pale blue band : the sea I 
The breeze came up softly. There was a 
boy waiting just by the gate for the pony, 



Leicester. 119 

whose rein close by the month he now 
held. 

I stretched my hand for Mr. Gholmeley. 
He rested on it, and getting down : 

* It's a beantifiil day for Angnst — ^in Sea- 
bay/ he said. ' That is to say if I may 
believe what they tell me abont it. An 
antiquarian friend of mine at Newport 
described the place as a bed in a cncnm- 
ber-frame, in summer. Myself I am in- 
clined to doubt it — ^for reasons.' 

Bayne was already down and on to open 
the gate ; but I was there before, unlatched 
and threw it inwards wide. Mr. Cholme- 
ley passed in slowly, Bayne followed 
with a look at me like that of when she 
said : * Well : There's the pony-carriage 
outside, but . . • I'm afraid your box will 
be rather too much for it.' I followed, 
with an arriving thought that I had seen 
her eyes somewhere before, and perhaps her 
face. 

We went in, through a small green- 
covered porch, to a small hall, then to the 



120 Leicestei\ 

right, down a passage that met the little 
hall at right-angles, down a staircase, along 
a little hall again with an open door at the 
end and green garden and blaey sea-view, 
then to the right into a large light room, in 
the middle of which was a laid table and, 
for the far-side, a large half-bay window 
with the two central flaps opened out- 
ward. 

Mr. Oholmeley sank down sighing in an 
armchair that Bayne turned a little to the 
window. 

* Ah-h,' he said. * I'm very soon tired 
out now.' 

Then, in a little, recovering himself, 
looking up at me standing by the window 
to his left : 

* — ^But perhaps Mr. Leicester is hungry ' 
(turning his look up to Bayne above the 
right arm of the armchair). * We forget 
that. — ^And dinner is not till half-past 
seven.' 

* No,' I said. ^ I am not hungry at all, 
thank you.' 



Leicester. 121 

* Are you sure ?' 

' Certaiii/ I said. * I had some things 
on the way. I am not at all hungry, really, 
thank you/ 

A pause. 

* Then I think/ he said, ^ that the best 
thing to be done, will be for Bayne and you 
to go for a ramble along the shore together, 
and leave me here. I'm afraid I should be 
but poor company just at present. In fact: 
I confess that I should like a little nap 
before dinner. You remember, my dear, I 
had no siesta this afternoon, and I'm tired.' 
His voice fell. 

We left him rather lingeringly, more 
particularly Bayne. And went down over 
the first plot of grass, the gravelled walk, 
and the lawn in silence. Then she led me 
round a clump of bushes, and we were on a 
path whose front was a low sea-wall. There 
was a break of a yard therein a little further 
on. Arrived there, I saw a ladder, like 
those from bathing-machines, that touched 
the sand* 



122 Leicester. 

We stayed a moment. Then I jumped 
down and held my hand up for her. She 
jumped past it down, and stepped seawards, 
I following. 

* I hope you didn't mind my father going 
to sleep/ she said as we moved off together 
through the loose tuneful sand. ^ He usually 
takes his nap after lunch, but to-day your 
coming disturbed him so, that he couldn't 
take it, and he is so easily exhausted . • . 
now.' 

* I am sorry,' I said. 

* Why should you be sorry ?' 

* To have disturbed him.' 

^ I didn't mean that ! I meant that it 
had excited him thinking you were coming, 
and so he couldn't get to sleep then, after 
lunch. But that wasn't your fault.' 

We moved on in silence for a little. Then 
she said : 

^ How beautiful the sea is now, and the 
sky.' 

We stopped a moment to look at them. 
And looking at them, the pale yellow slrjr, 



Leicester. 123 

the smooth sea, the liquid wavei dreami- 
ness came to me : absorbed all my iimer 
self with a dimness, even as the pale yellow 
hght may have absorbed the middle heaven. 
A doable word, that was almost one word, 
was, came, went through, I cannot say 

what ^in the dimness : OaXarra, OaXarra. I 

knew only the dimness : it, the pale yellow 
sky, the smooth sea, the liquid wave, were 
outside. Then a deadened pain came in 
my left brow, and a deadened sound in my 
ears ; and I saw ; and saw her by me, and 
her face with the shadow of a frown on her 
brow. 

* I am sorry,' I said in a low voice. * I 
had forgotten you.' 

She smiled. 

' You said something, in Greek I think it 
was, and then you shook your head a little, 
and then you threw out your arms to the 
sea. — ^Will you tell me what that Greek 
meant ?' 

^ I am sorry,' I said. 

' What for ? For forgetting me ?' 



124 Leicester. 

* Yes. I was not thinking.' 

* Surely it was just the opposite. — ^You 
were thinking. When you think you for- 
get, very often, everything but what you 
are thinking about. There is no need to be 
sorry for that.' 

* I am very foolish to-day. — ^But I have 
never seen the sea before that I can remem- 
ber : and, I cannot tell you why, but it 
seems to make me wish now to laugh and 
then to cry. I am foolish/ 

We walked on in silence for some twenty 
steps : 

* It is not so,' she said. * Sometimes, 
early in the morning, when I have come 
out, and the sun was shining, and every- 
thing seemed so happy, I have run down to 
the sea dancing and singing. But when I 
saw how it lifted itself up, and threw out 
its arms once — ^twice — over and over again 
— ^into the sand, and it seemed so tired, 
so tired ... I. have stood and pitied it : 
till I felt the tears all coming out of 
my eyes. — I do not call that foolish. 



Leicester. 125 

It is God who makes yoa pity the 
sea/ 

I laughed, and we moved on together 
again : 

' These ridicnlons dreamy states/ I said, 
' come upon me at times : ever since I had 
the scarlet fever, more than a year ago 
now. — The Greek I called out was, I think 
so at least, only what the Greeks cried, 
** The sea I the sea 1" — You remember 
Mr. Cholmeley quoted it. P'r'aps it was, 
that I remembered it in the middle : and 
that made me call it out. I dare say !' 

Then we talked of Greek, and how we 
both loved it ; and then of Homer. And I 
could have cried out when she said straight 
oflf the line : 

fiff y dieewp trapa Otva iroXv^Xour/Soio 0a7iaaa"n^, 

which I had thought one of the most beau- 
tiful 'ideas' that I knew: the old man 
going in silence down by the loud-resound- 
ing sea. And then we traced the words 



126 Leicester. 

with a stick on the clean smooth sand, and 
she said that she wished she knew how to 
put the accents on the words, for they 
didn't look quite right without them, and I 
said that the general rules for marking the 
accents were very simple, and explained 
about oxyton, paroxyton, proparoxyton, 
perispomen, and properispomen, and other 
matters connected therewith. 

From that, in some way or other, we 
went to French, of which I knew next to 
nothing; but, when I asked her and she 
spoke some of it, it pleased me to listen to 
it as it came from her lips, some poetry she 
had learnt, and lastly a little song. I was 
sorry when the song was over, and went on 
by her without a word for a little, as if the 
song would continue, and yet not quite that. 
Then I remembered, and said that I liked 
to hear her sing. This led us to Italian, 
and she repeated some Italian for me. 

*It must give you pleasure,' I said, 
looking at her, ' to know these soft beauti- 
ful languages.' 



Leicester. 127 

' Well/ she answered, * it does please me 
sometimes ; bnt I've known them ever since 
I was quite small, and so they seem some- 
how natural to me.' 

* I have never been out of England/ I 
said. ^ I should like to see Italy, I think 
I should like to die in Italy, where the sun 
shines always, and there is no cold wind 
and rain, and the fields are fiill of flowers/ 

'But the wind does blow,' she said, 
* horribly sometimes : the sirocco in the 
autumn is terrible, and so are the spring 
winds in Florence/ 

' Ah but,' I said, looking at her, ^ that's 
not the time I was thinking of/ 

Then she began to tell me about Italy 
and their life there. I asked particularly 
about the pictures and statues, telling her 
that the only pictures I had ever seen were 
in the Fainted Chamber at Greenwich, and 
described the one of Nelson rushing 
wounded on deck, and the other of him 
being taken up, a pale dead body, into 
heaven. 



128 Leicester. 



At that point we stopped ; for walking 
on the bank of stone on which we were 
was toilsome : and she looked aside and up 
at under the clifif, and I also* It was a sort 
of plateau a few yards higher than the 
stony shingle, covered with thick grass, and 
having small trees here and there. She 
was looking at one part of it, — Two small 
streams, but the one larger a little than the 
other, made two small cascades flowing 
down from a higher elevation through the 
grass, gathered tufts of which and weeds 
guided the flow into the round earth basin 
below. There was a gentle murmur : and 
by the right side a tree, with a faint shadow 
against the earthen wall behind. 

We climbed up. 

It was a pretty place. Clear streaks of 
colour on the earthen wall that was 
sheeted with the ruffled water : then, from 
an arched break up above, came the main 
stream^ dividing, to cross and flow down 
the swaying grass and weeds into the round 
earthen basin. 



Leicester. 129 

Bayne sat down on a thick clomp of grass 
under the tree: and I leant against the 
earthen wall with the line of water just by 
me. 

All at once she jumped np, looking along 
the shore to the brown cliff that ended the 
bay. I looked also. 

' We're caught !' she said. 

There was a play of foam, as she spoke, 
at the foot of the brown cliff behind which 
was the now almost, or altogether, set sun. 
She rose, crossed the plateau, jumped down 
on to the shingle and started off at a run. 
I was up and after her in a moment, close 
by her. She ran well, for a girl. But the 
shingle, giving with each footfall, was tiring 
to the limbs, and then there were her petti* 
coats. She began to flag a little. We 
were still quite a hundred yards from the 
point. 

^ Will you take my hand ?' I said, pass- 
ing her. * Let me help you. The stones/ 

She would not. I fell back. 

We ran on as before. 

TOL. I. 9 



180 Leicester. 

Looking down as we came onto some 
smooth half-hard sand, I saw the B?7 SaK^wv 
which we had written ; the rest was washed 
out. 

At last we came to hy the point. The 
waves were dashing up foamingly all round. 
She went straight to a boulder, jumped on 
to it, and with her hand against the brown 
earthen side was about to step to another, 
when up had come a swelled sideward wave, 
swirled over the first ring of rocks, and the 
next moment she was in a shiver of spray. 
I stepped to try the boulder on which she 
was, caught firm hold of her round the hips, 
and, lifting her up, made straight onward. 
Up came another wave, but smaller, swept 
past and through my legs up to the knees, 
but I held both her and the ground firm. 
She did not move : one arm held me firmly 
round the shoulders. I looked aside. 
There was a large wave just offshore coming 
in swiftly. * Now V 

The wave went back. I dashed on, 
stumbled over a stone, recovered myself, a 



Leicester. 181 



small leap, a run — and we were in the 
light of the setting sun, and she put down 
on the sand before me. The large wave 
strack through the first ring of rocks, and 
burst fiill upon the cliff, mostly on this 
side, into a lit cloak-like shower of drops 
flying through the soft sunny air. Then I 
looked at her, — ^both looks, for the bursting 
of the wave and for her, inexpressibly swift. 
Laughter was in her eyes at last, and on 
her lips, and in her face. 

* I will never forgive you for not letting 
me get a ducking,' she said. ' I had set 
my heart on it I' 

Then she turned, and we hurried on in 
the warmer sunset air, not saying much. 
I was fully content so. 

At last we reached the garden wall. 
The tide did not come up to the other end 
wall. She went up the ladder, and then I : 
along the path : round the bushes, and on 
to the lawn. There we saw Mr. Cholmeley 
looking through a pair of lorgnettes along 
the other shore. 

9—2 



ltS2 Leicester. 



Rayne came np to him quietly, I fol- 
lowing ; and put her left arm round him 
and said : 

* Here we are, daddy ; I hope we haven't 
kept you waiting for dinner/ 

* Eh ? hey ?' he said, smiling at her, with 
the lorgnettes lowered, and then, looking at 
me : * why, I thought you would be sure to 
go along the shore towards Cremlin, child.' 

And we went over the grass together and 
up into the dining-room talking. We all 
seemed content so. 



CHAPTER II. 

The fortnight I was there with them went 
like a space of faur weather throngh a time 
of dnhiess. 

When I awoke one morning and informed 
myself that this was the last day I should 
be here in this fair beauty and inner 
pleasure of life with them, it seemed to 
me that I thought foolishly. Not even 
that evening, when we three were in the 
open air, Mr. Cholmeley in the arm-chair in 
the middle of the out-flung bay-window, 
Bayne on a stool at his feet, touching him 
with loving hand from time to time, and I 
half lying on and over the edge of the 
terrace — ^not even then, with the certain 



134 Leicester. 

quiet and sadness that was of a last evening 
together with ns, could I realize that I was 
going away from the beauty and the life 
here with them, not to see either again for 
long ; perhaps ever. The even flow of 
quiet and sadness was too dreamy. 

We began to talk a little, of work, its 
length and weariness and the final rest 
when it was over : or rather it was, that 
Mr. Cholmeley spoke of it softly, and everj'- 
now and then Eayne or I asked him of 
things he told or other thoughts thereby. 
, Then Bayne left us for a moment to go 
to speak to Mrs. Jacques about our break- 
fast, and I came up and sat in her place. 

For a little there was silence, and I knew 
somehow that he wished to speak to me 
about my mother. I waited calmly. He 
was trembling. But at last the words 
came. 

He had felt that he had not done all he 
might have done for her. He ought to 
have remembered that he was the only 
person she had in the world of whom she 



Leicester. 185 

had a right to expect care and affection. 
Bat he had not thought of it in that way 
then. As he had told me, they had seen 
so little of one another, that she did not 
seem to him to be his sister, and * sister ' 
meant but a name that was not as near even 
as ' friend/ He was so fall of other things 
then : his studies, his work ; and she 
seemed happy and contented with her aunt. 
And then they both married, and she seemed 
happy and contented with her husband. 
He knew that he had done wrong. It was 
clearly his duty, both as a man and her 
brother, to have befriended her. Perhaps 
if he had done so, she might never. . . • 
God only knew ! 

He was so moved, that all I saw good to 
do was to calm him. 

I said, as I thought, that he had acted 
for the best, and that he could not be 
blamed. The questions that I would like 
to have asked, what my mother had done, 
and when and why she had done it, were 
not, I thought, to be asked then. I was 



136 Leicester. 

once almost afraid that he would do himself 
some harm and, as I tried to soothe him, I 
felt in some way that the pulse of life beat 
but faintly here. And thinking of it grew 
sad. 

And so at last Bayne came back, and we 
talked of other things. 

The next morning Eayne went with me 
down to the station to see me off, and, when 
I had got my ticket and seen that the box 
was all right, we walked up and down the 
gravel platform talking a little, of her 
father and of their going abroad and when 
we might meet again. She seemed to have 
no idea that he was very ill; and mine, 
of the faint-pulsing life, having passed 
away, there was no certainty in me — no, nor 
thought, to tell her of what might after all 
have been no more than fancy. 

She would write to me once every month, 
she said : that was better than promising to 
write often and not writing; for it is so 
difficult to know what to tell a person if 
you write often, and it is much nicer 



Leicester. 137 

to have the whole month and write to 
them when you feel inclined to, didn't I 
think BO ? Then I reminded her of her 
promise to learn hard at Latin, and of mine 
to learn hard at French, so that we might 
both know the same languages and compare 
onr thoughts npon them : ' And/ I said, 
* I shall set npon Italian soon, and see what 
I can make of it/ 

And a little after that the train came up, 
and we went stepping down it, till we saw 
an empty carriage. And then I got into it, 
and put my coat on the seat, and was down 
again by her ; but we said little, standing 
together, and I now and then looking at her, 
and knowing a tremble in me and the lump 
in my throat, and would have held her and 
kissed her on the lips and said ' Bayne !* 
But the last carriage-door banged to, and 
the porter was by mine, and it was a hurry 
to go : And in the hurry somehow I touched 
her hand, and she rose on her toes with her 
cheek for me to kiss, and I kissed it, and 
then was up in the moving train and not 



J38 Leicester. 



able to see her for the tears, till we were 
past the end of the station, when I saw her 
standing and waving her hand with a smile 
on her dear sweet face. * Ofc, Bayncy Bayncj 
how lonely I amy leaving you I Oh, Rayney 
Rayne t' 

Colchester seemed very dull to me when 
I first came back from Seabay. I roamed 
about the fields in search of consolation for 
something I had lost, but could find little or 
none. It was a relief when the term began. 

I had determined to work hard. I did, 
after a fashion, but it seemed that the 
moments of tastelessness, as Mr. Cholmeley 
had once said, were more frequent as the 
autumn grew more damp-decaying and the 
moments of hopeful delight more rare : and 
no letter from Kayne. 

At last, late on in September that is, the 
letter came. She was sorry not to have 
written to me quite within the month, as she 
had said she would, but her father (' father ' 
simply, as she wrote) had been very ill, and 
she could not settle down to write me a 



Leicester. 139 

long letter about some things she had heen 
thinking about, and she did not care to send 
to me * a scribble/ They had returned to 
Paris for a few weeks to see a doctor there 
about her father, and then back again to 
Switzerland, ThOn, which he was very fond 
of. — ^What she had been thinking about was 
her neglect of religious study. I can re« 
member that some one had brought this 
home to her, and that she was reading the 
New Testament in the original, and a 
general idea of mine that she had a fit of 
religious seriousness upon her that puzzled 
me in a vague sort of way. I didn't think 
about religion myself. I never had thought 
about it, somehow. 

I answered her at some length, giving a 
summary of the authors I had read and the 
impressions therefrom formed, with occa- 
sional allusions to events or things that 
interested me, afterwards noticing somehow 
to myself that I wasn't thinking very much 
about her in connection with what I had 
written. I directed the letter, as she told 



140 Leicester. 

me, to a Poste Bestante, somewhere in 
Italy, where they were going shortly. 
Late in October her second letter came. 

^ Mt DEAB BfiBTRAM, 

^ It is a wet and tempestuons after- 
noon, and therefore I consider it a fitting 
occasion to answer your long and with 
difficulty decipherable epistle. Yesterday 
was one of the hottest days I remember 
here, my thermometer going up to 105 in 
the sun, and so I knew we should have 
thunder and lightning. We did have: of 
a sort, but utterly disappointing. Of course 
I went out of doors to see what would 
happen, but, beyond two livid sickly green 
flashes, all was thick pitchy darkness. So 
I returned a sadder and wiser woman, drip- 
ping wet. We have been enjoying the most 
glorious weltering simmering heat, and I 
am out of doors reading or rambling alone 
through the ' lustrous woodland,' or else 
lazily boating, the whole day. You would 
never have got this letter written, if it had 



Leicester. 141 

not been for the wet day* I don't believe 
this place can be matched for pore natural 
beauty anywhere. Yesterday I went out 
in a boat, with two damsels. It was rough, 
and they were both sick and very afraid ; 
but there was a kind of new glory over 
everything, the air marvellously clear, in 
preparation for the storm in the night I 
suppose. The hills all a perfect indigo 
blue, and masses of cloud entangled in the 
*^ misty mountain tops." It was a 

" Glory beyond all glory ever seen 
By waking sense or by the dreaming soul ;" 

and I stood upright in the boat with my 
head bared, and revelled in it all — much 
to the disgust of the damsels in question. 
They shouldn't have plagued me to take 
them outl • . . I have got through two 
volumes of Carlyle's F. Revolution, as you 
desired, and am much impressed and edified. 
There is rather a tempest going on outside, 
and 80 I am going to try to dodge my 
dear old daddy and Sir James, and get out 



142 Leicester. 



my boat and enjoy it. — ^By-the-bye, I had 
forgotten to tell yon that an old friend and 
favourite of ours, Sir James Gwathin, has 
been staying with ns this last week. He 
is a most amusing mondain en villegiature, 
with a marvellous French and Italian accent, 
and altogether a very amusing companion 
to the father, and myself at times. He 
knows what seems to me a great deal about 
Art, the Old Masters particularly. My 
dear old daddy is far from well. The 
spitting is very troublesome, and now often 
tinged with blood. Three days ago he sent 
my heart into my throat and made me quite 
restless for the night, by breaking a blood- 
vessel; but he has felt far better since, 
he says; more fi^ee and relieved. The 
doctor says too that it has done him good. 
— But I really must go out now ! Excuse 
this final scrawl. I have hopes of a storm 
to-night. Love of course from the daddy. 
In haste, dear Bertram, 

* Yours truly, 

^Kaynb Cholmeley, 



Leicester. 143 

* P.S. — As we're on the move I'll send 
you an address to send your answer to in a 
little. 

' B. c: 

(The part about her standing up bare- 
headed in the boat thrilled me : the rest 
was almost interestless.) 

One day at the end of second lesson 
Craven came upon a piece of Italian in one 
of his books of reference, and could not 
translate it all. He half-smilingly asked 
if any of us knew Italian ? No one did. 
But I recalled some words of mine to Rayne, 
and determined that I would learn Italian. 
After second lesson, then, I went down to 
the school bookseller, and bought of him a 
little Italian dictionary and grammar. The 
man knew nothing of Italian literature, nor 
did I : I could not even remember any of 
the names Bayne had quoted, except Dante, 
Petrarch and Boccaccio. But all at once 
I thought of Macaulay's Essay on Machia- 
velli and of some words therein : and asked 



144 Leicester. 

the man if he had a Machiavelli. After 
some search he found a little red-paper- 
covered edition of the * Principe/ I said 
that would do, and bought it. 

I took it up to the school with me and 
sat at it for the remaining half-hour before 
dinner. Puzzled out six lines and a half, 
and came up to wash my hands for dinner, 
pleased. And after that I gave an hour per 
day to Italian, at first only to learning the 
grammar, but, up to the irregular verbs 
mastered, turned at last joyfully to my 
book, and found it fairly .easy and extremely 
interesting. It set me about thinking some- 
what in this fashion : ' Most things are this 
or that, because they are made this or that, 
that is to say, there are certain laws by 
observing which you can bring about certain 
results.' I proceeded: ^It is surprising 
that the world, which I had somehow or other 
always supposed to be one great witness to 
the justice of God, seems to be after all 
rather more like a great stage on which the 
drama of Might over Eight is perpetually 



Leicester. 145 

being played. Now does pure right ever 
come off best ? that is, does pore right ever 
win by its own unadulterated purity?' I 
began to doubt it. For, surely, when right 
is crowned victor, there are certain laws 
which having been observed have brought 
this about, and consequently wrong, if it 
only knows how to observe these laws, is 
crowned victor also. Honesty is the best 
policy : Bogues can be honest. 

But in a little came a certain disgust 
with the whole matter, and I determined 
not to think about it any more. But deter- 
mination was wasted. This brought it 
about that, on more than one occasion, sud- 
denly catching myself at the old thoughts I 
gave vent to a sharp impatient ' Damn !' to 
the surprise of those who happened to be 
with and hear me. I remember once in 
second lesson so losing patience with my- 
self that, unconscious of the presence of 
anyone, I let fly with my foot at a form in 
front of me, which went over with a loud bang 
onto the boards in a small dust cloud, and as 

VOL. I. 10 



146 Leicester. 

I Bat motionloBS frowning at my book, and 
answered nothing to the questions Craven 
asked me about the matter, was given the 
lesson to write out twice ; and afterwards was 
called up and spoken to on the subject, but 
preserved complete silence, for what was the 
good of telling a fool of this sort, who grew 
furious over a false concord and preached 
invertebrate sermons the truth ? I would 
as soon have thought of telling him a lie ! 
Well, I wrote out the lesson twice, and 
there that part of the affair ended. 

The Christmas holidays were an evil time. 
I gave myself up to, as it were, an entirely 
new consideration of affairs. A week's 
close thought, out on my walks, in bed at 
night, often till after twelve or one o'clock, 
made me give up the Bible as a fairy tale. 
Then came a fortnight or so of utter con- 
fusion, inexplicable to myself: excitement 
of body and soul, wild dreams, visions or 
half - visions, a purgatory. Finally I 
emerged with a certain calmness to wonder 
at that time, wonder that it had belonged to 



Leicester. 147 

me. It seemed so dimly far away now, and 
as to some one else, and yet not to some 
one else, and yet not to me. 

The opening of the term wrought a 
strange change, A new form of the thing 
which had done duty to me as woman came 
to me, producing an amount of longing for 
her and her love that frequently found vent in 
tears over pencilled poetry sheets. Then 
Christ was introduced, as a sweet tender 
friend who consoled me for her present 
absence by telling me of her future coming. 
But, after a time, this too passed, and I 
returned to my old doubtful state, deciding 
that happiness was undoubtedly the end of 
life, and that happiness to me meant having 
written certain quietly delightful books, 
while I stayed alone apart in a dim place 
that had Httle to do with life and nothing 
with death. My old idea of greatness en 
bloc was childish, absurd. My old trouble 
about God and the world was uselesSi 
absurd. My old ideas about everything were 
extremely vague I Happiness and selfishness 

10—2 



148 Leicester. 



are synonymous terms. Everybody is selfish. 
Good men are good, because they couldn't 
be happy bad. Bad men are bad because 
they couldn't be happy good. Men who 
are the most unselfish are the most selfish : 
the very pain that their unselfishness causes 
them is their pleasure. Therefore when I 
intend to be happy I am simply intending 
what everybody intends. It was surpris- 
ing how calm I grew upon this and other 
thoughts ; how quietly assured of my unin- 
terrupted course towards the cultured hap- 
piness that I now looked upon as mine. 

Some way on in February, one Saturday 
afternoon just after dinner, to me, sitting 
up in the bedroom looking through some 
of the de Oratore for * third lesson,' enter 
Armstrong, who throws me a letter and exit. 
I pick it up : recognise Colonel James' 
handwriting : open it : read. He must 
request my presence in London immediately 
on important matters. I could apply to 
Dr. Craven for the necessary funds. There 
was a train arrived in London to-morrow 



Leicester. 140 

about one. (The letter was addressed from 
a street adjoining Piccadilly. I forget its 
name.) He hoped I should not be later 
than that. He had something of the 
greatest importance to communicate to me. 
I must excuse a hasty letter, but the state 
of his health at present made every unusual 
effort very painful to him. 

I, as in a sort of dream, went in to 
Craven about it. 

I came out from the short interview a 
Uttle puzzled. He had heard from Colonel 
James, he said. He gave me enough for 
my fare second-class to London and a few 
shillings over. I might start when I liked. 
I told him (I don't know why I told him. 
I think it must have been the half dreami- 
ness of it all that caused me so to break 
from my usual custom of reserved silence) 
that I thought I should take the early 
morning train, as Colonel James had men- 
tioned it as one that would do. 

As I was dressing for tea, it suddenly 
occurred to me that I had heard somewhere 



1 60 Leicester. 

about a train which left ColcheBter about 
six and got into London pretty late that 
night. — ^Why not go by it ? As well as not. 

When I had dressed I went into Mother 
McCarthy's to see if she had a time-table. 
She had. I found that there was a train 
left Colchester at 5.55 or so, and got into 
London at about eight. I looked at the 
clock. It was twenty minutes to six now. 
I would try it ! 

I had bought a glazed black bag last 
holidays, as being a useful sort of thing for 
a peripatetic to have. I got a clean night- 
gown, a clean shirt, a couple of collars, a 
pair of socks, and some handkerchiefs out of 
my linen locker : went back into my room : 
fished the black bag from under my 
bed : packed in the things I wanted : took 
my great coat off the peg, and started 
away. 

I ran into the station at four or five 
minutes after the train was due to start. I 
had a sharp cut and run onto and down the 
platform and got into an empty carriage 



Leicester. 151 

JQst as the train moved off. The liveliness 
of the whole affair delighted me* I felt 
something like an excited child. 

The jonmey did not seem long to me ; 
for I slowly fell into a dim thought-world, 
and only came out of it for a moment when 
(about half way I think) a fat old gentleman 
got in with a bulged old carpet-bag which 
he put onto the seat beside him ; and then 
took a newspaper from his inside breast- 
pocket ; put on a pair of black horn pince- 
nez and began to read. Just before London 
they collected the tickets, and then I be- 
came aware that I felt empty internally : of 
course, I had had no tea. But I went back 
into the old dim thought- world again, and 
was not out of it when we glided down a 
long gaslit platform and it was borne in to 
me that we were in London. 

I got into a hansom and gave Colonel 
James's address to the driver. We drove 
through many streets, mostly having little 
traffic in them, till we drew up suddenly 
before a house, above the door of which 



152 Leicester. 



was an oblong of glass lit by a gas-lamp, 
and in the middle, in black figures, 15 — 
Colonel James's number. I got out, paid 
the driver, and rang at the bell. The door 
was opened almost immediately by a man 
in evening dress with a napkin in his hand. 
I asked did Colonel James live here ? He 
said. Yes, he did. I said : 

* Can I see him ?' 

The Curling wasn't very well this even- 
ing, sir, he said. He was upstairs there 
with his cawfee just now, sir. He (the 
man in evening dress with a napkin) didn't 
think he'd like to be disturbed. But I 
might give him (the man) my card, sir, and 
he'd (he, the man) take it up to him, 

* I have no card,' I said. ' My name is 
Leicester. Will you tell Colonel James 
that I came to-night, instead of to-morrow, 
and want to know if I can see him ?' 

The man turned and went slowly up the 
first few staircase steps : then half-turned 
and said : 

^ Leicester was the name you said ?' 



Leicester. 153 

* Yes,' I said. * Leicester/ 

I leant against the glazed-paper wall, look- 
ing at a large print of Wellington meeting 
Blucher after Waterloo. A clock ticked in 
an adjacent room. I heard the man from 
the top of the stairs say : 

* Will you step up, please ?* 

I put bag and hat onto a dark-red maho- 
gany chair by an umbrella stand, and went 
up. The man ushered me in through an 
open door to the right. I entered. 

The first thing I saw was the part of a 
large low red-clothed table under the light of 
a red- shaded lamp : then, a rather thin old 
gentleman standing on the right side of the 
hearthrug with his back to the fire. He 
raised his head. There was a light-flash on 
his glasses. 

He spoke. 
' * Mr. Leicester ?' he said. 

* Yes, sir,' I answered. * I am Bertram 
Leicester.' 

* Ah yes — exactly so.' 

He paused, looking aside. Then again 



.154 Leicester. 

raised his head with the light-flash on his 
glasses. 

He spoke. 

*Will you please sit down,' he said. 
* Perhaps yon would like to take your coat 
off ? It is very warm in here, I dare say — 
after the street/ 

I slowly took off my great-coat ; and then 
sat down in a chair by the table facing him : 
he remaining standing. 

After a little : 

* Yon have rather taken me by surprise, 
Mr. Leicester,' he said. ' I, ah, did not 
expect you till to-morrow morning: as, ah, 
you have said, as you have said. Did 
Dr. Craven give you any information about 
the, ah, reason for your journey ?' (Looking 
up at me as before.) * No ? he did not ? — 
Very well. He acted wisely. I have 
every possible reason to believe that Dr. 
Craven is a man of distinguished, ah, fore- 
thought.' 

A pause. Then : 

* I have a very bad piece of news to give 



Leicester. 155 

yoQy Mr. Leicester/ he continned. * I, ah, 
am much afraid — ^Bat I think that I had 
better give it yon at once, and without, ah, 
preamble. Your father's small personal 
fortmie, amounting to, ah, from jgl20 to 
JE180 a year, was invested in — ah, given up 
to (I am not quite sure about the correct 
expression ; but it is, ah, immaterial) — ^to a 
bank in which he had every confidence. I, 
ah, constantly, during his later years, did 
my best to prevail upon him to — ah, make 
some other investment with his money : as, 
ah, I had myself seen a very sad — ah, inci- 
dent in my own family in connection with 
— ^banks. You may have heard that the 
Great Southern Bank has recently, ah, 
become insolvent, or whatever it is ? No ? 
Well, ah, it is so ; and, ah, every hour is 
bringing in worse information on the, ah, 
matter. It is, you may perhaps see, Mr. 
Leicester, quite impossible for you to con- 
tinue your career at — Colchester. Every 
penny of your father's money has — ^gone. 
I, ah, have, I am glad to say, absolutely 



156 Ldcestei*. 



nothing to— to do with it myself personally. 
. . . Have you any, ah, designs yourself 
as to a future, ah, career ?' 

I put my hand to my mouth, looking 
steadily at him. He looked aside and back 
again, as before : 

* — ^I am not to return to Colchester T I 
asked. 

* Ah, surely not.' 

I spoke rather to myself than to him : 

* Not to work any more ? Not to be able 
to read my books ? Not to learn ? — ^Why, 
it is ridiculous ! All my books are at Col- 
chester : with all the notes I have taken 
such trouble to write out — and I here. . . . 
What must I do ?' 

There was a pause. 

I rose, and said : 

' I can only think of one thing, sir. I 
have, I believe, some brains, and, I believe, 
of that sort which can be turned to some 
use. I have for long desired to write. If 
I only had time, I am confident that I could 
make my liveUhood ' 



Leicester. 157 

* Good heavens, sir!' he exclaimed* * You 
are not thinking of becoming a — a writer. — 
Ah. Why, it is, ah, another word for star- 
vation.' 

*Men have made their fortune with 
nothing bnt their pens to help them 
before now, sir,' I said. ' And I am not 
afraid.' 

I noticed a thick blue vein swelling out 
on his forehead. He threw up his hands, 
and exclaimed vehemently : 

' It is madness, madness, sheer, ah, in- 
sanity. I will not hear of it. I will give 
yon no help !' (He seemed suddenly to 
collapse.) * You must go away. I must 
ring for Salmon, to show you out. You 
must go away. You are agitating me — 
dreadfully. I am not to be agitated. 
Doctor Astley says so. I am not to be 
agitated.' 

At first I was startled : then amused : 
then saddened : last angered, by this unex- 
pected outburst. I moved a step nearer to 
him. He looked at me for a moment, and 



158 Leicester. 

then dropped into the arm-chair by him to 
the right of the fire. 

* 0, don't touch me !' he cried; * Don't 
look at me like that ! I will not have it ! 
I will not endure it t Salmon, Salmon, 
take him away. He agitates me. • . . Please 
go away, sir. I am dreadfully agitated.' (I 
was looking at him frowning. He cried out, 
almost in a scream) — * For God's sake, don't 
look at me like that ! My God, my God, 
my God ! Just the way site used to look.' 
(Then he suddenly started up, exclaiming) 
— * I say I won't endure it ! Do you hear ? 
I won't endure it. Don't act at me, sir ! I 
know it's in your blood, but, if you think 
you're going to browbeat me, you're mis- 
taken !' (Then he began to fail.) * Salmon, 
he is going to act at me. No, no — ^you're 
not as careful of me as Edgar used to be. 
Why did I ever let him go ? Why did I 
ever let him go ?' (Ending in a wail.) 

I began to grow a little weary of it, and 
looked aside. He went on maundering 
about her having killed him, yes, killed 



Leicester'. 159 

him; and other things. At last came a 
pause. I determined to go : then thought 
of some questions I would care to ask him. 
I said : 

' I cannot understand, sir, why you have 
spoken to me like this. I know nothing of 
my father or my mother. You say you were 
my father's friend ' 

* So I was,' he wailed. * So I was, till 
she came between us.' 

I gave my teeth an impatient gnash : 
then bit my lip and clenched my right 
hand with all my strength, determined not 
to say what was now on my tongue. 
What good could it do ? 

I said : 

* I have nothing left then ? Absolutely 
nothing ?' 

He stared at me half vacantly ; 

* Absolutely nothing,' he repeated. 

A new resolution came to me : to leave 
the questions unasked and go — go at once. 

* Good-night, sir,' I said. * I will leave 
you now.' 



160 Leic€stei\ 

He stared at me as before. 

* You are not, ah, going V he said. 

'Yes, sir, I am going,' I said. * Good- 
night.' 

As I was turning away he started up 
convulsively and burst out : 

' But it is insanity ! I will not hear of 
it ! I will not endure it ! I am your guar- 
dian. Do you hear, sir, that I am your 
guardian ? Salmon ! Damn the man 1 
Salmon, I say ! ' 

I was out of the door and closed it to. I 
could hear his voice now wailing as I went 
to the head of the stairs. Then it died 
away. I found my bag and hat in the hall. 
My coat was over ,my arm : I do not re- 
member either having taken it up or put it 
there. I went on to the hall-door : opened 
it, after a little trouble with the latch : went 
out: pulled it to, by its big round brass 
handle in the middle, once, twice. Then 
was over the step and onto the pavement. 
It was raining. 

I walked on into a main street, and then. 



Leicester. 161 

turning •to the right, walked on down it. 
The perpetaal movement of people and 
horses and things about me brought a 
feeling into me that I had never felt before. 
I forgot about myself and my own affairs 
and my hunger in considering them all. So 
I went on, till I came to a corner where the 
main street ended. There I somewhat me- 
chanically crossed. As I reached the pave- 
ment of the other side, I heard a man call 
out twice : * Kil-bum ! Kil-bum I' and 
looked at him standing, keeping on by a 
strap with one hand and holding out the 
other, on an omnibus perch : 

* Kilbum,' I thought, ^ is the farthest 
place he goes to. Probably, then, it's a 
suburb. I may as well go there as any- 
where, for what I intend to do. At any rate, 
we'll see.' 

And with that went straight to the 
omnibus step and clambered up by the 
ladder onto the top, where I saw a man 
sitting on another omnibus that just then 
passed by. Up, I laid the bag down and 

VOL. I. 11 



162 Leicester. 

put on my coat : when the conductor 
crossed to by my side, and began removing 
the tarpaulin from the seat. I thanked 
him and sat down with the bag beside 
me, and took to half-absently looking at 
the people passing in and out of the light 
from the shop windows as we drove on. 
We drove on for some time. 

At last we turned into a long straight 
rather dark street. As we were some way 
up it, I noticed what seemed some torches 
or something of the sort flaring by the 
right side, at the top, just above where it 
bifurcated. I determined to get down 
there. 

We stopped on the left side just below 
them. I let myself down with my bag in 
my teeth, and paid the conductor my fare : 
2d. or 8d., I forget which. Then I turned 
from him ; crossed the street : and saun- 
tered along looking at the stalls. There 
were not many people along the pavement: 
the hawkers cried their cries rather plain- 
tively : one old man, sitting in front of an 



L€icest€7\ 163 



oven with a small steam-jet, cried ont 
every now and then sharply : * Ot ! Ot !' 

It was still raining and it seemed colder. 
I sauntered on. A tall girl, with a singu- 
larly well-made body and well-poised head, 
moved with a long swinging step in front 
of me* She stopped in a moment, to buy 
some nuts, and I saw her face. It was 
pleasant to look at it : so pure and clear- 
cut, with crystal eyes and red rarified lips 
and large row of white teeth. I followed 
her slowly, thinking of her dear face : I 
felt sure she would kiss and love me if she 
knew me. 

She stopped to listen to a man who 
was addressing a few shivering children 
whose faces formed a line along the far 
side of his stall. I went up to close by 
her and looked at her. She was eating 
nuts, and every now and then let the 
shell-bits fall out of her mouth down her 
coat to the ground. At last she turned 
her eyes to mine : then exclaimed in a 
half-whisper : 

11—2 



164 Leicestei\ 



* Oh my 1 I hope you'll know me next 
time you see me, young man/ 

I turned away and crossed the road. 
I faced a pawnbroker's. An idea came to 
me- I went in, into a dusky clothes- 
hung place where a man was sprawling 
under a large gas-jet over the counter, 
with a cigar in his mouth. I said : 

' I want to sell this great coat. What 
will you give me for it ?' 

' Let's see it, sir,' he said. 

I took it off. 

In the end he gave me fifteen shillings 
for it. 

I went out and counted my money 
before the next, a jeweller's, window. I 
had one shilling and seven pence half- 
penny in my pocket. That left me four- 
teen shillings and ninepence for myself; 
for I owed Colonel James threepence for 
my omnibus fare. This and the other he 
should have at once. Some day (I hoped 
soon) he should have to the last farthing I 
owed him. I turned away, putting his 



Leicester. 165 

money into one troaser pocket and mine 
into the other, and went on for a little, 
thinking, till, feeling the rain and the air 
colder, and nnder an impulse, turning up 
my coat-collar, re-crossed the road and 
wandered on. I did not notice particu- 
larly where I went (I was deep in thought 
now), only that I turned down the nar- 
rowest streets I happened to see. 

All at once my eye was caught by a 
card in a small window I was passing. 
I stopped to look at it. The window, or 
rather, a linen blind, was lit-up from with- 
in, the card marking a small oblong on 
the ledge of one of the upper panes. I 
looked closer, to read the actual letters : 
Apartments. 

I, not seeing either bell or knocker, 
knocked at the door with my knuckles. 

An old woman holding up a guttering 
candle half-opened the door. I said : 

' Do you let apartments ?' 

* I've a room. Yes.' 

' How much is it a week ?' 



166 Leicester. 



* Five shillings a week, sir/ 
*0h/ 

A pause. I half turned my body : 

* — But I think I could take four, sir, 
perhaps T 

^ Will you let me see it ?' 

* Please step upstairs, sir* — Mind the 
wall, sir, it comes oflF.' 

I followed her upstairs. 

I took the room, and paid for two 
weeks in advance. 

The furniture was a bed,, a washing- 
stand, a table, a chair, and two ragged 
scraps of carpet : one under the table, one 
by the side of the bed. There was a 
looking-glass over the chimney-piece, and 
three photographs in faded violet frames, 
worn out: Napoleon III., the Empress 
Eugenie, and the Prince Imperial as a 
boy. A gas-jet was turned full on. 

I bolted the door, and began pulling off 
my. coat, when I felt emptiness inside me. 
Then I sat down on the unsteady chair, 
and began thinking about what had oc- 



Leicester. 167 



curred to me to-day ; but I soon gave it 
up. 

I got up again and, for a moment, 
stood irresolate whether to go out and 
get some food, bread, or to ask this woman 
Smith for some, or to get into bed without 
any. At last I thought I would get into 
bed and fall asleep. Sleep, quiet cool 
sleepi would calm and refresh me. 

I threw my waistcoat onto the top of 
the coat, and then stood irresolute again, 
stretching my arms up and down. Then 
an impulse came to me. I fell down onto 
my knees and, leaning my arms on the 
bed, leant my head on my arms. I began 
in a half whisper : 

* If there he a God ' 

After a pause, of thought almost as much 
as of words, I said : 

* I ask You, God, if You are, to have pity 
on me if I am blindly wandering, and to 
lead me to know You some day before I die, 
so that Your Truth be the jewel to the 
setting of the Truth that I would have my 



1 68 Leicester. 



life to be. I don't know how I am going, but 
I know where I desire to go : and yet I don't 
know more than that it is somewhere. This 
earth is a strange earth, by reason of the 
strangeness of its inhabitants. If there 
were no living thing in it except myself . . .' 
(I left the thought). * But now I am going 
to strive to make money, in order that I 
may live the life that I want to live, and I 
don't see why I shouldn't succeed.' Then 
the feeling of light and shadow, dream and 
reality, an eclipsed sun and moon, came to 
me so strongly that I got up again, slowly, 
with the intention of saying no more prayers 
that night. The things around me now 
were all in a sort of noise above my ears. 
I stepped to and turned out the gas : and 
then slowly undressed, in the dark save for 
the light that came from a gas-lamp in the 
street, through the far window. 

I pulled down the upper-clothes, got into 
bed, sank into enclosing coolness, and very 
soon sleep. 



CHAPTER m. 

When I first woke up, I thought I was 
back in my room at Colchester : then re- 
called, but slowly, all that had happened 
the day before. — That next day awakening 
was a dreary thing : everything that I had 
done seemed so purposeless ! I was a con- 
ceited fool : or at best a dim-eyed far-away 
dreamer. It would be better to marry a 
red-cheeked woman, with untidy gold hair 
and a brown homely dress, and smoke a 
pipe in the sun all day while she brushed 
out the house. The picture I conjured up 
made me laugh out loud. I leaped out of 
bed : an impatient cry killing a yawn. — 
The sun was shining. 

I went to the other far window, pulled 



170 Leicester. 

down the upper part and looked out. The 
air clear and rather sharp, but not cold : 
as something almost corporal, to my in- 
haling lungs. I had no watch. It was 
about half-past seven or eight, I thought. 
A man came with sounding steps down the 
street and passed invisibly below me. I 
pulled up the window again, stripped, and 
prepared to wash. Such a little jug and 
such a little basin ! And no sponge. What 
was I to do without a sponge ? 

I made the best of it : dried myself on 
a flabby towel : and began to dress. 
Dressed quickly, and then, taking up my 
hat, went slowly downstairs. 

At the house door, I met Mrs. Smith 
coming out of the room on the left, where 
I had seen the card. I said ^ Good morn- 
ing,* and she said * Good morning, sir,' and 
I asked if there was a park anywhere near ? 
She told me that it was about ten minutes' 
sharp walk to the Regent's Park, and gave me 
some directions. I bought a half-pound of 
dates and a large brown loaf at a shop close 



Leic€stei\ 171 



by, and with these under my arm, asked my 
way, which was a very simple one, to the 
Kegent's Park : passed out of a somewhat 
dirty road, through the gates, and so over 
the two bridges into the Park itself. I 
sauntered along the side of the lake, look- 
ing at the swans and ducks. 

It was a glorious morning. The sun 
breathed a gentle heat upon me, and warmed 
me gratefully. The dew was still on the 
grass : a few people hurried across by the 
pathways; every now and then a duck 
whirred through the air. At last I reached 
another bridge, went onto it, and stood and 
watched a flight of birds bathing them- 
selves wantonly in the shallows of a small 
bay on the far shore : 

* It is very beautiful,' I said. 

I ate my dates and loaf on a seat behind, 
or rather beside, a tree on an elevation that 
runs up there and along parallel to the 
curve of the lake. The loaf was of good 
thick crummy bread, and satisfied without 
satiating me ; the dates, a half-pound, 4d., 



172 Leicester. 



gave the bread a flavour. The only thing 
that seemed lacking was a crystal stream 
from which I might drink a pure cool 
draught. But, my breakfast done, I rose 
almost readily, and went back again to the 
bridge that leads to the gates. For, the 
fight is begun and loitering looks like lag- 
gardness. 

Being a little doubtful about my way 
home, however simple, I was pleased to 
find that I had remembered it aright. 
Finding myself in the road that led to my 
Maitland Street and opposite a small news- 
paper-stationer's, I went in and invested in 
a pen, nibs, ink and paper. These were 
my weapons. Then proceeded on home: 
went upstairs : found my bed already made 
(which was pleasing) : put my weapons on 
the table, myself into the chair and, tilted 
back, began to consider. 

I had seen somewhere or other that 
Byron received J6500 or so for his shorter 
pieces, ' The Bride of Abydos,' * Giaour,' 
etc. * There is, then, surely a good chance 



Leicester. 173 

of my getting at least £10, or perhaps jg20 
if my book sells well, for two pieces each 
of (say) 600 lines long !* On that I could 
subsist for a long time, and a long time 
means more poems and more money. * You 
see, if you only live as economically as I 
am going to. . • Well, many things may 
be done.' 

After a little thought, preliminary, round- 
about, I came to this : I had had these 
almost two years two tales in my head : 
that is, connected narratives with a definite 
beginning and end ; a story, a fact : not 
the embodiment of a' passing humour that, 
I thought, being exalted, has to be climbed 
up to, but a narrative, to be clothed in the 
best clothes I could put on it, and then sent 
on a journey with the reader to amuse and 
try to instruct him, if only in a lesson of 
pathos, on the road. — I at once set upon 
the first of my ^ tales/ 

By the time it grew dusk, I had finished 
over two hundred lines of it. I was not at 
all satisfied. I had not, I thought, twined 



174 Leicester. 



the melody of the rhythm enough into the 
sense : that is, had lost some of the scent, 
in transplanting my flower. I was afraid 
of becoming a mere painter, and losing the 
scent altogether. Still, I thought, the less 
subtle I try to be, the more likely am I to 
please those who are likely to read this 
stuff of mine. One must live prose, before 
one lives poetry : prose is paying for your 
cake, and poetry is eating it. Get some- 
thing to support your body first : the body 
is the keystone. It is no good having your 
brain full and your belly empty, for at that 
rate you soon die, and then you look 
foolish. 

For all such thoughts, I was a little 
ashamed of what I had done. My muse 
had not moved me : she dwelt but in the 
suburbs of my good pleasure. ' Well, well, 
it cannot be helped.' — So I left her there, 
and went out into the streets. 

I wandered far that night. At last to the 
Serpentine, where I stood, some little time, 
trying to explain the lamp reflections across 



Leicester, 175 



the water, two together : large space : two 
together. Then I must have gone down 
Piccadilly, and through Leicester Square : 
then into the Strand, I think, and so down 
by Charing Cross station ; for I went under 
a bridge, and ended on the Embankment. 

I came home with an * aerial breathless- 
ness ' upon me : sat down to my poem and 
finished it. It had indeed moved me this 
time : two tears had fallen from my eyes. 
But, what I had heard called * mysticism ' 
by some people (meaning, as I supposed, 
that it seemed so to them) had run riot : 
and I knew that I had not written what 
I meant to write. — I lost patience. It 
seemed very hard, that I should not be 
allowed to try to do my best. I thought, 
not unbitterly, of the thousands of silly 
men and women, who squandered on luxury 
for mere luxury's sake, or hoarded for mere 
hoarding's sake, that which would enable 
me . . • Then it struck me that sometimes 
men starved. — The fought seemed like a 
being of darkness. T looked up sharply, 



176 Leic€3te7\ 

almost hearing a sort of clang of the de- 
parting wings of the being of darkness. 
There was so much that was dreamy and 
unreal in all this I Up arose a circling 
black cloudy from the outer dark-smokiness 
of which many many eyes looked at me, 
the eyes of the many many men who had 
struggled and perished. I looked up sharply 
again, almost hearing my own thought's 
words, * Atjy but great men never struggled and 
penshed : they always struggle and win.' But 
still that circling black cloud stayed, with 
the many many eyes looking at me from the 
outer dark-smokiness, the eyes of the many 
many men who had struggled and perished. 

For four days I worked at my ' poems :' 
finished them and, sauntering out that night, 
looked into a newspaper-shop's window by 
chance, and there noted a publisher's name 
and address on a board below, and sent him 
the poems next day. I had said nothing 
more to him than that I begged to submit 
them for his inspection, enclosing stamp for 



Leicester, 177 

their retnm in case of rejection. I was 
sure that he would take them. 

I spent most of my time in my room ; 
either writing more poetry, or reading and 
studying a Shakspere^ which I had bought 
for a few pence in the Edgware Boad 
market one Saturday night from an amusing 
man who was selling o£f a cartload of books 
to the stolid people as he best could. But, 
generally in the late afternoon I went out 
for a walk into the Begent's Park, feeling as 
if I were away from the streets and the life- 
worn people there. Many happy hours 
were spent by me wandering whistling over 
the middle grass plateau (it seemed to 
me like a plateau somehow), thinking of 
my work and, sometimes, of the dear 
woman to whom some day I should tell all 
of this ; for she had come back to me now, 
and not quite what she had ever been before, 
more . real because more gentle, more 
loving, more true, knowing what was in my 
heart and soul and having much in her own 
heart and soul that mine would be glad to 

VOL. !• 12 



178 Leicester. 



know of. Often I watched the snn setting 
m the cloud banks, and once saw him in 
the dim dapper sky-layer a bloody spider- 
ronnd, gradually covered with a sort of 
dusty smokiness and darkened till he was 
wrapped invisible in clouds of dead slate. 

All the time I lived on bread, with an 
occasional relish of fruit or a glass of 
milk. 

I soon learnt my way about, at any rate 
in one great block that was between 
Begent's Park and the Thames by Charing 
Cross. I was very fond of wandering by 
night : especially to the top of Primrose 
Hill, to look out over the great city, and 
the rings of light closer to, as in a vestibule- 
court of an almost boundless palace build- 
ing : especially, too, in the populous streets 
like Oxford Street and the Strand. 

One night I had wandered along Oxford 
Street past the Circus, and then turned down 
on the right into the block of buildings that 
is between Seven Dials and Kegent's Street: 
had wandered on and on, till I found myself 



Leicester. 179 

in dim streets, in which every now and then 
shadows as of women moved with a certain 
inspiration to me of fear. I passed close 
to some of them, drawn as by some latent 
power of fascination on the ground, and in 
them, but not looking at their faces : till 
at last, passing somewhat quickly into an 
alley, I met one face to face under a pro- 
truding shadowed lamp. For a moment I 
stood breathless with my eyes in the 
wolfishness and glitter of hers, and then, 
like a lightning flash that fills the whole 
air, terror of her filled me quite. I leaped 
aside and then past her, plunged into a 
dark-covered way that was behind and be- 
yond her and hurried on, past two silver- 
ornamented women who stood laughing and 
talking at a comer shop-door, out into a 
city street again, not streets of this city of 
shadowedness 1 But the impression of that 
place, its shadowed air, its shadowed women, 
and the wolfishness and gUtter of their 
eyes, was upon me all that night, turning 
even my sleep into a nightmare. It was 

12—2 



180 Leicester. 

eeveral days before that impression left 
me. 

It was about then that a vagae fear 
came to me that I had caught some fever. 
My hands were so hot at nights, and cheeks 
and ears. I grew so impatient too. One 
evening I tilted over the table: and the 
ink-bottle was in the middle of my scattered 
blacked sheets on the floor, and I was al- 
most crying, and had scarcely heart to pick 
the things ap again. 

It was that evening that an idea came 
over me that I would go down to Norfolk 
Square and see the house in which Clayton 
lived. I rose from the table where I had 
been reading with the light of a coffin- 
wicked dip-candle, took up my hat, and set 
out. It was a long walk. At last I entered 
Norfolk Square : a long dark oblong, with a 
long thin-railed garden in the middle. And, 
when I found out No. 21, I found out a 
lampless eyeless house, up from the area 
rails of which protruded a black To Let 
board. In a few moments, standing, I 



Leicester. 181 



realized this: and tamed away sad at 
heart. I wa^ quite alone in this city, this 
London, and, if I were to lie down there in 
the hollow under the garden rails, and sleep, 
and never wake again, there would be no 
one, not a man, not a woman, not a child 
who • • • I gave up the old thought as I 
began walking. I had never realized that 
I was quite alone here before this. The 
realization seemed to deaden the soul in me. 
My later weary wandering of that night 
saw nothing of what was around me : I 
reached home somehow, and bed, and 
sleep. 

The next morning I went for a long walk 
out to Hendon, and when I got there, lying 
on the grass, felt too languid to move : till 
at last, summoned enough resolution to set 
off home again. It was two when I got 
there, hungry and yet not hungry, thirsty 
and yet not thirsty, hot and yet not hot. 
I sat down, lounged over the table, and 
began to read at the opened Shakspere. 
I read on till it grew a little dusk. All at 



182 Leicester. 

once a few of the letters seemed to disap- 
pear or to have disappeared. I strained my 
eyes. More went. I peered closer. Two 
outer circles almost invisible were out-turn- 
ing on either side of my sight. In a little I 
could make out nothing but a blurred mass 
where the two small printed pages had 
been. I closed them to. Then leant my 
face in my arms over the table and closed 
my eyes ; but the two outer circles almost 
invisible still were out-turning on either 
side of my now sightlessness. I felt dimly 
that I had made that movement somewhere 
before : perhaps in a dream ? No, it was 
not in a dream. I remember now. It was 
once when a poor lonely boy (and that is 
why it may have seemed at first like a 
dream to me) went to the bench and, half 
upon it, leant his face in his arms on the 
cool table-cover . . . And could not weep 
tears : the tears were dried behind the eyes. 
I started up impatiently. I was crying, 
my hands were all wet with my tears. I 
stamped my foot. This was all accursed 



Leicester. 183 

folly I Hysteria : like a woman ! What 
the devil wa^ the matter with me ? Was I 
ill ? Or going to be ill ? Or what ? . . . 
I was tired. That was all. It was nothing 
more. — But my eyes I ... God^ if I 
break down t * Nay I' I cried aloud, smiling 
through my tears. ^ Fm the boy who says 
there is no God. ** The fool hath said in 

his heart " Chal That's David's 

opinion. If ever I write Psalms, I'll put 
it the other way on. David was the man 
who never saw the righteous deserted and 
the righteous man begging his bread. 
There's inspiration for you ! You blind old 
driveller you ! into the ditch, I say ! 
There'll be plenty of your tribe to follow.' 
I smiled again, but differently : 

* Still Eebes : always hunting out some- 
thing/ 

I had waited for thirteen days now. 
Would the man never write to me ? 

It happened that, the afternoon after I 
had the affair with the eyes, coming home 



184 Leicester. 

from Hampstead Heath by the Grove End 
Boad with my eyes as usual on the gronndy 
I saw what looked like a small part of a 
large silver coin in a heap of dust by a 
lamp-post. I stopped, bent, stretched 
down my hand and found a two-shilling 
piece. I looked np. I could see no one 
in the road : no one behind me. I might 
take it then ; for how could I possibly find 
its owner ? And to have found it, I, who 
had never found anything in iny life before I 
It seemed quite strange. — I had three shil- 
lings now. That meant another fortnight. 
On the force of it, I got a glass of milk, 
as I went down the Edgware Koad. 

I came home almost buoyant, and 
was up the two first steps when I knew 
some one was descending. I drew down 
and back. It was a petticoated being : a 
girl, I saw, but of what sort, the dark of 
the place and the duskiness of the hour 
combined to hide. Anyhow, she said 
* Thank you,' and went on : and I up and, 
as I went to my door, I thought that the 



Leicester. 185 

one on the left must be hers ; but perhaps 
she slept up in the attics like a clay-homed 
swallow ? Then I remembered to have 
heard muffled stirring in that room by 
mine^ and concluded it must indeed be 
hers : and proceeded to forget all about the 
matter. 

That almost buoyant humour was evan- 
escent. I had scarcely sat down and begun 
to think a little, before I grew aware that 
my foot hurt me, my left foot. Then, in 
an odd sort of way, I took off my boot and 
sock and examined the naked foot : a dirty 
foot, and with the skin rubbed off at the 
top of the heel, which was rather inflamed. 
The thought of a sore heel was unpleasant 
to me. I put on sock and boot again, and 
took to Shakspere with the coffin-wicked 
dip, till it came to an end and I, tired 
enough, into bed, and sleep. But what a 
sleep ! A submarine place in which all 
kinds of shadowy cool horrors were done 
and no one disconcerted but I, who finally 
swooned in the cold soft embrace of a 



186 Leicestei\ 

ton of some irresponsible jellied thing or 
other. 

The next day was chilly and rainy. I 
set out for a walk to Hampstead ; for I 
must, I felt, take exercise to keep ^ break- 
down' at a fit distance. I had some trouble 
with my foot till, at last, by the time I was 
three-quarters there, economical pain-shirk- 
ing foot positions had made every step pain- 
ful. None the less I was determined to get 
as far as the Hampstead Pond. It began 
to drizzle. I toiled on. I found once 
that deep thoughts made me forget the pain 
of movement : so I kept trying this plan, 
with short-timed success, till (now a quarter 
way back again, and the rain thicker) a 
desperate attempt to separate body and soul 
by resolution proved fruitless. Then an 
utter despair came upon me. I stood still. 
It was at a comer in front of the rails of 
the dingy garden of a lampless house. I 
could have sunk down upon the shining 
pavement there, covered my face with my 
arms, and sobbed myself like a tired child 



Leicester. 187 

to sleep, but a sleep that should know no 
waking, no waking to misery and despair ! 
At that moment a light leaped np and out 
from the big window on the left of the door. 
I saw it, but did not move. Then I leant 
against the nearer cemented gate-post in 
that dreary rain of half-darkness, and my 
body seemed all bloodless. And a girl, 
with her dress huddled up all round her 
and an umbrella spread over her, came 
hurrying to me. I looked at her slowly. 
Just by me she gave me a quick glance, 
and hurried more. The devil rose in me. 
I made a short half-step after her. I would 
seize her, tear that thing from her hand, 
rip and rend her laced clothes : rip and 
rend them off her, till she stood tattered 
— ^naked, there in the rain of the half- 
darkness with me. And all I would desire 
more, would be to take mud and bespatter 
and befoul her, and then turn and go on 
my way with laughter. The thoughts were 
lightning swift. I gave a cry of fierce- 
suppressed delight : stepped : and halted. 



188 Leicester. 

Was I mad? I tnmed, and went back, 
and on. 

"When I got bact I set upon a poem by 
the light of a new dip. If I had had to 
die for it, alone and in the early grey 
morning, I could not have kept out my 
mysticism now. I must speak to some one 
now ! It could not always be silence ! I 
had need to speak to some one. I thought 
my heart was breaking. And I could not 
fall asleep till I had told my soft death- 
tale\ 

But I was too weary to finish it. I 
gave it up at last. I was in an evil plight, 
I knew : burning and shivering and with 
an empty stomach. I undressed slowly, 
as usual, in the dark, save for the light 
that came from the gas-lamp in the street 
through the far-window. As I got into 
bed I determined that the next day I would 
seek some work, even manual ; for I did not, 
after all, care to die till I had heard about 
my stuff (It was very ridiculous I I smiled, 
but in a strange tearful way), and I should 



Leicester. 1 89 

have to pay fonr shillings at the end of the 
week, rent, and I had only three left for 
food. * Wherefore, work must be done if 
money is to be earned : even manual, and 
why not ?' At last I fell asleep. 

But in the moming I lay in a half- 
dreamy, half exhausted state of heat, from 
which I had not will enough for long to 
rouse myself. This grew into a dull lan- 
guorous heaty lethargy, not unsweet, and 
in my very bones, making me altogether in- 
dififerent to everything save a sort of dull 
hunger, which at last drove me out of bed 
to the table for the half-pound of dates and 
the loaf I had bought last afternoon : got 
them into my hands for me; and then I 
was back in bed again, and, I suppose, ate 
them ; for when I awoke and it was evening, 
the gas-lamp lighting up a part of the far 
end of the room, and I flushed, with the 
dull hunger still in me, I soon became 
aware of many troublous crumbs in the 
sheets and some date-stones, but of neither 
bread nor dates. In a little I got up, and 



190 Leicester. 

washed and dressed slowly and listlessly, 
with the dull hunger ever in me. Now I 
would go out, I thought. I went to the 
door, opened it, and heard a voice say : 

'Well, I can't help it, you must go!' 
It was Mrs. Smith's voice, harder and drier 
than usual. 

Another answered some soft words. I 
leant against the door-post, rather exhausted, 
scarcely knowing why I stayed there. 
A pause. Then — 

* You know it's the second week owing,* 
pursued Mrs. Smith. * I can't do it any 
more, and what's more, I won't I So there 1 
. . . You must give me something, or you 
must go, that's all.' 

' I've only got a shilling,' said the other 
voice softly. * I gave it you. Won't you 
wait till the end of the week, Mrs. Smith ? 
I shall have my wages then ?' 

*You said that last week. No, not 
I ! Tick's not nat'ral to me, I say. I'm a 
lone widdy woman, I am, but I pays my 
way, and why don't everyone, I want to 



Leicestei\ 191 

know ? . . . "Why didn't you pay me last 
week, then ?' 

* I was ill. I had to pay for the me- 
dicine/ 

* Drat the medicine ! You shouldn't be 
ill. . . . Come now, what are you going to 
do ? Look sharp. Don't go and be blub- 
bering now. It's no go with me, young 
woman — that.' 

Another pause. 

*I have never blubbered to you, Mrs. 
Smith. I asked you to wait a bit, that's 
all. I'm down on my luck, that's what I 
am. A lady took a piece of work I did out 
of hours, a week ago ; but she won't pay 
me for it tiU the end of the month, she 
says.' 

* my eye, that's likely, ain't it now ?' 
It's all fudge — that's what it is ! — ^Either 
you pay me to-night or you go. So there, 
plain and straight! I've got to live like 
the rest of you, I suppose ? Will you give 
it me now ? Four shillings I must have, 
and I will have ; what's more, let me tell 



1 92 Leicester. 

you, I'm reg'lar hard up, that's what I 
am . • . You've given me one shilling of 
it already, you know. Now come! give 
us the rest, and I'll let you go on tick for 
the other week till Saturday.' 
Another pause. 

* — ^You know you can get it, if you like, 
you know well you can.'- Mrs. Smith's 
voice was soft now, but hoarsely. 

* I can't ! How can I ? Or else I would 
give it you.' 

* you can — if you like.' 
' How can I ?' 

* Oh, come ! You know well enough. • • 
You ain't so bad looking as all that.' 

I put my hands behind me ; my fingers 
scraped lightly on the wood and paper. 
My breath went from me, and I groaned. 
I was trembling all over. I did not know . 
whether to cry out, or, keeping silence to 
see what would be the end. 

I waited — the blood pulsing through my 
head, and whirring in my ears, till I was 
nigh blinded and deafened. 



Leicester^ 193 

It seemed to me that it was half an hour 
before either of them spoke again. 

Then Mrs. Smith said ; 

* Come along now ! don't stand there 
staring oat of the window like that. Either 
you will or you won't. — Oh, very well then. 
You won't. V-e-r-y well ! out — you — go ! 
out, you, go, I say, I shan't let you take 
your things, mind. I should think not, you 
idle hussy you : that's what you arel a-comin' 
and cheatin' a lone widy woman, what pays 
her way, too ; a-cheatin' of her out of her 
the bread she puts in her mouth. For shame ! 
• . . Precious fine things they are, too. 
I shall get a bob for them, I warrant, or for 
ten lots of them, it's likely.' 

A pause. 

' do wait, do wait, Mrs. Smith,' pleaded 
the other. * I really will pay you on Satur- 
day night. I will really. I've been ill. I 
will ' 

Her voice maddened me, I pulled to 
my door somehow and threw myself on to 
my bed, shivering and clutching myself, 

VOL. I. 13 



J 94 Leicester. 

muttering into the pillow ; * 0, there cannot 
be a God in heaven, who is jn^t and good 
and will let such things be.' 

At last I stopped. — ^What would she do ? 
The thought stayed me all into listening for 
a moment. 

Then I began to mutter again : and again 
stopped and listened. It seemed I was so 
for hours. 

As I listened the fourth or fifth time, I 
heard Mrs. Smith's voice almost at the door: 
then there came silence : then a door closed : 
then I heard slow heavy footsteps with 
clamping heels go down the stairs. My 
door was ajar. — I got up, and closed and 
carefully latched it. ' What would she do ?' 

* What is the girl to me T I thought. 
* There are hundreds like — what she will be, 
in this city. And one more ; ** What is 
one among so many ?" All soulless things 
too ; like me : and useless things, who will 
try to do no more than live in the sun, breed 

maggots, and perish. Whereas I ^What 

wiU she do ?' 



Lei€e8te7\ 195 



I came to my bed and lay, face down- 
wards^ on it. 

' . . . That three shillings perhaps means 
life,' I thought again. * Who knows if I 
can get any work ? and how to live in the 
meantime ? And I so weak. . . . Means 
life : means hope, and all my dreams I 
means everything I That is its meaning. 
And, if I give it up. . . . Nay, I won't 
give it up ! I won't give up my life ! It is 
the only thing here : the rest is but hope 
and dreams.' 

I heard a board creak. 

Some one went down the stairs quickly- 
. . . Who was it? — Along the passage. 
The door closed. It was just beneath my 
head. — I seemed to see it, and her. I 
leaped to my knees on the bed : pulled up 
the piece of linen, that hung half across the 
window, and looked out. — She was hurry- 
ing across the road, with her head bent 
down, and her hands hanging beside her. 

* Only one more,' I thought. * What is 
she to me ? Let her go. Let her go. — 

13—2 



196 Leicester. 

Why, see : if I had gone out in the morning, 
as I had intended, I might very well never 
have known anything about it, I will not 
do it. Why, now ' I stopped. 

* You coward /' I cried. * You miserable 
coward /' 

I covered my face with my hands, press- 
ing my elbows against my body and tighten- 
ing every muscle in my body. 

At last I moaned : 

' If I only thought there was a God — 
who saw us both I — A good God — who 
would not leave us die — despairing — ^I 
would give it her! — ^But — as it is — I — 
I ' 

* Coward /' I cried, almost choking. 
* Coward! . i . You cannot let her go !' 

I leaped onto the carpeted plank : dragged 
open the door ; and went leaping down the 
steps. At the foot, with my hand on the 
latch, cried out : 

' Mrs. Smith ! Mrs. Smith !' 

And when she came from the room on 
the left just by me, had the three shillings 



Leicestej\ 197 

into her hand, the florin and one shilling, 
and said : 

* There is the money for her/ 

I had the door open as her fingers closed. 
She was staring at me blankly enough ; but 
I saw that she understood what I meant. 
Then I stepped out quickly, ran across the 
road, and stopped for a moment : looking 
ahead to see if I could see her. ...Ifshe 
escaped me after all t 

Three great gas-jets flared some fifty 
yards down, on the opposite side, in front 
of a fish-shop. I saw her pass by it, casting 
an irresolute shadow : her head bent down 
as before, her hands evidently holding one 
another in front. A few people were moving 
to and fro. 

I walked quickly along the pavement, till 
I came to opposite her. She hesitated for 
a moment at the comer of a street. I 
crossed over, just behind her : as she made 
her first step forward, touched her arm, and 
said : 

• Stop.' 



198 Leicester. 

She started, turned round sharply, and 
seemed to recognise me. For a moment we 
stood facing one another. 

* You must not go,' I said. * I have 
persuaded Mrs. Smith. She will let you — 
she will wait till the end of the week.' 

She answered nothing. Th6n I turned 
from her, and walked away. 

I had gone some ten yards, when I heard 
her running after nie. She laid her hand 
for a moment on my arm, and said 
quickly : 

* You are very good to me, sir : very 
kind. I cannot ' 

* I am neither kind, nor good to you. I 
have done nothing for you,' I said. 

* You have paid Mrs. Smith, sir, for me,' 
she said. ' I know you have. She would 
not wait else. — But I will pay you back, sir, 
for sure, on Saturday • • .' 

* You need not trouble about it — ' 
(Looking at her face, I added :) * Child.' 

* Indeed, sir, I am very grateful to you,' 
she said. 



Leicester. 199 

I could not bear to listen to her any 
more, remembering my late thoughts of her. 
I said: 

* It is nothing. I am very glad to have 
been of any use to you. — Good-night.' 

And left her. 

Near the end of the street I passed a 
man who stared at me, till I noticed it and 
stopped, wondering what was the matter 
with me, for a moment. I had no hat on : 
That was it. I proceeded a little : then, 
almost as if recollecting something, turned 
back and came home. 

I found my hat up in my room, put it 
on, and went out again. I felt as if I must 
go, as if I was going, somewhere. 

Wandered out towards the Park and 
then, up-skirting it, on to Primrose Hill, 
up which I climbed slowly. It seemed to 
me that I would not much care whether 
I lived or died. I would seek for no work. 
No : not I. It was nothing to me what 
happened, or to anyone else, or to God. 
I was glad the girl had not been driven to 



200 Leicestei\ 

prostitute herself in these damned London 
streets. * You see, when the barrier of the 
first time you do a thing is broken through, 
the second time is easier, and the third 
easier still. I am only sorry that this vile 
body of mine should have so conquered me 
as to give the tyranny of its thoughts to 
my soul. These last few days have unmade 
me.' 

I stood by a bench not far from the top, 
and turned, and looked out over the dark- 
ness from which came the cool breeze fan- 
ning my feverish face. All at once I cried 
out almost passionately : 

* I will know, I tvill know V 

Then my head fell down onto my breast, 
and I said : 

* Oh fool, fool ! Dost thou think, then, 
that thou art the first, and will be the last, 
to cry that cry ? They have not known. 
They will never know; — Ay, they are all 
wise,' I said, * and they none of them find 
out anything 1 They beat the air with 
heavy flails, proving each other fools and 



Leicestei\ 201 



us slaves and beasts, and then they also 
die, and rot, and are eaten. Behold, I here, 
a starving beggar-boy, know all that they 
know : and that is — Nothing 1 Ay, • you 
foolish Wisdoms, that spend your days in 
spinning clothes of air with which to clothe 
the long procession of humanity, behold I 
here, a starving beggar-boy, laugh at you and 
say to you what you know : * Why^ you go 
nahedj — naked, as when you came from your 
mother's womb 1 Oh, oh, oh ! we are all 
fools together. And there's a consolation 
in that; but not much, if you happen to 
be starving. — Starving ? J, starving j* I cried 
fiercely, * with a better head on my shoulders 
than all these damned. . . . Come, come : 
we mustn't brag — even now.' 

Laughing a sad, short laugh at my help- 
lessness, I stepped out and down, and began 
to descend, thinking. 

Half way, or so, down, an impulse made 
me stop and look up. And I saw what I 
took for a small woman, coming down also, 
just above the seat where I had been stand- 



202 Leicester. 



ing. Seeing her, I laughed again. — The 
poor girl ! For, of course, it was my girl, 
following me. She thought me, me.' a 
heaven-sent saviour, perhaps ? I hurst out 
into a keen short laugh and went on — went 
on in home, with the wings of a shadowy 
hird-thing or moth-thing fluttering in my 
inner ear. — Up these weary old stairs with 
an up-pulling arm. — The landing at last. — 
My door open. — My room, at last ! 

And, as I stood still for a moment, the 
thought that I had never once used the gas 
since the first night came in upon me, and 
I said wearily that I was a fool. I took 
the match-box off its mantelpiece comer, 
went to by and found the gas-jet, struck a 
light, turned on the gas, lit it, and looked 
back over my shoulders. And saw a large 
envelope lying on the table. I started. 

Then I looked at the gas, one long half- 
vacant look : and turned and went to the 
table, and took up the letter and slowly 
opened it and read: 



Leicester. 203 

'Dear Sir, 

*Our reader thinks very well of 
your Poems ; bat as there is little sale in 
poetry now-a-days he does not, on that 
account, think the work would command a 
remunerative sale. The following is an 
extract from the report which we have re- 
ceived on the MS. " There is evidence of 
power in his book which, with due care and 
cultivation, may ripen into ability to achieve 
real and lasting poetic work." 

* If it were not for the poor attention 
poetry attracts in these days, we would gladly 
have made you an o£fer for a little work 
which contains so much beauty and melody. 

* Yours faithfully, 

' Baxter, Innes, & Co.' 

* We are sending the MS. to you per 
book-post.* 

I put it down with a short laugh, and 
smiling, shrugged my shoulders. 

*Very well. There is nothing left for 
me now, I suppose, but to write my will 



204 Leicester. 

after Chatterton, and invest in arsenic 

and water I think it was ? But I forget; I 
have no money ! I must go out into the 
streets, even at this hour then, and beg 
a few pence to be able to kill myself; since 
in London, too, one can't die for nothing. 
There is the river — my old river at Col- 
chester. If I could roll over and over in 
the long green weeds, why, it wouldn't 
matter much whether I was able to come in 
the brown earth again, would it ? And to 
look up through the dusky, jewelled light- 
shafts of the currents ! There are flocks 
down there ! I read about it in a story 
book once, and a man went down in a sack 
to find them. But he was drownded. No, 
drowned. Drownded is bad grammar ; but 
what's the odds, I say ? These damnable 
wordmongers here talk about nothing but 
grammar . . . ^^ For a good knowledge of the 
classics (especially of Cicero), is^ihe founda- 
tion of all that is worth knowing in the 
humani," — You think so, my good fellow ? 
You think art's growing more and more of 



Leicester. 205 



a drug, do you ? You^re a fool ! and you 
think I shall he great — some day? He 
said so ? — If I was earnest ! Good God ! 
As if I could ever he anything but earnest ! 
But I've no amhition to he great, I tell you. 
Fools are great. When they die they rot 
and are eaten. We all shall die some 
day, and rot, and he eaten. I wish I were 

a worm Hushl Hark! What 

was that ? Who's there ; hi ! who's there ? 
Rayne ? You, Rayne ! — No, I assure you ! 

I'm not starving I I'm only But take 

care, or you'll have the hoat over. Why 
are women done up like mummies ? If ever 
/have a wife, Rayne, she shall wear knicker- 
hockers, and race up Taygetes. . . . Hush, 
hush ! Here's Christ come to see me. 
dear Christ, sweet Christ, give me your soft 
hand ! I'll tell you all about it. I seem to 
know you so much hetter than God. And I 

haven't a friend in the whole world, and 

No, I'm afraid they won't understand them 
. . . My poor little poems ! Too mystic : 
too mystic. I must keep out my mysticism ; 



206 Leicester. 

But how can I, when my heart's breaking ? 

breaking, breaking Chat, chut, 

there I You mustn't sit down on the bed 
like that. Why, you're a woman I These 
are clothes : and here's — your soft breast ? 
And your face? and your hair? you 
dear woman, why are you holding me so 
with your soft arms, and laying my face on 
your soft breast ? Let's go to sleep like 
that — together. Will you ? Come close 
to me, I will tell you something. Do you 
know, I've been longing for you to come 
to me ... to come to me, ever since. • . 
But let's rest, now you are come, dear. I 
saw a woman with a sweet face to-night. 
She passed me on the pavement in the 
crowd : but not so sweet as yours. I love to 
.... Closer, closer ! Let me feel you, 
I am beginning to be afraid ! Don't let 
these wasp-waisted waterspouts touch me ! 
. . . How dark it grows. — The waterspouts! 
the waterspouts ! Ashtaroth, Ashtaroth, the 
terrible woman! A star over her brow, 
driving in the midst, under the shadows. 



Leice8tei\ 207 



— They are on to me ! over me ! — I am 
sinking ! . . . . — Up ! up ! Hold me up ! 
. . . Catch me by the hair. • . . Eayne ! 
. . . Rayne!' 



CHAI*TER IV. 

BERTRAM LEICESTER. 

' Stirb und werde I 
Denn so lang d/w das nickt hasty 
Biat du mir ein triiber Gast 
Auf der duiikeln Erde* 

Goethe. 

I AWOKE in the dusk. 

Up leaped a core of light at the far end 
of the room : then grew steady and lived . 
Some one had lit the gas-lamp at the street- 
comer helow. I turned over in my bed. I 
thought that it was very lazy of me to be 
lying warm here : to-day, when 1 had, I 
remembered, intended seeking work, even 
manual. Wcyrh I Work for what ? Well, 



Leicestei\ 209 



it was lazy of me to be lying warm here. 
Where had I been ? . • . 

Some one came in softly : the door had 
opened. And why didn't they knock ? 

Taming round with a frown, I saw a girl 
on her way to the table with a paper-bag in 
her hand. 

' Hullo r I said. 

She dropped the bag onto the floor with 
a start : sharply picked it up, and, looking 
with round shadowed eyes at me : 

* Good gracious, how you did frighten 
me. — ^Why, he's better !' she said. 

'Certainly he is:' I answered, turning 
aside my eyes. * There was never any- 
thing the matter with him that he is 
aware of.' 

She stood, with her hands joined in front 
of her, holding the bag, and looked down at 
me. 

* You've been very ill, sur,' she said, and 
gave her head a little shake. 

' I assure you, madam, that you are mis- 
taken. I have just woken up. — " Ahou 
VOL. I. 14 



210 Leicester. 



hen Adhem, may his tribe increase," and 
so on/ 

* You have been insensible for on two 
days/ she said. 

I stared at her round shadowed eyes. 
She nodded her head at me and, I saw, 
smiled at me. 

* — Insensible ? . . . Why I have never 
fainted in my life. I would not let the man 
give me laughing-gas for my tooth for that 
reason last term. I . • / I saw an open 
letter on the table-cloth in that dusky 
light. 

I let my head sink onto the pillow with a 
sigh and shut my eyes. Memory had flowed 
back everywhere. 

At last : 

' I have brought you some grapes/ she 
said. * I thought you might like them.' 

I raised my head again, and opened my 
eyes in the room, now full of gaslight. I 
had not noticed that she had lit the 
gas. 

* You are very kind ; but * 



Leicester. 211 

^ You will not take them ?' 

' I cannot. Thank you very much/ 

* Oh very well : I shall throw them out 
of the window then ! — ^Why shmldn't you 
take a present from me ? . • • I haven't 
paid you back the four shillings I owed you 
yet : but I can — now/ 

She took out a purse : unhasped it : 
opened the leaves, put in two of her fingers ; 
and then, with a quick lift-up of her head 
and a bright smile came towards me, holding 
two florins in her extended palm. 

I smiled. 

* I only lent you three/ I said. 

* And I have got no change ! Think of 
that! Only gold and silver. Isn't it 
ri-diculous ?' she added : * Will you eat 
some of the grapes ? • . . Please /' 

^ I cannot.' Then I smiled. 

A pause. 

*It was very kind of you to bring me 
them/ I said^ ' and I am — afraid I must 
have been giving you a great deal of trouble 
. . . Miss . • .' 

14—2 



212 Leicester. 

* Oh no ! None : none ! — You will eat 
them then T 

I protested : 

* Beally, Miss . . .' 

* Do you want to know my name T she 
said with a drop in her voice. 

* Only if you care to tell me/ I answered, 
a little sorry for this my attempt at some 
sort of formality or other. 

* 'Owlet is my name : I'm from Norfolk. 
— But I hope you won't call me Miss 
'Owlet.' 

* Why do you hope not, may I ask ?' 

* Oh, Howlet is such a horrid name !' 

I could not help laughing. Then she 
laughed. 

* But what shall I call you ?' I asked. 

* You called me " child " once. I'm not 
a child. I'm seventeen.' 

I smiled at her. She at once caught up 
the bag of grapes, undid the mouth, and had 
offered it to me. 

* Then I beg your pardon,' I said. 
She pouted : 



Leicester. 213 

* — ^But yon have not taken any.' 
And our eyes met, and the bag was once 
more offered, and I dipped two fingers into 
it and lifted a big bunch half out (she 
looking at me all the time, and I at the bag- 
mouth), and stretched out my other hand 
to break off a portion of the bunch, and had 
broken off a portion, and was about to drop 
the remains of the original bunch into the 
bag again, when she drew back her arm 
quickly and the bag, and said : 

' That's not fair 1' 

Then she took out a big bunch, squashed 
up the bag in her hands, threw it onto the 
floor^ and came to me holding the grape- 
bunch with two fingers in the air. Our eyes 
met again, and I stretched up my hand and 
took the bunch. She smiled at me. A small 
thin black kitten was out and chasing the 
squashed-up paper-bag. 

She turned, saw it, and cried out : 

* Minnie, Minnie. — Oh, you silly thing I 
Let it alone can't you Y 

She turned to me again : 



214 Leice8tei\ 



^ That's my cat Minnie. Isn't she a 
beauty ?' 

^Well . . . Yes, I suppose she is/ I 
said. 

* I should think so ! — ^Now I must go. I 
oughtn't to have let you talk so much. I'm 
sure it's not good for you. I hope you're 
feeling better? — ^Here, Minnie^ Minnie, 
Minnie, Min, Min f Oh, she's after that 
piece of paper. Silly thing I . . .' (Turn- 
ing to me again.) * I'll let her stop with you 
... if you like.* 

* Thank you,*^ I ^aid. * That's very kind 
of you. I should like very much.' 

* Good-bye,' she said. 

* Good-bye,' I answered to her slowly 
going. * And thank you for all your 
goodness to me. Miss' (she stopped) ^Rose- 
bud.' 

^ I shall see you soon again,' she said ; 
and, at the door : * If you wouldn't mind 
going into my room in a little — that's this 
one ' (opening the door and pointing to the 
right) * here, we'd get your bed done very 



Leicester. 215 

quickly, and yon could come back again. I 
don't think yon onght to dress and go out 
yet/ 

* Very well/ I said, ' Thank you, I 
will/ 

She went out; but looking in : 

'Put on your coat or something/ she 
said. * For fear you catch cold/ And with- 
drew her head, and the door closed, and she 
went down. 

I sat up in bed, and threw out my arms 
and up : 

' Oh bless you, you dear Kosebud T I said. 
' You are the dearest thing I have ever 
known. You Rosebud !' 

We had a short conversation together 
that evening as I ate my tea in bed, and 
then we said Good-night, and she left me. 
And I set about thinking what I had best do 
now. The failure of my attempt to earn my 
livelihood by my pen was a blow to me, and 
the heavier that it was so unexpected. — ^But 
I gave up further consideration of the 



216 Leicestei\ 

matter for the present : I mast have some 
means of support, and at once. And what 
was the good of thinking abont poetry, 
after what Baxter, Innes, and Co. had said 
to me ? 

All at once the idea of becoming a 
school -master flashed upon me. Why 
not? I was sure I was quite as capable 
of teaching as Currie, the under-master 
at Whittaker's. — Or a private secretary- 
ship ? I let my thoughts go, and had 
planned out my life as under-master, or 
private secretary, or tutor, before I fell 
into a sweet dreamless sleep. 

The next day, in the morning, although 
I was, I found, uncommonly weak, I man- 
aged to get into the Edgware Road as far 
as to a stationer's, where I inquired in a 
general sort of a way about such things as 
under-masterships and tutorships, of the 
genteel middle-aged party who was in the 
shop. She took a great interest in me, 
I thought, for a complete stranger; but 
could not help me in the least. 



Leicester. 217 

In the afternoon I made three more 
attempts at stationers', and at the last 
one was so far snccessfnl that I learnt 
the name and address of the people, it 
seemed, I wanted. 

I set off for Grenvil Street at once 
(a weary walk of toil to weak me), and 
interviewed a respectful clerk a good deal 
better dressed and, doubtless, fed than 
myself. He thought he might possibly 
get me an ushership in some small school 
pretty soon ; but I must observe that it 
was not the time for such (that is to say, 
instant) engagements now, half way through 
the term. I told him the sooner the better; 
for I was in great straits. He had an 
equally disencouraging account to give of 
tutorships and secretaryships : all these 
things required time. I said that speed 
was the one necessity. And on this under- 
standing we parted : I, I cannot say how 
forlorn, nay, once or twice on my wearier 
walk home, near to tears : and, worse than 
all forlomness, having with me a certain 



218 Leicester. 

shame that, owing to the clerk's instigation, 
I had given Craven as a reference in the paper 
of acquirements, etc., that I had filled np. 
Altogether I felt more like drowning my- 
self than making any farther fight for 
existence. 

When I arrived at home I scarcely knew 
what I had said or done down at the 
agent's. Everything was a mnddle, and 
a jnmble, and from beginning to end. I 
cast myself down on my bed, and the tears 
came. why had I not died in that 
strange dream after the reading of the 
letter? I lay sighing to myself till I 
dozed. 

From this half-sleep of despondency the 
Bosebud ronsed me in the early evening, 
and took me oat for a short walk. I don't 
know what we talked aboat. Everything 
seemed a maddle and a j amble, and from 
beginning to end. I was glad to get back, 
and tamble into bed, and sleep. 

I was better in the morning : inclined, 
it seemed, to feel cheerfal, and began, as 



Leicester. 2 ID 

I lay with closed eyes thinking, to put the 
events of yesterday into something like 
connection and tout ensemble; bat with 
no great snccess. The one comforting 
thought seemed to be, that the clerk had 
said he would send me up anything that 
came. Surely something must come ! I 
could not believe I was destined to die 
here like a rat in a hole. — I played upon 
my inclination to be cheerful, till it had 
brought me to cheerfulness: and, getting 
up briskly, perceived a letter on the chair 
by my bedside. The agent, of course ! 

' Hurrah 1' I said. ' The tide's on the 
turn. . . . What's in here ?' I hesitated. 
The sun was shining in through the window 
upon the envelope. 

I ripped it open, took out the letter and 
scanned it. 

* Dear Sir, 

* Please call early to-morrow on 
Alexander Brooke, Esq., 

* 5, Duhraven Place, 

* Piccadilly, W., 



220 Leicester, 



who wishes to engage at once a secretary 
to go abroad with him. The engagement 
would be at least for a year, if not more. 

* Terms ' between £90 and £100 per 
annum. 

* Please inform us of the result of your 
interview, 

* And oblige, 

' Yours faithfully, 

* LiNKLATER PeMBRIDGE AND BlENKIKSOP.' 

I threw the letter onto the table with 
new life in me, and began to wash, whistling 
to myself. As I was folding on my necktie 
I noticed how dirty my collar was, and then 
my shirt, and more particularly the cufiFs. 
I put on a clean, the last, collar in the bag. 
And that set me off thinking for a moment 
about my clothes. * Well, well 1' I said — 
' I shall have to tell the man the truth I 
suppose : and why not ?' For I did not 
doubt but that he would have me. 

Kosy was of course off to her work these 
three hours. This, and the thought of 



Leicester. 221 



what she would think about the Becretary- 
ship, came to me as I passed her door and 
went down the dark stufty old wood stair- 
case. What would the Bosebud think? 
' Well, well !' I said as before, ' it'U be 
time enough to think about what she thinks 
when I've got it/ And yet did not doubt 
for one moment but that I should get it. 

I knew my way to Piccadilly all right. 
It was a crisp clear morning : the stir of 
the air and of the life brighter than usual 
stirred me. I went along down the Edg- 
ware Boad, eating my brown bread and 
dates with some cheerfulness. Then I had 
a refreshing glass of milk. And, by the 
time I was half way across the Park by 
the path that leads up to the gates, I 
seemed to have regained something of my 
former self: something of my Colchester 
character of will and self-reliance. The 
last three weeks seemed a dream ; almost 
a bad dream, a nightmare, for a little : 
then only a dream, save for something of 
the Bosebud that seemed to reach out half- 



222 Leicesttr. 

weakly into the present light. I asked the 
policeman at the gates where Dunraven 
Place was, and he directed me. Then I 
arrived at No. 5, Dunraven Place, and was 
shown into a heaatifuUy famished room. 

Waiting, I began to examine a book-shelf 
that was full of beautifully bound books 
that harmonized with the room. They 
made me think how I should like to be 
rich and have all the books I wanted. I 
had my eye particularly on a Gervinus' 
Shakspere in half-calf, and my fingers 
began to feel as if they ought to take it 
down, and run away with it to a convenient 
arm-chair, and then eyes to begin upon it 
at once. As I stood so, I heard a step 
behind me and turned. 

^ You are looking at my books, I see,' he 
said. 

* Yes, sir,' I answered. * It was a Ger- 
vinus' Shakspere. I hope ' 

^ Oh, not in the least ! Please sit down.' 

He motioned me into a large red leather 
chair on one side of the fire-place. 



Leicester. 223 

'You come from Messrs. . . . The 
name is rather confasmg/ he said. ^ I 

want a secretary to help me with to 

make himself generally usefdl as I may 
direct. Another young gentleman has been 
here this morning already: I mean from 
Messrs. . . .' He smiled. — *He objected 
to going out to Africa. Do you ?* 

' Not in the least.' 

* You see — shortly — I want some one to 
help me to get together my things, write 
letters, and so on. — You understand me T 

* I think so, sir.' 

* The young friend who was going with 
me has suddenly been taken ill, and, as it 
is important that I should be out of Eng* 
land in under a month. — ^You follow me T 

* I think so, sir.' 

* Good. Now tell me. Can you shoot ? 
No. Ride? No. Urn. — You are strongly 
made. Where were you at school ?' 

* At Colchester.' 

* Ah, so was I. With Craven, I sup- 
pose ?' 



224 Leicester. 

* Yes, sir.' 

* Did yon go in for sports — ^mnch ?' 

^ I was in the first foot-ball fifteen, and 
rowed in my house-boat.' 

* School house ?' 
'Yes, sir/ 

* So did I. It was head of the river in 
my year.' 

* And in mine too/ 

* — Tell me something about yourself ?' 

I paused for a moment : then, looking 
at him, thought that I should in no case do 
any harm by at this point simply telling 
him the truth. He did not look the sort of 
man who would do ... 1 smiled to myself : 
who would do, could do — what ? 

I said : 

* I have been at Colchester five years, I 
was in the upper sixth for two terms and a 
quarter. My father, who is dead, had placed 
all his fortune in the Southern Bank. My 
guardian called me up to London about three 
weeks ago, to inform me of this. I deter- 
mined then to try to make my livelihood by 



Leicester. 225 

my pen and . • • failed. That is, shortly, 
why I am here, sir/ 

* Tried to make your livelihood by your 
pen and failed. Did not your guardian 
help you ? How did you ? . . .' 

' I angered my guardian by refusing to 
try for a clerkship. I thought that I 

had something here ' (Lifting my 

finger.) 

* '' Quelque chose.la "—Yes. Well.' 

^ I sat down and wrote two poems, which 
I sent to a publisher, hoping ' 

' Why all, or nearly all, poetry has to be 
paid for now-a-days, my good boy. — Of 
course they sent it back again ?' 

* They did,' I said. 

* Well ? And may I ask how you lived 
in the interim ? You had funds ?' 

* No : I sold my great coat/ 

^Excuse me. I am not asking &om 
mere curiosity. : . Would you care to tell 
me more ? I will (looking for a moment 
in my eyes), * if you will allow me, write to 
Dr. Craven about you. — Not that I doubt 

VOL. I. 15 



226 Leicester. 

what you say ; bnt you must see. . . . You 
understand ?' 

* Perfectly, sir. — You have absolutely no 
guarantee that I am not a rogue/ 

' Aha ! I think you are wrong there : 
however/ suddenly : 

' How much did you get for your 
coat ?' 

* Fifteen shillings.' 

* And you have lived on that for nearly 
three weeks ?* 

' Just three weeks/ 

* Impossible I You are joking !' 

* No, sir. — Since I did. My room only 
cost me four shillings a week, and I ' 

* Then you must have lived on a shilling 
a week ?' 

* No, I have not paid my rent for this 
third week yet/ 

* And how are you going to ?' 

^ That I cannot quite say. Perhaps, I 
hope to get an ushership in some school, 
within the next few days. I should antici- 
pate my pay/ 



Leicester. 227 

He stood np ; we looked for some little 
in one another's eyes. Then he stretched 
ont his arm, and let his hand fall on my 
shoulder. 

' You are a hrave fellow/ he said ; ' and 
I believe you are a true one. I believe 
what you have told me. There, there, now/ 
(For my eyes were suddenly full of tears) — 
* There, there, there, there, there I It's all 
right now.' And he turned away and let 
his arm drop. 

Then : 

*Ah, stop,* said he. *Did you know 
a Mr. Blake at Colchester ?' 

^ He left just before I came ; but I met 
him once. He came to examine a school 
at Blackheath, where I was.' 

*• Ah, I am sorry I He was a very dear, 
dear friend of mine — ^an old college chum ; 
but I had known him before then. He was 
a Wykamist.* 

* Yes ; so I remember.' 

* It would have been enough to me 

16—2 



228 Leicester. 



that he had thought well of anyone. He 
would have liked you, I am sure.' 
He smiled, and added : 

* You see that I have let slip how well 
I believe in you, and what you have said 
to me.' 

* Thank you, sir. Some day, perhaps, I 
may be able to show you that I deserved 
some of your belief in me. — Mr. Blake was 
very kind to me when he came to my old 
school. He was pleased, I think, with 
some verses I had to recite, and bo. • • / 
He had snapped his fingers impatiently, 
and made a sharp noise with his lips. 

I stopped speaking. He cried out with 
a smiling mouth : 

* You are not the boy who recited Long- 
fellow's '' Psalm of Life " ?' 

* Yes, sir, I am. Mr, Blake ' 

< Immediately after that visit he came 
and stopped with me here in London for a 
few days.' 

His face grew sadder. He went on 
slowly : 



Leicester. 229 

^ It was the last time I saw him* Yon 
know of his terrible death, not so long after ? 
AH that he said in those few days has been 
treasured up by me, and lives for ever in 
my memory. The first night he came here 
after dinner, as we were sitting here by this 
very fire over our cigars and wine, he told 
me about the little boy he had seen that 
afternoon I' 

He caught himself up : 

* Well I and how old are you now T 

* Eighteen/ 

' You strange boy ! Eighteen. — ^Why, it 
is ridiculous ! (I really must read some of 
those Rejected Addresses of yours some day.) 
— ^You are very tall for your age, and look 
very old for eighteen.' 

I smiled i 

* This fortnight has made me older by five 
years, I think. Years are no test of age, 
sir.' 

We talked together for almost an hour : 
of many things. Then he looked at his 
watch and jumped up, saying : 



230 Leicestei\ 

' You have made me forget that I have 
a very great deal to do this morning, young 
gentleman/ 

* I am sorry, sir/ 

* — ^But very pleasantly/ 

* Then I am glad/ 

I smiled, and so did he. He tapped me 
on the shoulder. 

As I was going, he spoke of Mr. Blake 
again : how that he was a truly great and 
good man : without the cant of the two 
words, a Christian gentleman. I flushed a 
little as he said that. 

A pause. — Then I : 

< I think I ought to tell you something, 
sir, that I have not told you yet.' 

* Aha,' he said. 

^ I am not a Christian, and ... I do 
not say that I do not believe in a God, but I 
do not think that I believe in one.' 

He put his hand on my shoulder again 
and smiled : 

* It will pass, it will pass 1 We most of 
us go in a circle now-a-days : most of us^ that 



Leicester. 231 

is, who are worth anything. Christian, or 
perhaps nothing at all, till seventeen : 
Atheist till twenty : Materialist till twenty- 
one (we soon get tired of that I) : Deist till 
thirty (though some of the wilder sort go in 
for a course of that nonsense called Fan- 
theism) : and then, either the old original 
Christianity again onto the end, or some 
slight modification of it. Take my word for 
it, boy, there is no religion worth calling a 
religion that does not take Christ and Christ's 
teaching as its original : and how much 
better is it to lift up your eyes from con- 
sidering the shadow on the ground, to con- 
sider the One that casts the shadow, even 
Jesus, Who is as the standing figure that 
watches this our on-rolling earthy yearning 
for it as a mother for her wandering child, 
waiting for the hour when He shall take it 
to His Bosom and for ever ?' He paused. I 
kept silence. 

We shook hands. I turned to go. 
He called to me : I turned again : 
* I shall not write to Craven.' 



232 Leicester. 

* Thank you, sir/ 

We again shook hands : and I had my 
hand on the door, when he said : 

' Stay a moment. You are my secre- 
tary — for a year. It is so agreed T 
^ Yes, sir : as far as I am concerned.' 
' Then allow me to give you your first 
quarter in advance. It is always — I always 
manage it in that way. You may be in 
want of a little ready money : for this, that, 
and the other, you know ... all sorts of 
things • . . And • « • as regards Messrs. 
— Messrs. X. Y. and Z., you will of course 
allow me to settle that with them myself.' 
I stood irresolute. 

*Come, come!' he said. — 'Now, don't 
be foolish, Leicester. If you are going 
to • • .' 

I stepped to him suddenly, saying : 
' Sir, sir, you are very good to me 1' 
He took my hand in his and pressed it. 

* Yes, yes, yes, yes : that's all right now. 
— ^Now you really must run awayl You 
said that you would like to come to me to- 



Leicester. 238 

morrow morning, didn't you ? — ^Very well* 
I will instruct you about what you will have 
to do, then. So good-bye, or rather au 
revoir, or rather (when I think of it) 
both/ 

I was at the door, when he called : 

* you dreadful boy, you haven't taken all 
your belongings away with you ! Here is 
your first quarter on the table yet. You are 
inclined to be careless, I see. Look to 
it. It is an evil, evil vice — carelessness.' 

I found that I could scarcely see the 
folded piece of paper that he had put down 
on the edge of the table. 

When I had it safely in my hand, I gave 
one look at him and a bright smile, and 
went out as quickly as I could ; for my eyes 
were full of tears, and I feared some might 
drop out. 

Biding up on the outside of an omnibus 
to Fraed Street, I felt as I had felt in some 
of the days at Colchester, when I had longed 
to leap and give a shout and move onwards 
towards something. And then I grew a little 



234 Leicester. 



sad, if it is possible to call joy sad, and began 
to say to myself : 

* bitter time, you are past and gone 
from me now, as my vision swept from me 
on the sand and I saw her angel face. Well, 
pray that there is a God, child ; for you long 
to thank Him for this ! And see, it is very 
sweet to you to think, that perhaps, per- 
haps. He has but afflicted you and chastened 
you by this your suffering so that, in the 
end. He might lead you nearer and nearer 
to Himself, ... It is a sweet, sweet 
thought !' 

I spent that afternoon happily. First of 
all I had a good dinner at a restaurant in 
Oxford Street, and that gave me an insight 
into what a healthy pleasure in food meant : 
and then (the day continuing sunny and 
almost warm) I went for a long walk in 
Hyde Park, stopping to look at the men and 
women riding or driving by, and not one of 
whom I, in this bright day's dawn of a new 
life, could possibly envy: although their 



Leicester. 235 



wealth might give me the chance of leading 
another life which would not be without its 
charm, nay, delight ; yet how much nobler 
this one that I was entering upon now, this 
one that had work to do, work for others, 
that is, which would require self-sacrifice — 
conquest of self I 

And after that I came up home, buying 
on the way fruit and cakes and other things, 
for a tea I had in my mind with the Bose- 
bud in my room : and then set about 
making it all ready, so that, by the time she 
came in, half-past seven, the room, lit up 
with gas and fire and well-laid table, was 
most cheerful. 

But the tea was not. For Bosy took my 
good news most gravely, and did not laugh, 
properly laugh, once the whole time. 

After tea we went out for a walk together, 
and, when we had gone a little way, I said, 
smiling, that I intended to get her a bonnet 
to wear as a memory of me. But she would 
not see anything to laugh at in that, and 
refused the bonnet with dignity. Then 



236 Leicester. 

I tried a coat^ but she suddenly ex- 
claimed : 

* And do you think I would keep it all 
rags and tatters ?* Dismissing the idea. 

I tried a locket as a last resource. 

After some persuading, she at last agreed, 
and we went into a jeweller's in the Edg- 
ware Boad together, and she chose a little 
round silver locket^ and relented a little. 

' No/ she said, as we were walking 
slowly away. * The bonnet and the jacket 
would wear out, and I couldn't very well 
keep them then — eh ? And they wouldn't 
look nice, all in rags and tatters, would 
they ? But I shall always be able to keep 
the locket, you know : and when I look at 
it I shall think of you and give a sigh ; for 
you've been very nice to me.' 

' Hey-ho I' I said. ' Who's talking non- 
sense now ?' And proceeded to demon- 
strate that, if anybody had been ' nice ' to 
anybody, it was she to me. To which she 
answered that she liked to hear me talk so : 
And I felt rather foolish, and proposed that 



Leicester. 237 



"we should go up to the top of Primrose 
Hill, and Bosy agreeing, we set off. 

I hegan to question her a little about her- 
self, and she answered readily, nay, entered 
upon a regular discourse, to which I played 
the accompaniment with some pleasure of 
amusement and otherwise, till we were 
half way up Primrose Hill : when I all at 
once remembered a certain bench not far 
from the top, by which I had on a certain 
night stood and looked out over the dark- 
less from which came the cool breeze fan- 
ning my feverish cheek. Gould it have in- 
deed been mej this living, moving, thinking 
me here, who lived and moved and thought 
that certain night as memory silently told 
me that I had. Poor me ! 

I led her a little round and then up to 
it. And we sat down upon it together and 
talked somewhat softly. 

What thousands and thousands of stars 
were in the sky ! And what millions and 
millions of people had looked at the thou- 
sands and thousands of stars, and yet would 



238 Leicester. 



look : and when would it all ever come to 
an end? 

' Rosy :* I said again. * Does it never 
seem to you, as if you were here alone in 
the world, quite alone : I mean, as if no- 
body else belonged to you somehow ; and 
they are all here, and they live, dimly, and 
then die, and you can't tell where they go 
to : and you can't tell where you will go to, 
but you don't think you really ever will die, 
although you know you will ; but when you 
do die, that you will go to somewhere else, 
where you will be quite alone again and 
nobody else will belong to you somehow, and 
they will be all there, and they will all live 
there, dimly you know, and then will die, 
and you can't tell where they go to, and 
then you will die. • . • And then it goes 
on like that. — Did you never think of it all 
in that way?' 

* I never thought about it at all,' she 
said. ^ But I like to hear you talk like 
that. Go on.' 

I started and laughed : and then said : 



Leicester. 239 

* Now 111 tell you a little piece of poetry, 
a merry little piece, and then we must be 
going home ; for it's getting late/ 

She composed herself to listen. 

* It's in Greek/ I said, * yes, you'll 
be able to understand it, I'll tell you 
about it, first. It's called a Swallow Song : 
and the little boys sang it in Greece when 
the swallows came back after the winter. 
They used to go round to all the houses 
and sing it, just like boys sing carols at 
Christmas. This is the way it begins : 

' '' She comes^ she comes, the swallow, 
bringing beautiful hours, 
beautiful seasons. 
^ White on the belly, 
black on the back. 

* " Do thou roll forth a fruit-cake 
out of the rich house, 
and a beaker of wine 
and a basket of cheeses, 
and wheat-bread the swallow 
and the pulse porridge 
does not reject. Say, shall we go away, or some« 

thing receive ? 
If thou givest — well ! But if not, we won't let 

you off I 
Shall we bear off the door, or else the lintel ? 



240 Leicester, 

Or else the wife that is seated within ? 

She's a small body, easily shall we carry her off I — 
But if you give us something, 
something great may you get 
Open, open the door to the swallow, 
we are not old men, but childerkins here," * 

Then I proceeded to recite to her the 
Greek, and she moYed her body in some 
sympathy with the rhythm of the words, so 
that I, who was somehow pleased with this 
and it all, gradually grew into the humour 
in which I had been before when I ex- 
claimed : * You are the dearest thing I have 
ever known. You Bosebudl' till, at the 

words 17 rav yvvauca rtiv coco KaOtijuanv^ 

I gave one look at her, sitting there ^in- 
finitely childlike and half-fairy-like and 
dear, and could have caught her up in my 
arms and then • . « I didn't know what I 
should have done * then/ 

I sat still looking out into the night. 

After a little : 

* I wonder,' said her quiet voice. * I 
wonder if you would teach me that ? . . • 
I think I could learn it very soon/ 



Leicester. 241 

* ^You need not wonder any more/ 

I said slowly, looking on out into the night. 
* I will teach it you/ 

And so we began, I to repeat the trans- 
lated words, she to say them after me, 
I looking on out into the night, she as I 
knew looking up at my face. She had a 
strangely acute memory, as I thought. 
She had soon learnt the piece, and repeated 
it alone faultlessly. 

* You have a good memory,* I said. 

* Yes,' she said. * I always was quick 
at learning things when I liked them. I 
like that.' 

A pause. Then : 

* Now we must be going,' I said, rising. 
' It is getting late.' 

We went slowly down the dark hill-side 
together. 

Then something seemed to grow with 
and about us, and I began to feel somehow 
as if I were leaving a thing that had to do 
with me in a low plain, whereas I was 
going away to mount up into a rich bright 

VOL. I, 16 



242 Leicester. 



coantry of gentle sunshine. And once I, 
in half-forgetfulness of something, would 
have taken her hand with mine, and we, 
two children, would have wandered on so 
over the dim fields together for an ever till 
we softly faded away. I was moving in a 
dreaminess, and she in one parallel to it. 
Then we turned up one of the roads at 
the back of St. John's Wood in order to get 
to Maitland Street; and the dreaminess 
began to grow more transparent. I looked 
at her walking along beside me. 
Then at last : 

* You're very quiet, Eosy,' I said. 

* So are you,' she said, looking in front 
of her. And then we went on together 
with the same quietness ; for I had no care 
to say more, nor she either, it seemed. 

As we stopped opposite the door of No. 3 
she heaved a sigh. I stretched out my 
hand and opened the door. She said : 
' Thank you,' and went in : I following. 

Up the dark stairs we went together till 
we reached her door, the handle of which 



Leicester. 243 



she had in one hand as she half turned to 
me. 

* Good-night/ she said. 

* Good-night/ I said, finding her other 
out-held hand, and held it half-loosely for 
a moment. I could not see her face in 
the blackness. 

Her door opened in, and a little light 
came from the turned-down gas — opened 
wider: she went in — slowly — closed the 
door. I ilnlatched my own door, and went 
into the room. The gas there was turned 
down. I went and turned it up. 

* Heigh, ho !' I said, with supposed 
half-weariness, and sat down in the chair : 
and stretched out my legs, and tilted the 
chair back, and lifted the hands of my 
stretched arms to my head and thought. 
All at once I stopped with listening powers 
like a rock balanced on the edge, breathless, 
motionless. 

A low knock came at the door. 
*Come in,' I said, and was breathless, 
motionless. 

16—2 



244 Leicester. 

The latch was lifted and the door opened 
a little. 

* It's me,' said Kosy's low voice. 

Then, the door opening a little, I saw 
her. * Rosy,' she said. * May I come in ?' 

I started : sat up straight. 

•Yes/ I said. . . * Yes/ 

She came in: her face flushed, eyes 
bright, hair loosed a little round her head 
in wavy brown threads. I seemed to in- 
hale her fairness like a soft sweet air. 
She said : 

* I thought — that as — as you were 
going away in the morning — before I come 
back you know — and as I get up early — 
at seven — so as to be down at my work 
by eight you know — I thought ... — 
that — that perhaps I — ^that perhaps you 
. . . wouldn't mind if I was to — ^if I i . .' 
She paused, or stopped, with an indrawn 
breath : and so I was with her, and had 
taken her hands. 

* . . . What is it, Rosebud ?' I said, 
with a trembling in me. 



Leicester. 245 



All at once two large tears came out of 
her eyes and trickled down her cheeks. 

Then she looked at me steadfastly, try- 
ing to smile and not wink her eyelids, 
whose long laahes had crystal drops on 
them. The trembling passed out of me. 
I thought only of her distress. I put 
one arm round her, and so, holding her 
small body, stroked her soft brown hair 
back softly, saying : 

* Why, little Rosebud. You musn't mind 
like that, you know. I'll come back again 
some day. — Quite soon.' 

* Oh, you were so nice to me,' she said. 
^ But you wiU come back again to see me 
. . . someday — EkV 

* Surely I will. — ^And bring you a bonnet 
with blue ribbons and a flower that. . . 
What is it ?' 

* ... I don't want a bonnet!' 
*— Not a bonnet?' 

* . . . No ' . . (piteously). * I want 
you /' 

'Very well then: I'll bring you me,' I 



246 Leicester. 



said, ' some day : and some grapes, and 
bon-bons to make me go down well.' 

Her arms hnng listlessly. She seemed 
very miserable about it. 

I kissed her on the cheek, kissed a tear 
that was stealing down. — Then the next 
moment felt her breast heave and shake 
against mine, and she sobbed out : 

'Oh I wish — you weren't going away: 
I wish you weren't going away 1' 

I kissed her again : now afraid lest my 
own tears should fall to join hers soon : 
and at last found voice to scold her, gently : 
telling her that this would never do, you 
know, and that she would be all right soon. 
— ^And we should see one another soon 
again, and have long walks in the evening 
again : 

* — And learn more Swallow Songs ?' 
asked she, looking up. 

* Yes,' I said. * And all sorts of other 
things as well.' 

* — That would be nice : wouldn't it ?' 
she said. 



Leicester. 247 



* Yes. — ^And climb up to the top of Prim- 
ro0e Hill and look at the lights.' 

* — Yes, and go up the river some day 
as you said once. That would be nice too, 
wouldn't it T She had stopped crying at 
last. 

Then, holding her little upturned face 
in my hands, I kissed her again, first on 
one cheek and then on the other. And 
then we said good-night. 

But at the door she suddenly turned 
back to me with her arms half-raised, and 
said piteously : 

' Kiss me again, do. . . I do like you to 
kiss me so !' 

I took her hands and, smiling a little, 
went and kissed her on the cheek. 

' Kiss me on the lips,' she whispered, 
half giving herself to me. 

I kissed her on the lips and drew back. 

* . . . Good . . . night,' she said. 

* Good-night, Rosy, good-night.' 
She withdrew : she was gonp. 

Then trembling came into me again. 



248 Leicester. 

and I stretched out my arms before me as 
half-round the air. And threw them up 
with an nnknown word, and tnmed away. 

I stood for a little thinking ; till, at last» 
the thought came and grew of her ' alone 
in the world, quite alone, as if nobody else 
belonged to her/ And then I seemed to 
grow further and further away from that 
her, and the last I had with her was 
now: 

* Good-night, Rosebud^ good-night/ 



m. 

CHAPTER I. 

I BROUGHT a certain amount of enthusiasm 
to bear upon my new life : and the idea of 
working in co-operation with * the friend of 
Blake ' was a powerful incentive to perse- 
verance. I wrote in the Journal, which I 
began to keep at this time : 

' I have had a great deal to learn and to 
do in this swift-flown fortnight. And I 
have found both the learning and the doing 
very pleasant to me. It would seem that 
my just-past struggle for existence partook, 
all along, greatly of the cul-de-sac ; whereas 
this new life is like an open road that leads 
to a great city : that city has to be reached ; 



250 Leicester. 



certain things have to be done, which 
things constitute a ** cause." There can 
be no doubt that a definite aim, object, 
end, is the making of a man.' 

But the next week came a reaction ; I 
weary of the details of my work, more 
weary of the people with whom I was 
thrown, and there was growing in me a deaf 
unrecognised notion in connection with Mr. 
Brooke that would have partaken, had I let 
it, of dis-illusionment. Hear the Journal 
of three days later, apropos of a dinner at a 
Mr. Starkie's, a friend of Mr. Brooke's, 
where I had met some, what I called, 
travellers : 

* Travellers are an aggravating tribe. 
They seem to expect you to know their 
books better than they do themselves ; to 
pretend that no one else ever went where 
they went or, if some one else undeniably 
did go, — then that that some one else went 
the wrong way, came back the wrong way, 
and made rather a fool than otherwise of 
himself every bit of the way ! People 



Leice8tei\ 251 

have no business to be active monomaniacs : 
passive ones, as much as yon like : I see 
no harm in that. I am a passive mono- 
maniac myself/ 

The next day : 

* Imps have been at me to-day. The air 
has been densely populated with them.' 
Here is a lugubrious account for you ! — But 
1 begin from the beginning. Thus : 

' Since the morning I had had a longing 
to write one particular thing haunting me. 
In crowded shops : before me as the cab 
cut through the streets : beside me as I sat 
at my desk; wherever I was, whatever I 
was doing, I saw the same silent figure, 
with its hand to its brow, standing under a 
tree in the first evening. I was like an in- 
veterate smoker, robbed of his pipe and left 
staring at his full tobacco- jar. Once or 
twice I very nearly went up to my room 
with paper and pencil to fill in my imagin- 
ary picture : having resisted and conquered, 
I was irritable with everything about me 
for my own firmness. How cruel it was 



252 Leicester. 

that I had no time ! how badly organized 
was the world, that so many other people 
had time, and wasted it ! 

* Driving down New Bond Street, I saw a 
young lady, with a pince-nez and walking- 
stick, staring into a jeweller's window. I 
at once began to revile her as frivolity's 
foolish wasp : and must have done so aloud, 
for the coachman opened the trap to inquire 
if I had said anything ? ** Noy" I said, 
" Drive on." 

* In the evening (this evening) we had a 
dinner-party. The two men who are going 
with us on the Expedition, Clarkson and 
Starkie, were there — with their wives. 
Also some other " men of mark " with their 

m 

wives. But the female element was 
(thank God !) in the minority. But that 
didn't save me. I sat between a beetle- 
browed prude who kept making (bad) eyes 
at her husband opposite us (a travelling 
monomaniac, of course!), and a cavalry 
officer who had cantered through half a 
continent, and, as soon as he came home, 



Leicester. 258 

sat down and wrote a book on all its his* 
torieSy languages and literatures. The 
beetle-browed prude told me about her 
husband's travels : the cavalry officer about 
his own. (The lady he had taken in to 
dinner, was a philanthropist, very distin- 
guished, very loquacious, but unfortunately 
deaf. She and the cavalry officer soon gave 
one another up ; the cavalry officer, for me, 
the female philanthropist for a course of 
lectures to a weak-eyed man on her right : 
subject, parochial rates, I think.) The 
officer varied the conversation once, by re- 
marking that Darwin did not appreciate the 
spirit of Nature : so leading the prude into 
a disquisition on Eternal Love, but, in the 
end disagreeing, they called me from a 
dream just under the ceiling to give my 
opinion ; found I knew nothing about the 
points in question : and so repeated them 
in their entirety for my edification — even 
to the disagreement. 

^ After dinner, when we joined the ladies, 
the prude motioned me to her side by a 



254 Leicester. 



smile. I heard the officer repeating his 
remark about Darwin to, I swear, another 
pmde (square-browed : lifeless combed-back 
hair : slow eyes : and an altogether sugges- 
tiveness of " shoulder arms ") just behind 
us. Then my own particular prude seemed 
for some time (that is, till I grew dreamy and 
answered monosyllabically) to have eyes, I 
should like to say a good many tongues, 
and half one ear, for me only : then she 
carried me oflF, tripping over her spasmodic 
train, to her dear dear friend Mrs. Basing- 
stoke (to whom she really must intrqjooce 
me — a must cul-tivated and highly de-light- 
ful crea-ture, she assured me 1) and I was 
presented, as (in a whisper) ** a most in- 
teresting young man, with decidedly marked 
tastes, my dear Mrs. Basingstoke " (what 
could I have been saying ?) '* and — alas ! — 
a rare endowment of young men now-a-days 
— earnest religious convictions." Oh 
Jupiter ! Oh Jupiter ! 

* But jam satis ! — After they were all 
gone, I stood frowning on the hearthrug. — 



Leicester. 255 

Mr. Brooke came in from the hall, having 
seen the last of them off. 

* " Aha, Leicester," he said — '* and how 
about those things from Taunton's ? I was 
dressing when you came back. They are 
aU right ?" 

* " Well, no, sir. The tubes had to be 
made on purpose " 

* ** I ordered them a fortnight ago." 
***And they came. But one of the 

people in the shop managed to crack 
one 

* ** And the whole thing will have to be 
done again. Bother 1 ; . .Hoity-toity: 
I'm very tired. . . . You look tired 
too." 

' '' I am." 

* *' I saw you making yourself very 
agreeable to Mrs. Napier, and afterwards to 
Mrs. Basingstoke." 

* I curled my lip. — Then, feelipg that I 
should say something foolish in a moment if 
I stayed, and irritated that I should have to 
save myself by running away, said : 



256 Leicester*. 

* I think I will go to bed, sir. — There 
is nothing more to be done to-night ?' 

*"Ah-h-h ... no 1 That is, I don't 
think so. — Hamilton and Malmesbnry sent 
up everything ? — They are the rudest 
and most unpunctual people in all London ; 
but they have the best ..." 

' I made a sharp noise with my lips, ex- 
pressive of impatience and disgust. I had 
forgotten altogether about Hamilton and 
Malmesbury : — What business on earth 
had I with running about seeing that 
Hamiltons and Malmesburies sent up 
things? Why not send a servant? Or 
use the post ? There was not any need 
for such frantic haste. Whereas there 
were creatures, like that girl with the 
pince-nez and walking-stick, who dawdled 
away their whole lives I And here was I 
— going out on an expedition into the 
wilds of Africa, to be killed by fever and 
eaten by vultures, or run through with 
spears and eaten by negroes ! — Oh, it was 
too hard! I really must write to some 



Leicester. 257 

GrcBSuSy state my cruel case, and ask for 
£100 for three years, offering to refund 
it out of my first year's earnings. — Nay; 
a better idea would be, to insert an adver- 
tisement in the Times agony column : 
** An unappreciated genius (male)^ cetat 18, 
desirous of benefiting humanity by devoting 
himself to Himself, would be glad to meet 
with some young woman who would give him the 
means of pursuirig this lofty course of action. 
Millionairesses with a hankering after (literary) 
immortality are strongly advised not to let this 
opportunity slip, as a similar one may never 
arise again. Apply for further particulars to 
B.L., 5, Dunraven Place, Piccadillyy IF., 
who , . •" And I burst out into a laugh, 
rather a bitter laugh. 

* '' What's the matter ?" asked Mr. 
Brooke. 

* I shrugged back my shoulders with a 
half-sigh, half-groan. Then : 

' '' I think I am ill," I said. 

* He rose from his desk, where he was 
sitting examining some papers ; came across 

VOL. 1. 17 



258 Leicester*. 

to me and, smiling, put his hand on to my 
shoulder. 

* " Come : come : come ! You must not 
mind now. — It will soon pass, this malaise. 
You have lived so much in yourself, that 
you find it very hard to live in other people? 
— Ah well, well ! We most of us have 
that little difficulty to contend with sooner 
or later." But I was almost bursting out 
into the soft tears of relief with the cry : 
** 0, will she never J never come V But, in- 
stead, hanging down my head, bit my under- 
lip with all my might for a moment. The 
pain made me master of myself. I looked 
up in his face, with my eyes hedged about 
with tears, but ready to listen to what he 
had to say to me. 

* He pressed my shoulder with his hand : 

* '* Don't dream so, my boy :" he said. 
'* Don't dream so. You're always at it, you 
know ; and it's sxich a bad habit ! It leads 
to absorption in one's own world : and 
that means selfishness. Why, I have 
known in my time at least three dreamers, 



Leicester. 259 



who ruined all their own happiness and 
their family's as well, simply because they 
would have their dreams. Such are they 
whom the world calls * geniuses ' and their 
friends * brutes,' for no sacrifice is too 
great for these precious empty dreams of 
theirs — not excluding the dreamer's lives. 
It angers me to hear people erecting special 
codes of morality for such men. Because 
a man is dubbed ' genius,' is he also to be 
dubbed demi-god, and allowed to pick and 
choose from the laws of the land, which he 
will be so good as to obey and which he 
won't ? — Give up thinking that you can do 
anything, and there is a chance of your 
doing something. Get out of yourself and 
into other people. They are, probably, 
better than you are. —You don't mind me 
speaking like this to you? Now do you 
now r 

* *^ Oh no," I said. " It's very true what 
you say, I live too much in myself : and 
I am impatient of what I think are other 

17—2 



260 Leicester. 

people's smallnesses . . • I will try to be' 
more patient." 

' *^ Very well. Don't let's talk about it 
any more. — One moment ! Am I to halve 
the dose ? Is it too strong for you ?" 

* ^* No, sir. I would say, double it ; 
but " 

* *' Your stomach can't stand it yet ? 
Never mind. I only wonder that it has 
stood so much. Go on taking your medicine 
like a man (I don't mind your pulling faces 
now and then. Perhaps it is rather nasty !) 
and . . /' (with a smile) ** well, you shall 
have some jam aftei-wardsJ' 

' '' Will you tell me the sort ?" I asked, 
but in a purposeless sort of way, for it 
seemed as if he expected me to ask for an 
explanation of his <* jam afterwards.'' 

* ** You will be more contented : less self- 
conscious, a better member of society 
generally. I mean, more ready to put 
yourself out to talk to ** fools," less eager 
to find fault with wiser people than yourself 
In a word, more healthy." 



Leicester. 261 



* I kept silence ; for I felt that it would 
be quite useless to speak/ 

The next day has : 

* Mr. Brooke with me to Riding School. 
Nothing particular/ And, after a space, 
the following remark : 

' These riding lessons five times a week 
are not without their pleasure to me. I 
am pleased at my complete freedom from 
fear. Small things, I hope, are here too 
the father of great. But, can I ever be 
afraid of anything again ? For have I not 
realized how small an atom I am of things 
living and dead : how valueless, as I am, 
to things as yet uncreated ? I am a 
spectator of existence in general, and my 
own in particular. — How can a man who 
believes in nothing but bare existence and 
the beauty of Truth, and feels that he is 
floating along, weak and not far from help^ 
less, have fear? What are a few more 
seconds to him ?' 

Here my enthusiasm for a full Journal 
seems to have given way. The rest is 



262 Leicester. 

made np of simple notifications of the 
general events of each day. 

This short period of my life is, strangely 
or not, one of those about which I remem- 
ber least. It may be that I was too ab- 
sorbed in what Mr. Brooke dubbed for me 
my * dreams ' to notice even what took 
place to myself. It may be. Perhaps 
that may account for the long filing trail of 
society-dressed people that represents my 
memory of this short period of my life, and 
for a certain lifeless wanness that contains 
even these conversations between Mr. 
Brooke and myself, although written so 
shortly after they were spoken. But as 
the days wore on, I with a little astonish- 
ment found that I was again beginning to 
take an interest, and something more 
than an interest, in my work. At first, as 
I have said, this astonished me, and I half 
anticipated that * It would go off soon :' 
But, when it did not, rather grew, till it 
seemed to have achieved some permanent 
strength, I was led to look upon my early 



Leicester. 263 

discontent as the momentary humour and 
this cahner readiness for the actual indi- 
viduality. There were no more theological 
conversations with Mr, Brooke now : no 
more of his jeremiads against brutal Science 
or debased Art, and consequently no more 
rousing of the antagonistical feeling in me. 
Besides, something of my old adventurous 
love was rising in me at the near approach 
of our departure, and this helped me to 
realize that, past denial, there was much in 
me that was morbid and self-concentrated, 
and helped me to determine to resist these 
infirmities. I had began to like Mr. Brooke 
better: and this although I was far from 
holding him up to myself as ' the ideal 
friend/ as I had done at starting. No one 
could help liking the man's earnestness : an 
earnestness that had something of the 
tenderness-inspiring in it. It did not 
matter that the aim of this earnestness was 
not altogether apparent to you. You saw 
the eflfect : the effect was beautiful, earnest- 
ness and honesty welded together, and you 



204 Leicester. 

* liked ' it. What matter about the 
cause ? 

It was in a humour of this sort that, some 
days later, I sat with him after dimier in the 
library, he smoking a cigar, I thinking about 
things. 

We sat in silence. 

At last, with a slight yawn : 

* We shall be off,' he said, * before this 
time next week. Oh-h-h ! . . . How de- 
lightful it is to think of it !' 

* Mr. Clarkson is to meet us at Brindisi, 
is he not ?' I said* 

* Yes. He does not want to go through 
Paris : and it would scarcely do to go 
through the Continent and he not ge with 
us. I do not think so, at least. « . . He 
has a perfect monomania about Paris. He 
caught a typhus or typhoid fever when he 
was there three years ago : and almost died 
of it : up at the top of an hotel — alone. He 
declared that he would never put his foot 
inside the place again. It was a very 
horrible idea, I must confess : death : 



Leicester* 265 

alone in a strange hotel : in a strange 
city/ 

* But, if he's afraid of fever, surely it is 
rather a strange thing to go to ' 

^ Yes : yes. It is. But men are made up 
of such inconsistencies. I, for example, am 
shudderingly afraid of small-pox : yet I have 
been through a cholera epidemic, nursed 
diphtheritic cases, known cancer, and what 
not besides.' 

* King Alfred used to pray that God's will 
might be done in^ all things, but that he 
should prefer not to die of a loathsome 
disease. I should be afraid of such things 
too, if it wasn't that . • •' I.paused. 

' Wasn't what ?' he said. 

* 0, a silly idea of mine ! — I don't believe 
that I shall ever catch anything again, some- 
how !' 

* Fearlessness is half the battle. ... I 
too have prayed to God that I may not die 
of a disease that makes others fearful of me 
and myself loathe myself.* 

* And I do not see why God should not 



26G Leicester. 

grant your prayer, if ' I left the rest, 

* If He is and can,* unsaid ; for I had seen 
his face contract a little. 

* I beg your pardon,' I said, ' if I have 
offended you. My thoughtlessness began, 
and my honesty wanted to end, my sentence.' 

^ Oh no ! I am foolish to notice it. I 
should not have, but that it recalled to me 
that the same vile bartering thought had, I 
am ashamed to say, occurred to me too, as 
it were despite myself, before now. You 
see I am trembling ' (he held up his hand) 

* like a terrified woman. Upon my word I 
ought to be ashamed of myself !' 

He resumed more slowly : 

* I cannot quite account for this hysterical 
dread of one particular disease. My father 
died of it just before I was bom, and my 
mother was nigh losing life, and then reason, 
in giving birth to me. Perhaps that is 
enough to excuse my poor nerves. . . . 
But I've not much belief in these things. 
Hereditaribility, as Spencer would say, has 
been done to death nowadays.' 



Leice$tei\ 267 

I remembered a somewhat contrary re- 
mark to this of his : and smiled a little to 
myself. 

There was a silence for a few moments. 

At last he lifted np his head, looked 
across at me, and jerked his cigar-end nnder 
the grate, saying : 

* By-the-bye, Leicester, I have something 
to say to you. . . . It's abont my book.* 
He paused for a moment. Then pro- 
ceeded : 

' You know that it is not yet published ? 
— ^Indeed, it is not fit to be published. — It is 
like Caesar's Commentaries — nudi^ recti et 
venusti (I think that's the expression 
all right) omni ornatu orationis tamquam veste 
detracta — ** Unadorned, severe and decent, 
stripped of all the embellishment of expres- 
sion, like a garment " — but I was carried 
away from its actual state^ nudasy into its 
ideal state, rectus et venustus. — Decent, 
comely^ that is the best attribute for a man, 
his thoughts and his actions, that there can 
be. But you see my poor book never got 



268 Leicester. 

beyond starkness 1 It was meant to be as 
a sort of introduction, or prelude, to a future 
work : my magnum opus I I did not care to 
tell the tale of my failure — not, at least, till 
I could tell with it the tale of my success; 
But ... If anything happened to me : Who 
can foresee even a moment here ? — Quid 
hum^nitusy as Cicero has it : any of those 

chances to which humanity is liable ' 

He paused again. The words seemed perse- 
veringly jerky. 

I waited. — He resumed : 

* I should like it brought out — ^then : sup- 
posing, I mean ; supposing aliquid humanitus 
occurs this time. For, you see, it might be 
of some use to others : more especially to 
him following on my track. It contains my 
attempt from the south, and my last journey 
ending at lujigi.' 

*Yes?' I said. 
Another pause. 
Then he : 

* Ah, but I thought I had the bird in my 
hand that time ! Only in the bush, only in 



Leicestei\ 269 

the bush ! And I with no more twine with 
which to mend broken nets and snare it. I 
have not told you before, how bitter that 
moment was to me : To turn back at Mount 
Nebo, within sight of Canaan, into the sandy 
desert, so hot and waterless ! — ^And as I 
turned, verily my anguish shamed me out 
of my manliness to play the woman. I did 
restrain myself till they had pitched the tent 
there, in the roar and very breath of the 
mighty waters ; but then I went apart, and 
sat, and looked at the smoking columns of 
the fall fading into the purpling sky, and 
wept. It seemed to me as I sat there alone 
that evening that I was not turning back, to 
come again with new victorious face and 
reach to It ; but it seemed to me — I cannot 
tell you how, or why. I can only tell you 
that so it was. — It seemed to me, I say, that 
a still small voice spoke whispering to my 
heart : and I knew that I should not see 
Mount Kebo again, should not even cross 
the desert again, but die far away in the 
land of Egypt, in a land of glory and sin/ 



270 Leicester. 



Another pause. 
He went on : 

* Since then, I have tried to persuade my- 
self that I was mistaken. Life is so ordinary : 
it is hard to believe always in the faith of 

one's higher moments And you see, my 

dear boy : in a few days we are off ! What 
do you say ? — Well, what I want to tell you 
is this. Supposing aliquid humanitus. — ^You 
follow me ?' 

He looked at me, who was a little mysti- 
fied by it all. 

* Yes,' I said. * To a certain extent.' 
He smiled. 

* Ah, you've grown deep into my heart, 
boy ! you cannot know how deep. Perhaps 
there is some selfishness in my love for 
you : I do not say that there is none : But 
I do love you ! — I have been rather sharp 
with you at times : Forget it ! It is, that 
I cannot bear to see you with the ideas you 
have, about this beautiful world — and God. 
It seems** to me almost a crime that you 
. . . Forgive me : Now you do now ?' 



Leicester. 271 



He had touched my leg : laid his hand 
on it, and looked so fondly into my eyes 
that I was moved, bnt not quite with an 
answering feeling to what he called his love. 
I turned my look aside. 

* You see that I believe in you/ he said. 
* Believe in you even as you are now, a 
mere boy ! I know that if you only had 
some great work cut out for you to do — ^you 
would do it ; and that there would be no 
need for it to be done again — something that 
would require all your heart and soul I At 
present ... I am afraid for you, and that 
is the truth ! And being afraid, I am jealous 
for you, and so — cross with you ! That is 
my way. . . Can you understand me ?' 

* Yes,' I said. * I think I can.' 

He went on at last, I was glad, looking 
away from me. 

^ I have this presentiment upon me, and 
I cannot shake it off. I shall never reach 
my heart's desire. God's will be done 1 — 
And it is so strongly upon me that I • • • 
I am afraid I am very clumsy, beating about 



272 Leicester. 



the bush like this ! See now. Here it is 
out straight for you ! I want you to pro- 
mise me to go on and finish what I feel I 
shall never be able to do more than begin. 
— ^Every river, every lake of that land shall 
be mapped out and known!' (His voice 
rose and rang) * Why, I tell you I dreamt 
about it as a boy at school. I have kept it 
by me all my life. A grand idea ! — But not 
yet I Not yet, you understand. That would 
be foolish. If we — if they, fail this time, I 
want you to come back to England and wait 
here four or five years, preparing for it. 
You will grow apace. Bead, read, read I — 
Then try again : and when you do it !— when 
you do it ! then. . . Tell them of my poor 
old dead book : and of me, just a little, to 
say how I dreamt of that hour all my life ! 
None of the glory I — Oh no, I don't want any 
of ihaU All that shall be yours I But — if 
I could only think that through me, if not hy 
me, the thing had been done at last ! — If I 
could only think that^ why . • . You must 
not come out with us this time. You are too 



Leicester. 273 

young. Yonr constitution is just changing. 
You know the critical periods of a man's 
life — ^the twenties and the fifties — ^wait till 
your constitution has settled/ (He rubbed 
his eyebrows.) *Yes, yes, you might 
come down as far as Zanzibar with us, 
if you've set your heart upon it — ^if you've 
set your heart upon it. Eh ? You might 
as well get some knowledge of the life. But 
remember always that you are the reserve. 
(When you have been over all the land — 
crossed and re-crossed and known it — then 
you'll be able to confute that absurd theory 
of there being some Central Africans who 
have no idea of a deity. That's all non- 
sense ! If I had lived I had intended con- 
futing it myself. However . . .) Well, as 
I was saying, you must always remember 
that you are the reserve : both for our sake, 

dear boy, and for the sake of the Cause 

I am afraid again that I am very clumsy. I 
haven't yet told it you in so many words — 
eh ? Well, this time I will, straight out.' 
He began deliberately ; 

VOL, I. 18 



274 Leicester. 

* I want you to promise me that, in the 
event of anything happening to me, you will 
devote yourself to the Cause. — ^You see ?' 

He went on : 

* Study for it : toil for it : do for it every- 
thing : forget nothing ! On that condition 
I make you my heir/ 

There was a pause. 
Then I said : 

* I cannot 1' 

*Yes, yes,' he cried. * You can do it, if 
anyone can ; and it is to be done ! I am 
sure you can do it 1 I know you better 
than you know yourself. You will grow 
old apace : a man by twenty : a — some- 
thing more than a man by thirty, if God 
prolongs your days so far. I pray He 
may. — ^No, I say. Don't be afraid of that. 
I have no relation whom I can wrong by 
making you my heir: be easy on that 
point.' 

He stopped suddenly : 

* You say nothing ?' 

In a little, I, with my eyes downcast, said : 



Leicester. 275 

* Yon have so completely taken me by 
Burprisey that I scarcely know if I am asleep 
or awake/ 

* Yes : yes : yes, I know. It was foolish 
of me. I had intended working up to it 
slowly: training you into what I wanted 
you to become. You mmt do it ! and • . . 
all sorts of things. Of course you will/ 

He began to drift away : 

' Last night I • • • I had a horrible, a 
.horrible dream. . • Strange: strange how 
we all are troubled by our dreams. . . 
What accursed shadows I saw ! shadows of 
sin: shadows of a tormented universe. 
Oh my God I . . . My time is short. . . 
I know it. I shall not get further than 
Paris. I know it. . . ** Blake, old fellow: 
Allan's dead."— "Dead?" he said.— ** Yes, 
dead. Benshaw brought me news of it last 
night. He carried him on his back over a 
mile through the hot sands. It was eve 
when they got to the spring. Allan was 
delirious. I cannot think of his poor 
parched lips muttering : and his eyes 

18—2 



276 Leicester. 

rtared so^ Benshaw says, Bnt at the 
last, he grew quite calm, and asked him 
to hold him up. * Are those the mountains 
out there?' he asked. * Yes^* said Een- 
shaw, * How peaceful they are/ — Then he 
closed his eyes for a little; hut opened 
them all of a sudden and cried out : * Do 
you see the Cross there?' ^ No^' said Een- 
shaw. * Where ?' * Upon the mountain top^ 
the ridge I mean. Christ is holding it. How 
sweet His face is. . . Oh what a lights what a 
light / It hursts out all round Him. And 
seey the sJiadow ! There^ there on the sand. 
The shadow of the Cross. Nearer — nearer — 
nearer, fleet over tlie golden sand. The shadow 
of the Cross !' — And so he died." ' 
I shook him hy the arm : 

* Sir, sir — You are ill/ I said. 

* No/ he said. * Not ill, only tired.' 
All at once he started up : 

* I've been talking quickly. . • . My 
blood's been boiling. I'm all right now 
though. — ^You have understood all that I 
said? No, I see that you don't realize 



Leicester. 277 



it. Well, well. That is nothing. We'll 
begin again. — No, I assure you, I'm all 
right now. Sit down. Draw your chair 
closer. Now I will go through it again.' 

It seemed he had quite forgotten the 
story he had told me of his Mend's death. 
He began to explain the object of the ex- 
pedition : what was to be done this time ! 
what was to be done next time: lastly, 
what he wanted me to do. I listened 
patiently, although I was, as it were, physi- 
cally wearied of it all. 

Dawn was breaking as I stood looking 
from my bedroom-window. I wished that 
I stood on some Thames bridge, to look at 
the sleeping town : then turned away sigh- 
ing, and glad that I was not there — any- 
where but where I was, a few yards off my 
cool, comfortable bed. 

As I had one knee on it, getting in, I 
paused, made half-irresolate by a thought. 
How long was it since I had prayed ? Had 
I grown so sure, then, that there was no 
* good ' in it ? — None I none I * K God is, 



278 Leicester. 



He knows what is in my heart without my 
telling Him. And yet I haven't given 
much thought to the subject of late : not 
had time to go searching for new material 
with which to build up my belief in dis- 
belief, as I used to do at Colchester. Ah^ 
I was a boy then. Now I am ... a 
fool to be standing here like this.' I 
was into bed and had the clothes over 
me. 

^ . . . I wonder what Kosy's doing 
now ? Asleep, of course, like a good little 
girl. I wish I was ! I wish this world 
had never been made. I wish I had never 
been bom : and then I shouldn't have been 
plagued with all these things. I wish . . . 
Ahf this world is not much of a place to be 
happy in I* 



CHAPTEK II. 

For some time, when I half-awoke next 
morning, I was aware of a letter with the 
usual cup of tea by my bedside. At last I 
roused myself sufficiently to stretch out my 
hand and lift the letter into the bed by me : 
and then managed to open it, and began, 
still half-awake, to read it : 

' Deab Mb. Leigesteb, 

^ I have been informed of your ap- 
pointment as private secretary to Mr. 
Brooke, and that you are about to accom- 
pany him on his expedition to Central 
Africa, to which I wish all possible success. 



280 Leicester. 

I have a profound admiration for Mr. 
Brooke personally. I once had the honour 
of meeting him at the house of my distin- 
guished friend, Professor Strachan, F.R.S. 
I think that you are to be greatly con- 
gratulated on the results of your independent 
course of action in having faced the world 
so boldly on your own account ' (about this 
point I woke up completely), * and I have 
no doubt that you will always do credit to 
the name you bear. I have to regret and 
apologize for any little disagreeableness that 
may have arisen during our last interview, 
and to ask you to ascribe it to the very 
indifferent state of my health at the time* 
I am still, I believe, in rather a critical 
state ; but my doctors give me every hope 
of the ultimate recovery of my accustomed 
vigour. Thinking that perhaps you might 
require some small moneys, cash for your 
outfit, etc., I have directed that the sum of 
one hundred pounds shall be deposited to 
your account at my agents', Messrs. Milnes 
and Co., Axe Street, which you do me a 



Leicester. 281 



great pleasure by accepting as a small 
token of my personal regard for your- 
self. 

'I remain, 

* Yours trulyi 

* Thos* R. James. 
' B. Leicester, Esq,' 

' P.S.— The jeiOO will be handed over to 
you on personal application. I have to ask 
your indulgence for the indifferent composi- 
tion of this letter, which you must please to 
ascribe to my present condition. I find 
any mental eflfort very painful to me/ 

I lay back, with my head deep in the 
pillow, staring at the ceiling : * Either 
the man is soft-brained,' I thought, ' or 
flunkey-hearted, or ... I don't under- 
stand it t But I certainly shan't waste a 
quarter of another minute in trying to. 
What's the old hypochondriac to me ? Of 
course, I won't take his money, confound 
him !' 



282 Leicester. 

Then a crowd of other thoughts came 
npon me, till I was in a not £ar from 
disgusted state. There was Eosy: and my 
books still at Colchester : and the general 
futility of existence, and particularly of my 
own. I ended by growing sapless, and 
then half- peevish. 

A barrel-organ began playing some way 
off. I lay and listened to it in an arid dis- 
gust. At last it stopped. Then I got up, 
and proceeded to my toilet. — * This is what 
is generally known as getting, or having 
got, out of the wrong side of your bed this 
morning,' thought I, going downstairs. 

Mr. Brooke seemed better. He talked to 
me quite naturally at breakfast about things 
in general. Then we parted : he to go I 
do not know where, I to see about some 
orders that had not been punctually ful- 
filled, etc. . • . But when we met again at 
luncheon, I thought he had rather a beaten- 
out look, a look of extreme weariness. I 
ascribed it to the amount of conventional 
thought and worry that he had gone through 



Leicester. 283 

of late, and perhaps a little to the nnnsnal 
excitement of last night. 

The next day was quite ordinary, quite 
uneventful. And so the day after. Every- 
thing was done now. We were to start 
early in the morning from Charing Cross. 
Consequently, we went to bed earlier than 
usual : about half-past nine. 

I, out in the hall, lit my candle first: 
said good-night to him in the library : and 
was almost up to the top of the first stair- 
case, where our ways separated, when I 
heard him call out. I stopped and lis- 
tened. 

He called again : 

* Boy 1' 

I answered : 

* Yes r 

* Good-night.' 

* Good-night.' 

' No : wait. I will be up in a moment 
to shake hands with you. The night before 
the campaign opens : eh ?' 

He came out : lit his candle (I watched 



284 Leicester. 

him over the bannisters. I see him now) : 
and came up slowly. I stepped back, and 
stood waiting for him in the mouth of the 
passage. 

Then we shook hands : but he did not 
let mine go after he had pressed it. I 
turned my eyes from his face generally to 
his eyes, and looked into them : puckering 
tip my mouth a little to one side. 

He smiled : smiled a second time : and 
let fall my hand. — He meieuit something by 
that smile, and I understood something, 
but I did not, and do not, quite know what. 

Mine was a dreamless sleep that night« 

Sitting opposite him in the railway- 
carriage some five minutes before we were 
to start, he caught me glancing at him in a 
peculiar way. 

* I can tell you what you are thinking of,' 
he said, bending towards me and putting his 
hand on my knee* * You are half-puzzled, 
half-amused at my "delusion." Oh yes, 
that's your word : " Delusion." Very well I 
We shall see what we shall see. My dear 



Leiceste7\ 285 



boy, I am not given to morbidity, believe 
me. — ^By-the-bye, you didn't forget to get 
some papers ?' 

I started up. 

^ Beally, I am very sorry. I am afraid 
I have forgotten all about them. I am very 
sorry. I will go at once. — What papers 
shall I get ?' 

^ No, I should have got them myself. 
Let me go. I have been doing all the talk- 
ing and you all the work. It was very 
kind of old Gordon to come down to give 
me a God-speed and shake o' the hand, 
wasn't it, Starkie ? — ^You didn't see him, I 
thought. He kept me chattering with him» 
— Stop 1 stop I I'll go. I really insist on 
going I' 

* It is only at the end of the platform, 
sir," I said. * Don't think of troubling 
about it. Let me ' 

* Ne : no. I will go myself. You stop 
here. — Is there any paper you particu- 
larly like, Starkie ? Are you a liberal or a 
CQnserf ative ^ 



286 Leicester. 



Mr. Starkie, with his feet upon the 
cuBhions, looked rotmd with his nsnal 
beard-twitching smile : 

* Oh, I'm neither. They're both equally 
bad. — Get me a society paper.' 

As Mr. Brooke hurried away, Mr. Starkie 
said something sarcastic about ^ society 
papers.' Then, after a pause (I knew 
nothing about * society papers '), I went on 
to the platform, and began walking up and 
down before the carriage. 

All at once I saw Mr. Brooke, with some 
papers in his hand, coming towards the 
open gate. A shabbily-dressed man was 
slouching along at right-angles to him. 
They met. I saw Mr. Brooke start back : 
half-loose and then clutch the papers : let 
the man pass by, and then come towards 
me, but more slowly. 

I thought nothing of it : re-entered the 
carriage : and a moment after he was at the 
door, and threw the papers on to the seat. 
I was arranging some rugs upon the rac- 
quet. Then the guard came to ike door to 



Leicester. 287 

examine our tickets. I had Mr. Brooke's. 
I gave it np with mine : and then for the 
first time noticed him. He was sitting staring 
in front of him, with his hand supporting 
his head. He was very pale. I stood in 
doubt, looking at him. 

* Are you ill T I asked. 
He started and laughed. 

* Oh, it is nothing. — We are to have a 
fine day for our journey. See how the sun 
is shining. It must be quite clear out in 
the country. ... Do you know what time 
we get to Dover, Starkie ?' 

There was a door between Mr. Brooke's 
room and mine at the Hotel de Manchester. 
We had it opened, and talked as we were 
dressing for dinner. He was instructing 
me in the programme that had to be gone 
through here in Paris. I was at my glass, 
spoiling a white tie. — ^I heard him come 
from his room into mine, but did not turn, 
thinking he was only continuing the con- 
versation. All at once I saw his face re- 



288 Leicester. 

fleeted beside miiie. I cried out: *Good 
God !' and jerked myself round. 

His eyes kept opening and shutting. I 
caught him by the arm. He smiled at 
me. 

* It is as I thought,' he said slowly. * We 
must get out of this, boy. . . . That man 
at the station. I ran against him/ 

He shuddered. I heard his teeth click 
as he closed his jaws. 
' You are ill T 

* Yes. That man ! It went through 
me like Weland's sword. Oh, the horrible 
smell V 

* You think you have caught the small- 
pox ?' I said incredulously. 

' I do not think : I know. How weak 
my eyes are. I could almost fancy I saw 
motes before. ... I am a fool 1' 

^ It is the crossing,' I said. * You will be 
all right soon.' 

* The crossing ? An old sailor like me ? 
Pooh, pooh ! Nothing of the sort. And 
yet ' 



Leicester. 289 

He began to consider to himself : 

* And yet • • . How possibly • » / 
I caught him by the arm : 

* Stop : stop 1' I said* * Yon will give 
yonrself the small-pox if yon go on at that 
rate. — ^Have yon been vaccinated V 

He moved from me, saying, with great 
calmness : 

* Not I. Nonsense every bit of it. I 
never wanted to have all the vile diseases 
flesh is heir to pumped into my system with 
bad lymph I See. I will sit down here, 
on the bed. I don't feel well : that's all — 
at present: giddy. Go and tell Starkie. 
Then go and find a room for me some- 
where. A nice room : and flowers. Mind 
yon tell the people what it's for : a case of 
small-pox.' He stopped and smiled. * Vari- 
ola conflnens, if they are particular. That 
means something like the certainty of a 
dead body in the house* You may add 
that: people like to know» Never mind 
what you have to pay. A nice room, 
Leicester* Bemember, I shall want to be 

VOL. I. 19 



290 Leicester. 

in it — ^probably a fortnight before I die. 
I used .to like Passy : try in Fassy. — 
Now go. No: I am not mad : not in the 
least/ 

*Will you let me fetch a doctor?' I 
said. 

* You will anger me in a moment I — Go 
and tell Starkie, and find me a nice room. 
I want to get there while I am quite sure of 
myself. We must think of other people as 
weU as of ourselves. — ^Please go at once.* 

I went to Starkie and sent him into my 
room : then ran downstairs ; found out the 
m^tre de Thotel, and tried to explain to 
him that I wanted to know where I should 
be able to find a house-agent. Seeing that 
I only confused the man, I came up to my 
room again. 

Mr. Starkie was sitting beside Mr. 
Brooke, speaking tQ him earnestly — I 
think trying to persuade him that he was 
mistaken in his idea about the small-pox. 
He stopped speaking as I came in. 

I explained how useless it was. for me to 



Leicester. 291 

try to get what was wanted ; I did not know 
a street in Paris, and could not speak French. 
Mr. Starkie had better go, and leave me 
here with Mr. Brooke. They both seemed 
to see this. Mr. Starkie jumped up^ saying 
that of course I was quite right. It would 
be a dreadful waste of time for me to go, and 
in the end I might not be successful^ Mr. 
Brooke thanked him. 

As thQ door closed I sat down beside the 
bed. 

After a little : 

* I wish you would let me get a doctor/ 1 
said. 

* Not yet. Not yet. Useless. We shall 
see, boy, in a little while. I hate doctors. 
They are a blundering race. » • • But I 
have one or two things to say to you before 
you go . . . Bertram.' 

It was the first time he called me by my 
Christian name. I felt a sort of answering 
thrill in me. 

* Before I go ?' I said. 

* Yes. I shall not allow you to stay, 

19—2 



292 Leicester. 

and mn the chance of catching it. That 
would never do. Nor must Starkie: he 
will have to hurry on to Brindisi ; but I'm 
afraid Clarkson won't care to go on without 
me. • • • And he wishes to put it off, too. 
It is very hard : after all these years !' 

A pause. 
• ^ I have been speaking to him about you/ 
he went on. * He knows all my wishes* 
He is one of my executors ... a brave 
man: rough and ready: will follow any- 
where, but can't lead. Clarkson has all 
the brains of the party. You must have 
scientific observation to hand, or you can 
never do any real good. That is the mis- 
take we have all of us made. Brave men 
can plod on- and, when there is need, shoot 
straight (but the less shooting, the better) ; 
but there is something else wanted as well» 
and that's perception. They don't recog- 
nise more than half they see. There has 
only been one naturalist in Africa yet — 
Klesmer, I mean. Think of that I And 
he, poor devil, came to grief on the ubi- 



Leicester^ 293 

qnitous reef of poverty. I have often 
regretted I didn't know of him in time. 
But it's the old, old story 1 When ihey 
had muscle, they hadn't brains : and when, 
they had brains, they hadn't muscle. These 
explorers (especially the French) are a 
queer lot. Du Camp's gorillas are . . • 
well, let's only say exaggerations : and as 
for Louis . • » But there, there ! Starkie 
knows all about it. He will tell you some 
day. I have a thousand things in my head» 
and can only bring you out one. About 
yourself. You would not promise that 
night to give up your life to the Cause. 
You said that you believed you had other 
work to do. I want you to promise now. 
You must leave me to-night, Bertram — 
very soon.' 

^ Leave you ? That is impossible. Here 
with strangers ?' 

< I want no one but the Sisters. I have 
seen them at work before : have worked 
with them. They are aU I want. With 
the small-pox, men die in delirium, loath* 



294 Leicester. 



some to everyone. You could not stay. 
; • . I am thinking of going into an hos- 
pitaly instead of taking an apartment — ^if it 
can be managed as I want it. Starkie has 
gone to see. • • . That was a foolish idea 
of mine : I am glad you came back. It is 
all right. Starkie knows all about it. If 
the doctors will only leave me alone I . • . 
Oh, boy,' he said, * if you would only pro- 
mise to try! Go back and study, say, 
for three years : only three years ! And 
learn everything, everything ! And then 
go down there for another year to learn 
about the life. And you will pick up 
experience very quickly. I know you. 
Starkie says he will do it : he will not be 
too old: a brave fellow I Ah dearl ah 
dear ! I have so many things that I want 
to tell you : so many ; so many that they 
confuse me, and I can scarcely tell you 
anything. All one jumble, eh ? But I 
have not been like myself since that dream 
— ^Now, you will promise ?' 
I answered nothing. 



Leicester^ 290 

He lifted np his head. 

* Promise me. I am so sure yon could 
do it. If yon only had some beacon-light 
to steer to. At times I have thonght that I 
am infatnated about yon. Yon did not 
know that I was married once ? . • . And 
God took away my son from me. Yet I 
bore. it. And then my wife, too. " The 
Lord gavCf and the Lord hath taken away. 
Blessed be the name of the Lord.'* That was 
what Blake said to me in the evening when 
my son died. I only saw him dead. It 
was very sudden. Dear child 1 dear child ! 
• • • You have something of him in you, 
Bertram, at times. . * « And then BatcHffe 
came and fell ill. He was not worth much. 
Intelligent, and all that; but had no in- 
terest in his work, and could not have done 
much for it if he had had. And then. God 
sent you to me. Your struggle in London. 
— Oh, you must promise me. 4 . • Ha 1 I 
am a fond old fool !' 

Atkst: - . 



296 Leicester. 

* You have not answered me/ he said. 
* Will yon not promise ?' 

^ I cannot, sir. It is as if yon asked me 
to become a priest — ^having no vocation/ 

* Bnt I have determined that yon shall 
promise 1 « I have made yon my heir. I 
am not yery rich. Some eight hundred 
a-year now; much less than I once had. I 
have spent much in the Cause. Yon will 
promise ?' 

* I cannot, sir. I thank yon none the 
less ; but you must give it to some one else. 
— To Mr. Starkie. I cannot promise to 
give up my life to the pursuit of a thing-r-I 
do not care for : I mean care for, enough 
for that.' 

After a little he ; 

* You will think better of it when you ard 
older. You are full of dreams now. — ^Pro- 
xnise me now. In five years • • It is not 
for five years.' 

' I cannot promise. You must not leave 
jne that money. I could not take it with- 



Leicester. 297 

out I did promiBO, and I will never promise. 
How could I honestly ?' 

He sighed : 

' My head is very heavy. I cannot talk 
any more now. Bemember; I will alter 
nothing. You will go some day. Wait 
till you have been out in the world, boy. I 
have seen bees covered with tiny red spiders 
innumerable, tickled to death. I will alter 
nothing.' 

I took his hand gently : 

* I cannot tell you, sir/ I said, ' how 
sorry I am to seem so ungrateful. It is 
not that I am so really ; but • • I cannot 
— do this : I cannot give up my life to such 
a thing. Do not think that I set great 
store by my life. . . I do not. I am not 
far from indifferent i^hether I live or whether 
I die — as yet. But, as you have just said, 
I am full of dreams. I have scarcely dared 
to whisper to my own heart what they are, 
but, such as they are, I will either climb up 
to them or to nothing. Greatness is the 
only truth. Man's soul is his fresh memory 



298 Leicester^. 

T— and BO is death the perfecting of life ; for 
life is the hero and death the crown with 
which he is crowned one of the heirs of im- 
mortality. — ^And harvest breeds to harvest : 
and evil days eat not the blades away ; but 
they ever live till their sheaves' golden 
heads shall touch the sky and drop/ 

In a little he said : 

' Oh greatness, greatness 1 what greatness^ 
boy ? It is all — vague — ^visions — dreams/ 

* No, no, not to me — now/ 

' I am too weary to talk of it any more. 
Best. Best I This is not the end ; for the 
end cannot Jbe with you — ^yet awhile/ 

I did not say what was upon my tongue. 
I was foolish to have said so much. I kept 
silence for a little. Then : 

^ Can I get you nothing ?' I said. ^ Are 
you sure ? ' 

* Nothing, nothing. • • « Let us wait for 
Starkie.' 

I rested my elbow on my knee and my 
chin upon my hand ; and so sat, looking at 
tiie floor, and thinking of my dreams. Mr. 



Leicester^ 299 

Brooke lay motionless on his back with his 
eyes closed. His breathing seemed to me 
short and heavy. 

At last Starkie came. It was all right : 
Mr. Brooke might go to the hospital. 

efnst before he went downstairs^ he 
asked Mr. Starkie to leaye us alone for a 
moment. I stood by the large wardrobe 
mirror, with a certain feeling of half-shame, 
making me half wish to avert my eyes from 
his face. He came to me~-pnt one hand 
on to my shoulder in his old way, smiling, 
and said: 

' Well. Starkie knows all about the book 
too. It is to be brought out soon after my 
death, and you are to be joint editor with 
him.' 

'I, sir ? But consider, I am not yet 
nineteen. I know nothing about Africa; 
nothing even of literary matters. How shall 
I . . ?' 

' I wish it so. You will not refuse me 
this?' 

* But, sir, I am so youilg.' 



800 Leicester. 

* People will laugh. Is that it ?' 

' What people do or do not do^ is, and 
I think always will he, . as nothing to 
me/ 

* You say it with proper and distmct em- 
phasis. Very well. — Then you accept ?' 

^ Yes, sir. — ^But I hope that neither Mr. 
Starkie nor I may ever have to touch your 
book. You will most surely recover.' 

He smiled again ; less sadly than before, 
it seemed to me. 

'No, no, that is not to be. God has 
laid His hand upon me ; and I am to pay 
the penalty of my sin. It is just. — May 
His will be done in all things.' 

I answered nothing. 

He sighed; let fall his hand from my 
shoulder listlessly ; turned, and was moving 
to the door. I followed him and touched 
his arm : 

* You have not said good-bye to me, sir,' 
I said« 

I passed to in front of him. He raised a 
hand to either shoulder, feeling up my right 



Leicester. 801 

Bleeve, but not the other ; then bent his 
face forward towards minei mnrmnring : 

^. My eyes are a little weak, I too am a 
little weak — a little feeble* That is tauto- 
logical — eh ? « . • I did not say good-bye 
to you ? That was careless of me. You 
were in my thoughts — in the thoughts 
behind my thoughts, Bertram. — Good-bye, 
my boy. • • I have no fear for thee — ^in 
the end, child. Thou wilt do it in the end. 
Keep a brave heart. God is not so far 
from thee. • •' 

His lips moved after that, but I heard no 
Bound that came from them. Then felt the 
pressure of his hands moving me aside : 
caught the door-handle : turned and opened 
the door ; and he went out. 

I stood watching him.! Mr. Starkie was 
at the top of the stairs. .He offered Mr« 
Brooke his arm, who half-absently took it : 
then started, looked at Mr. Starkie, and 
smiled. They went down together slowly. 

As they reached the bottom step, I 
moved back into the room ; stood staring 



302 Jjeicester^ 

at the carpet for a moment : looked np : 
saw my frowning face and then whole bent 
body in the mirror ; and said to myself: 

* I do not understand yon, heart of mine. 
Are you selfish to your very inmost core of 
cores? That man is going to his death. 
You are not really moved by his pitiful 
longing for some one to achieve the object 
of his life, or by the deep pathos of his 
silent grief. That man is going to his 
death : and you have not even a tear for 
him ! Is there anything in all the earth, 
think you, that could do more than send 
your blood raging through its channels for 
some few instants ? Oh, uneasy, backward- 
glancing dreamer 1 " Words, words, words." 
What of real use are your dreams, even to 
you ? After him 1 after him for your life ! 
Ask his pardon* Promise him all that he 
asks. I am alone. — ^Ay, frown 1 Go closer. 
Look deep into your own eyes : look, till 
you can see your own black, selfish heart 
within. — I am not selfish ! Take back the 
lie into your teeth, accursed Doubt I What 



Leicester, 808 

is that man to me, that I should give him 
my life ? . . . Can you hear me, God ? I 
have no such duty towards him, I say. Not 
no I And the memory of childish tales shall 
not cozen me into a fool's belief. Away, 
away 1' 

Mr. Starkie went on to Brindisi next day, 
I told him that I would not leave Paris until 
I had heard decisive news of Mr. Brooke : I 
had still Jei5 left from my Je25 : and had 
scarcely spent anything, Mr. Brooke having 
insisted on paying all my expenses of outfit, 
etc. 

Mr. Starkie told me of a ' pension ' in 
the Avenue de Fontenoi. I went there on 
the same evening that Mr. Brooke went to 
the hospital. The last thing Mr. Starkie 
said to me (we were sitting in the court- 
yard of the hdtel : I was about to leave him 
for the * pension ') was that he had very 
little doubt but that Clarkson would agree 
to give up the expedition, but still, if he 
wished to go on, there was nothing left but 



504 Leicester. 

''to go on with him : in which case I should 
hear at once, either by letter or from Mr. 
Starkie himself. As for my expenses at 
Paris, those would, of course, be defrayed by 
Mr, Brooke ; but of this, and many other 
matters, more anon. 

It was late in the evening when I arrived 
at the Avenue de Fontenoi» I went straight 
up to bed : to sleep heavily, I felt ; and yet 
I dreamt of a man consumed in a jungle 
by a small tiger. A horrible dream. 

In the morning no one appeared for cafe 
au lait and petit pain in the salle-a-manger 
but Madame Bouff, her child, and myself. 
I learnt from her that there was a park 
quite close to us, the Pare Monceau. 

I went there at once. It is a pretty 
greenery. I found a sunlit, bubbling spring 
at the end of a pool in a (I thought) sham 
ruin. And so, first of all, sitting watching 
and playing with the stream : then sitting^ 
watching the passers and some horses being 
tried, I was happy enough for the time. 
The sense of it all being in an air and place 



Leicester. 805 



somewhere between dream and reality was 
perpetually with me and of me. There 
were water-jets of pierced hose playing to 
right and left on the fresh grass : cooings of 
pigeons : and the flappings of their wings as 
they took flight : small birds taking baths in 
the dust : all the morning smiling and soft, 
fresh-breathed. I thought of my first morn- 
ing in Regent's Park, and of others : and 
that by degrees led me to thinking of Rosy, 
— ^What was she doing now ? And Minnie 
— such a dear beast, but then ! 

Later in the day I went to inquire about 
Mr. Brooke. Nothing new. * The symp- 
toms of small-pox, you know, sir^ advance 
with order. This does not hurry itself for 
anyone. You must keep quiet.' — And so, 
day after day, I went, and it was always 
the same answer. This advances, this goes 
on advancing. 

I tried once to make myself unhappy by 
thinking about him. I could not. My 
sorrow for him was of itself hushed and not 
untender ; but I could not make it into a 

VOL. I. 20 



806 Leicester. 

disturbing gnat buzzing in my ears at all 
hours. After that one attempt, I let my 
thoughts wander on at pleasure, as I had 
always done before, and was contented ; for 
such unceasing misery, produceable, it 
seemed to me, by continued concentration 
of the mind on one subject, was not * true/ 
I instinctively shrank from it. No, it was 
not that I was hard-hearted (I had fooled 
myself with that idea long enough). It was 
simply that I had nothing more than regret 
for this man, and that my old, unrooted -out 
ideas had been doing their best to persuade 
me that therein lay a sin ! 

My old wandering spirit came back upon 
me in Paris quickly enough. I had nothing 
to interest me indoors. Perhaps there were 
few things that could have taken me out of 
myself then : I was living for my dreams 
so much. I saw so many things before 
me. 

So passed ten or twelve weary days, whose 
only memory to me is unrecorded weariness. 
I spent most of my time wandering about 



Leicester. 807 

Paris, reading, and talking with Starkie ; 
but that last was only as we went down 
together to the hospital each morning for 
news, and sometimes an honr or so in the 
evenings ; he having a good deal of business 
to do in one shape or another. 

On the, I think, thirteenth day (but all 
accurate record or memory of these days is 
gone) I lit upon the Louvre, and from that 
hour forward was in it continually. It gave 
me quiet. 

This quiet was broken into by the news of 
the nineteenth morning. Secondary fever 
had set in. For the first time, Starkie 
seemed to give up all hope. The effect on 
me was quite different. I could not realize 
the fact of Mr. Brooke being in the state I, 
I almost thought, knew he was in. I went 
into the Pare Monceau, and sat there in a 
sort of warm, gold dream of wilderment for 
some time, till, all at once, I caught myself 
starting up with the exclamation : 

* No, no I If I was right in then re- 
fusing, I am right in now having refused.' 

20—2 



308 Leicester. 

— And I was right. For what had I to do 
with it ? 

I spent the afternoon sculling on the river 
hut at Courbevoi. 

After dinner I went for a walk along the 
boulevards, softly singing or whistling to 
myself ; till, in a dim street by the opera, 
I woke up out of dreamy, sweet thoughts 
into the perception of something like a 
breath of fluttering music in me, now melt* 
ing, now languorous, now fierce, floating up 
into my brain and pulsing through me, from 
time to time, a longing and yearning to 
stretch out arms with a gurgling cry to 
something. And in this strange, half- 
ecstatic state I came home, threw ofl" my 
things, and got into bed as into a white, 
cool haven. 

In that night I had a strange and vivid 
dream. I stood below somewhere, and saw 
a lady I had seen once, in a carriage with a 
dead child, on a green-lit down by the sea* 
The carriage had just crossed a bridge, A 
river rolled down smoothly over golden 



Leicester. 309 

sands. A boy on the right shore stood watch- 
ing a ball that the np-cresting sea-waves 
kept lifting np to and back from him every 
moment. I rose, and crossed over the stone 
bridge : came to behind the carriage, and 
began climbing over it from the back. The 
lady tnmedy and, seeing me, pnt out her 
brown-gloved hand to me ; and then, when 
I would have caught and pressed it into 
my bosom, touched my chest with her 
finger-tips, the carriage moved onwards, the 
child wailed, I fell backwards and down : 
and awoke trembling and wet with trickling 
sweat. 

It was the next morning that, when we 
came together to the hospital, they told us 
that Mr. Brooke had died last night, at half- 
past ten, delirious. 

In a long moment Starkie turned away. I 
followed him. 

We went in silence along the pavement 
with the on-moving people, till I said to my- 
self half-aloud : 

* I cannot believe that it is so.' 



310 Leicester. 

* Nor I,' he said in the same way ; * nor 
I : scarcely. ... He was a good man/ 

Then I said : 

' It is a deep thought to think that his 
soul has gone out like a candle, and that 
that is the end of him/ 

Starkie answered nothing. 

* I wish,' I said, * you would tell me truly 
and from the bottom of your soul : do you 
believe that that is the end of him ?' 

In a little : 

* I believe it,' he said. * The energy 
that was in him has undergone some change. 
We call that change death. It is, I believe, 
the end of us.' 

* Do you think that, when that change 
comes to you^ you will end ? that there will 
be jQo more of you ?' 

* I do. Death looses that which grips 
the gathered threads of our individualities : 
the threads fall away, going to other invisi- 
ble work, just as the threads of the body 
which is left slowly fade into the earth and 
air, going for other visible work. What 



Leicester. 811 



death is, to use what seems to me its proper 
name, solution may be, I cannot of course 
pretend to guess; but our grandchildren 
may be able to, and their grandchildren, 
perhaps, to know. You asked me to tell 
you my belief: what I truly and from the 
bottom of my heart believe. That is my 
beUef.' 

* I thank you for it,' I said. ' For from 
to-day I purpose beginning my soul's life 
anew, and I might go very far, I think, 
before I met one who believed what you 
believe, and would tell it me as you have 
told it me. Will you let me ask you one 
more question ?' 

* Twenty, if you care to ask them.* 

* Have you not in you a feeling, a strange 
unaccountable, but nevertheless undeniable 
feeling, that you, you — ^your individuality, 
as you said, can not possibly be destroyed?* 

' You mean have I, what is called the 
Instinct of Immortality? — ^No : I have not, 
now. When I first began to think about 
these things, my mind was strongly pre- 



312 Leicester. 

posseBsed in favonr of immortality^ and con- 
sequently this instinct soon developed itself 
firom its passive miconsciousness into active 
consciousness, and I held fast to the idea 
of immortality when everything else, save 
belief in a Deity, had gone. It was not 
till after more than three years of thought- 
fulness and study, that I learnt that my 
desire for immortality was only a synonym 
for my selfishness, and, having learnt this, 
I began to see, too, the complete needless- 
ness, though as complete naturalness, of thai 
desire. I determined to devote myself to 
benefiting, as far as I could, my fellow men. 
Whether this was a result from, or parallel 
to, my loss of all belief in immortality, it 
would be difficult to say. At any rate, 
there are the two facts contemporaneous.' 

*And do you not believe in a Deity 
either ?' 

*I cannot answer you; for I do not 
know. I am content, seeing a world full 
of ignorance and woe, to strive to lessen 
however little of that ignorance, knowing 



Leicester. 818 

that thereby I shall lessen a corresponding 
amount of that woe. This seems to me 
the one undeniable duty of each of us : to 
make the earth better for our having been 
in it/ 

I answered nothing, for my thoughts were 
full. So we walked on together in silence 
till we came to the hotel door. Then, as 
he half-turning faced me, I held out my 
hand for his, and when it was in mine, 
squeezed it, looking into his eyes that looked 
into mine : and I said : 

* Thank you.' 

Then we passed to other matters; for 
what more was to be said or done as re- 
garded this ? * 

We bought Brooke's grave in P6re-la- 
Ghaise k perpetuite. Upon the tombstone 
a plain white marble cross was to be put, 
his name, the dates of his birth and death, 
and below, 

* Thy will be done/ 



CHAPTER III. 

On my way to London, I sketched out 
something like a plan of action for when I 
got there. The first thing to be done, I 
thought, was the mastering of Mr. Brooke's 
business affairs, all, I meant, that was con- 
nected with his property and money : the 
next thing, the editing of the Book. I 
had determined to take as much of the 
income of one year as would keep me in 
comfort while I was engaged upon my 
work for him. Starkie had given me a 
letter of introduction to Professor Strachan, 
who would assist me in the editing of the 
Book, or rather, who would be assisted by 
me. Doubtless, after the first few weeks, I 



Leicester. 815 

shonld be able to find time to set about the 
recovery of my books and clothes from 
Colchester. Also, to see Bosy. Also, to 
meditate as to what I shonld do when the 
time of my work for Mr. Brooke was 
over. 

I had a certain amount of trouble about 
the business affairs, despite both the trouble 
which Starkie had already taken to save me 
from as much of it as possible, and the 
courtesy, not to say kindness, of Mr. 
Brooke's lawyers. Howbeit, at the end of 
some ten days, I found that it was now 
time to present the letter of introduction to 
Professor Strachan. 

He received me with the utmost kind- 
ness. I had, at a dinner at Mr. Brooke's, 
seen but not spoken to him, and so he was 
not altogether a stranger to me : besides 
which, I had heard a good deal about him 
from Starkie on our last night together, 
and he, I could see, was not unacquainted 
with me. He arranged to come to Dun- 
raven Place the next morning, and we 



316 Leicester. 

would then proceed to examine the work 
that was before as. 

After we had talked a little on general 
subjects, he asked me to go up with him 
and have some tea with Mrs. Strachan in 
the drawing-room. Up, then, we went and 
into the drawing-room where were three 
womenkind, one middle-aged and two young, 
to whom I was presented : Mrs. and the two 
Miss Strachans. Mrs. Strachan struck me 
as an ordinary good-looking middle-aged 
female, and her two daughters as two 
ordinary pretty young females, clothed with 
decorous fashionableness and speaking plati- 
tudes of the most irreproachable character: 
or shortly, as three ladies. And, this 
seeming so, it followed that not even a 
certain demureness in Miss Connie's face 
and manner not unsuggestive of a certain 
experience in the art of flirting, and added 
to what I subsequently was assured was a 
* grave sweetness ' in Miss Isabel, were 
enough to entice me out of my shell. It 
was far more amusing, as it seemed to me. 



Leicester. 817 

to sit and listen to their irreproachable 
platitudes, which, it was not hard to see, 
they took for delightful if not brilliant con- 
versation, than to enter into the splashing 
shallows myself, for, if I had been a talker, 
I must inevitably have missed over half of 
the nature-strokes which as a listener I 
caught. The amusement of hearing Mrs. 
Strachan and her daughters talk about 
' Culture,' while the Professor sat drinking 
his tea and occasionally throwing in a gibe, 
which they either did not hear or quite 
misunderstand, seemed to give me some- 
thing of an insight into the meaning of the 
word Comedy. Finally, towards the end 
of an almost irrepressible fit of merriment, 
I rose and said good-bye to them, and went 
away down the stairs and out into the 
street hot and a little exhausted. If I had 
stayed much longer, I thought, I must have 
shown some sign that perhaps might have 
offended them, and that would have been to- 
be-regretted. And then I was led to think 
of my last society experiences of three, it 



818 Leicester. 



seemed years, but it was only weeks ago, 
when I came to Dunraven Place. It then 
occurred to me to write to Mother McCarthy 
about my things at Colchester. 

Accordingly I wrote : and took out my 
letter and posted it ; and went for a walk 
into the Park, Hyde Park, till seven, when 
it was time for my supper. And after 
supper came a reading of * Esmond/ 
highest Thackerayean art, in the low, red- 
leathered armchair under the green-shaded 
lamp ; till eleven, dumb-bells, bed and sleep. 

The next morning Professor Strachan 
and I began our work.* 

My Journal takes out a new lease on 
that evening. (It seems to have given me 
pleasure, though no great pleasure I think, 
to record events or conversations, or to 
deliver some few of my impressions of 
present people and things in that way. 
Perhaps there was some small necessity 
upon me to write these things. I cannot 
say.) 



Leicester. 819 



Here is from a week later : 

' We are often almost in despair over the 
manuscripts. In the first place the writing 
is fearful. He seems to have thought it 
quite enough to write the first three or 
four letters of a word, for the rest is nearly 
always comprised in a twirl. Now this is 
aggravating to the son of man. Then, the 
Journal is broken off by chance notes, and 
these notes have references to other note- 
books, and so on. I never was made for 
editing other people's books. I lack pa- 
tience : and the worst of it is, that I don't 
believe that anyone can do anything worth 
calling thing without patience. The Pro- 
fessor is Job and Griselda put into one. 

'After a week's hard work we have 
arranged the stuff, I should say materials 
or notes, I suppose, into something like 
chronological order having separated the 
whole mass into three almost equal parts : to 
wit, The Travels in Palestine and parts of 
Arabia, The Expedition from South Africa 
upwardSj and the last Expedition to lujiji. 



320 Leicester. 

^ A sheet was pasted onto the inside of 
the cover of the first note-book of the 
^^ Journal through Palestine and parts of 
Arabia," which we are going, we think, to 
use as an introduction to the two first ex- 
peditions. It is as follows : 

* '* This Journal through Palestine and 
parts of Arabia was undertaken by me in 
18 — , with a view to helping by details, 
principally geographical, my dear friend the 
Bev. Charles Blake, in the compilation of 
his proposed History of the Origins of 
Christianity. On returning home, however, 
in , I learnt that he had been com- 
pelled to abandon his scheme for certain 
most satisfactory reasons. I therefore laid 
aside my MS., hoping that events might 
some day make it possible for him to 
utilize it as he had originally intended. 
With that hope I seal it up now. — In case 
of my death, this packet is to be given to 

him unopened." 

'''February 15th, 18— . 

* '* My Journal through parte of Arabia 



Leicester. 321 



was connected with the same scheme; 
Blake proposing to draw a parallel between 
the life of the Saviour and that of Mahomet, 
as illustrating — " [Last two words erased.] 

' It seems in some way a little strange to 
be sitting here copying out these words of 
a dead man. It would perhaps seem really 
strange if I realized that he was dead. Is I 
he dead'} It seems rather as if he had 
gone a journey into a far land, and now 
stays there. The thought is so. I wonder 
if I shall ever read this after many years 
to come, and what shall I think of it 
then? 

' I think I should like to go to Palestine 
some day. Nazareth must be a very beautiful 
place from what he says of it, and what so 
soft and sweet as to wander in that land of 

softness and sweetness, thinking of ' 

[Cetera desunU] 

A little lower : 

' That sheet may originally have been 

VOL. I. 21 



322 Leicester. 

pasted on the outside of the packet; at 

any rate the packet has been broken open ; 

for the note-books are all mingled with 

^t^t^i^cJU those of the other two journies in the 

/J drawer/ etc., etc. 

Another entry : 

' Books and things from Colchester. My 
Euperti's Juvenal missing, also my Greek 
Lex., also several note-books. A distinct 
nuisance. I have divided my day oflF as 
follows— Breakfast, 8.30 : Italian, 9 to 10 : 
The Book with Strachan, 10 to 1 : Walk, 
2 to 5 : Greek, 5 to 7 : (Supper) : Latin, 
8 to 10 : English, 10 to 11. I find it is 
the only way to get any real work done. 
Now and then I go with the Strachans to 
the theatre, or spend afternoons or evenings 
out at people's houses. Mrs. Strachan 
does her best to drag me into 1 what she 
calls *' society," by introducing .'me .to her 
women friends (especially th-fose having 
daughters), who send me invita\,tion cards, 
and the rest of it. I believe ) she would 



Leicester. 823 



like to see me married, or at any rate en* 
gaged, to some young woman or other. 
She seems to look upon me as lawful prey 
in the matter of endurance of female 
agacerie. Sometimes I grow mischievous, 
and talk " atheism " to the young women 
she puts me with, or who are put with me, 
or whatever the real case may be. It is 
sufficiently amusing. I had great sport 
with Miss Isabel's " grave sweetness " last 
Wednesday afternoon in this way. (Miss 
Isabel would marry me, " atheism " and 
all, I think, if I, after all proper formalities, 
asked her to : which is a tribute to my 
personal charms and her belief in my 
personal possessions that I fully appreciate.) 
Miss Connie, however, resolutely refuses to 
be drawn into discussion of anything deeper 
than flirting, and I respect her for it. 
She is a frank little sensualist. Take it 
all in iJl, the womenkind I have so far met 
with have been of a most God-forsaken 
sort. There is not one that has seemed to 
me worth more than a mild sort of feeling 

21—2 



324 Leicester. 

that might by some be denominated ** lust/' 
The idea of having to live with one of these 
things for yonr natural life, short though it 
is ! But the idea is happily out of the 
question; for where could you find one 
that would live with you without being your 
wife, with bell, book, ring, and the rest of 
it ? And I simply would not, could not, 
go through the foolery of the marriage 
service for any woman (or so it I think) 
alive. The more I think of Christianity 
as compared with humanity — I mean, that 
Christianity is the only divinity and all 
other than Christians are either damned or 
at the best deluded, the more I revolt 
against it as an accursed libel on God, if 
He is, and His justice/ 

About three weeks later : 

' The first part of our work was finished 
to-day. I must say I hope the rest may 
be a little more interesting. And, indeed, 
it has at times seemed, perhaps illogieally, 



Leicester. 325 

that this Journal through Palestine and 
parts of Arabia has been' as it were extra 
work ; at any rate, it has at times made me 
feel a little aggrieved. Strachan doesn't 
care for it either. I told him that Mr. 
Starkie had said nothing to me about it, nor 
yet of Blake's proposed History in connection 
with which Brooke's journey appeared to 
have been taken. He said that he had 
known of it through Glarkson, but had 
thought that the MS. had been destroyed, 
he did not quite know why. 

' We should have liked not to have sup- 
pressed or added a single word of it, for 
obvious reasons ; but this was really quite 
impossible. At times we came upon whole 
pages of, what I dare say were abbreviations, 
but which were to us, absolutely meaning- 
less signs : then there were long extempo- 
rary prayers, coupled with the most child- 
like virulent attacks on different scientific 
men of the day and Christians whose con- 
ceptions of Christianity were different to 
Brooke's own. Now all this was neither 



326 Leicester. 



beautiful nor to the point, and, besides, we 
felt sure that he himself would never have 
wished them to see the light, at any rate, 
in their present form. Accordingly we 
eliminated certain passages that seemed to 
us to oflFend : and were, I think, quite justi- 
fied in so doing ; for to whom could they 
do good ? Certainly not to the future 
investigator of the origins of Christianity : 
certainly not to the people who would read 
this book : certainly not to the memory of 
Mr. Brooke. None the less, I for my part 
felt that it was very delicate work touching 
anything, and so I think did Strachan. 
However, it's done now, and the best we 
could do it : so what's the good of 
troubling ?' 

^ It is astonishing how carelessly he put 
his materials together, considering that the 
object in view was one apparently so dear 
to him. I had to copy it nearly all out. 
The only interesting part was where he 
debated upon the sincerity of Mahomet. 



Leicester. 327 

This we left intact in the form of an 
excursus/ 

The next day has : 

* Went to Maitland Street this afternoon^ 
after a good boring at Mrs. Cunningham's. 
Upon my soul (fa^on de parler, that, of 
course) I don't think I will ever enter a 
drawing-room again. The sickening foolery 
we all talked ! And yet : [A pause ex- 
pressed on continuing by half a row of dots.] 
. . . And yet, how, if I do not go out into 
the world and talk with people therein, am 
I ever likely to meet the woman I am to 
love, nay love already in my heart ? — ** 
dear woman with soft eyes, standing wait- 
ing and looking for me while in my light 
boat on that, the night of my life, I pass 
from the Shadowiness into the silver-purled 
moon -track ; pass on and on to the grass 
mingled with the gently-moving wave in 
which the roses dip. I am there now, and 
know not of you : see, breathe, only this 
terrestrial beauty. I step from the boat into 



330 Leicester. 



* '' Oh/' I said. 

* *' Miss Martin's a friend of Miss 
'Owlit's, sir. But I don't know anything 
about her 'istory — ^nothing about her 'istory, 
sir." 

' *' Oh," I said. And then : 
* " You will give her that when she 
comes in, Mrs. Smith ?" 

' " Yes, sir, I'll be sure I will, sir." 

* ** Thank you," I said. " Good-even- 
mg. 

* ** Good-evening, sir. I'll be sure to 
give it her." 

' The old she-devil I' 
The next entry is five days later : 
^ Bosy, not seeing fit to write to me as I 
asked her (I don't quite know what I ex- 
pected her to write), I went to No. 3 again 
yesterday. She had just gone out — ^I was 
a little angered (having a most ridiculous 
idea that she had done it on purpose): 
scrawled her another note, why hadn't she 
written to me ? If she would only tell me 
some fixed hour, I would be happy to come 



Leicester. 331 

and see her, etc. : gave it to Mrs. Smith, as 
servile as usual : and then went for a long 
walk. — Half round Regent's Park, up 
Primrose Hill once more, and then back to 
Dunraven Place. It was all strangely dim 
to me, this walk over the old land. (This 
was yesterday.) 

' I found a letter from Bosy waiting me 
after this afternoon's walk. 

< ^' Deab Mb. Leicester, 

'* I was very happy to see you 
had not forgotten me. 

'* I was very sorry that I was out when 
you called on me the two times. I hope 
you are quite well, and have enjoyed your- 
self in Paris. 

''Minnie is quite well, and I am quite 
well. 

" And I have not forgotten the Swallow 
Song." 

" Yours truly, 
" Rosy Howlet. 



330 Leicester. 

' '' Oh," I said. 

' ** Miss Martin's a friend of Miss 
'Owlit's, sir. But I don't know anything 
about her 'istory — nothing about her 'istory, 
sir." 

' '* Oh," I said. And then : 

* ** You will give her that when she 
comes in, Mrs. Smith ?" 

* " Yes, sir, I'll be sure I wiU, sir." 

' " Thank you," I said. " Good-even- 
mg. 

' " Good-evening, sir. Ill be sure to 
give it her." 

' The old she-devil I' 

The next entry is five days later : 

' Bosy, not seeing fit to write to me as I 
asked her (I don't quite know what I ex- 
pected her to write), I went to No. 3 again 
yesterday. She had just gone out — ^I was 
a little angered (having a most ridiculous 
idea that she had done it on purpose): 
scrawled her another note, why hadn't she 
written to me ? If she would only tell me 
some fixed hour, I would be happy to come 



Leicester. 331 

and see her, etc. : gave it to Mrs. Smith, as 
servile as nsnal : and then went for a long 
walk. — Half round Eegent's Park, up 
Primrose Hill once more, and then back to 
Dunraven Place. It was all strangely dim 
to me, this walk over the old land. (This 
was yesterday.) 

' I found a letter from Bosy waiting me 
after this afternoon's walk. 

< '^ Deab Mb. Leicester, 

** I was very happy to see you 
had not forgotten me. 

** I was very sorry that I was out when 
you called on me the two times. I hope 
you are quite well, and have enjoyed your- 
self in Paris. 

'^ Minnie is quite well, and I am quite 
well. 

" And I have not forgotten the Swallow 
Song.'' 

" Yours truly, 

" KOSY HOWLET. 



332 Leicester. 



^* P.S. — I shall be in to-morrow night 
early by eight. If you care to go a walk 
with me then, I shall be very happy to go 
a walk with you. I hope you have not 
forgotten Minnie. 

"Yours truly, 
** Rosy Howlet. 
" (Rosebud.)" ' 

* The work is much easier now, though 
not particularly interesting. Brooke, I 
must say, seems to have taken a good deal 
more pains over his own particular mania 
than over his friend's. Great parts of this 
second Journal are continuous narrative 
that (thank God) require nothing on our 
part. Strachan thinks my old friends 
Baxter, Innes, and Co., will be the best 
publishers to send it to when it's done. 
Here is a copy of my preface. — ^But I can't 
trouble to do it now. I only said that all* 
the credit of the editing of the Book was 
due to Strachan, that I had only, etc., 



Leicester. 838 

etc., etc. There was nothing else to be 
said. 

' He calculates finishing it by abont the 
middle of July. destiny 1' 



END OP VOL. I. 



LEICESTEE 



;^n iAvdohioqxicfhji 



BT 

FRANCIS WILLIAM L. ADAMS 



* A rlmixur lo passo 
Che non laado giammal persona Tiva 
Damte 



IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. II 



LONDON 

GEOEGE REDWAY 

YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN 

1885 



CONTENTS OF VOL. II. 







TTT — continued. 






CHJLPTEB 

IV. 


- 


IV. 


- 


PACK 

1 


L 


. 


... 




18 


11. 


. 


- 




41 


Ill 


. 


- 




77 


IV. 


- 


- 




114 


V. 




V. 




144 


I. 


. 


... 


. 


173 


11. 


. 


. 


- 


205 


III. 


. 


• . « 


- 


223 


IV. 


. 


. . - 


- 


244 



LEICESTER. 

m. — continued^ 

CHAPTER IV. 

The next day after lunch, I went for a walk 
to Hampstead, and wandered abont there, 
my thoughts alternating between the beau- 
tiful soft nature about me and the past days 
of my first London weeks, till half-past 
six. Then I remembered that Bosy would 
be waiting for me at eight. It used to take 
me something under an hour to get from 
Maitland Street to Hampstead. It was 
now half-past six. What to do with myself 
for an hour ? — ^from seven to eight, that 
was. Then my thoughts turned oflf in 
memory : memory of the many times I 
VOL. II. 22 



2 Leicester. 

had come marching along this very pave- 
ment in those first London days whose 
second half was an age of weariness and 
woe. Here was the very comer at which 
I stood that dreary day. Was it all a 
dream ? ^ I stand still here to-day/ I said 
to myself, * as I stood still here that day, 
and look at the brown cracked concrete of 
the low wall and the black sooty rails that 
top it. The windows are lampless too, as 
they were when I first stood still here. 
Will the left one light up suddenly too as 
it did then ? No, Lampless yet. Who 
lives here ? God knows ! And yet, foolish 
though it be, will not the thought occur 
again : ' Is it nothing to you, all ye who pass 
by, my weariness and my woe V I put my 
hand on the nearer cemented gate-post, 
brown and cracked like the low wall, and 
think of the figure that leant against it in 
that dreary rain of half-darkness when my 
body seemed all bloodless, and the girl 
hurried by me with her huddled-up dress 
and umbrella spread over her. I see her 



Leicester, 3 

now. Her quick glance, and that hurry 

by : the devil that rose in me 

The door above opened and an old lady 
came out and, looking at me through the 
spectacles on her elevated nose, asked : 

* Do you want anything, young man T 
I took off my hat and held it off. 

* Nothing,' I said gravely, * thank you. 
I hope my stopping a moment to examine 
your gate-post has not troubled you, 
madame ? I see that the cement is cracked 
and peeling off- Now I am the patentee of 
a cement which is warranted to ' 

' No,' she said, looking at me over the 
spectacles of her depressed nose, ^ I don't 
want any of your cement, thank you. 
Good-day.' 

And was in and viewing me suspiciously 
through the glass^ door-panel of the closed 
door. If I had not been afraid of disturb- 
ing her feelings, I should have given a 
shout. As it was, I repressed the shout, 
and marched off quickly, laughing to my- 
self. 

22—2 



Leicester. 



It was a little past seven when I reached 
the canal bridge at the bottom of Maida 
Yale. I stayed a little there> looking at the 
flowers, finally buying a rose, and carrying 
it oflf with me. This I took to No. 3, and 
inquired of Mrs. Smith if Miss Howlet was 
in ? She wasn't : as I expected. I left 
the rose, and went for a prowl about the 
streets. 

All at once I found myself looking at 
the Marble Arch clock, by which it was five 
minutes past eight. Away I went up the 
Edgware Boad, and was marching along at 
full speed, a little past Praed Street on the 
right side, when, passing before a gas- 
fiaming fruiterer's, my eye took in a girl's 
form, and by the time I had gone five or 
six yards my heart was up in my throat at 
the sudden thought of — Rosy t I turned 
back at once. We met face to face, she 
smiling up into mine, I looking with an odd 
half-graveness into hers. 

' Well,' she said, * you were in a 
hurry I' 



Leicester. 5 

We were walking on together, I taking 
one stride to her two. It seemed to me 
odd in someway, this meeting. We had 
not shaken hands. I did not know what 
to say. We walked on together for a little 
in silence. Then I said : 

* I am very sorry. You took me so by 
surprise. We have not shaken hands yet. 
And I hope you are well. Will you shake 
hands now T 

I stopped : and our right hands met, 
while my left held my hat off, and my eyes 
looked into hers. There was light upon it, 
not much light, from a parallel shop- 
window. The people passed on about us. 
There was no doubt that the child's face 
was very — ^pretty. We walked on again, 
I taking one stride to her two, as before. 
I eaid : 

*I am very glad to see you. And I 
hope you are well. If you have taken 
walks, as you told me you would, then I 
am sure you are better than you were when 
I left you.' And began to think about the 



Leicester. 



words of Bayne's letter (where she stood 
upright in the boat with head bared and 
revelled in the light and the air and the all 
of that new glory over everything) in con- 
nection with my bare head before this child's 
face. The memory spoilt it. Rosy had 
said something which I had not heard. 

We talked of general things that did not 
interest me or, I think, her much ; till we 
came to the comer of Maitland Street. 
Then ensued questions and explanations, 
and, in about five minutes, Eosy returned 
from her visit to No. 3, full of the beautiful 
rose I had given her. 

* Beautiful rose ?' I said. * . . . How 
do you know I gave it you ?' 

* Because,' she answered, — * who else 
wovldV 

She was ready for • the walk now. We 
set off at once, in a half-mechanical way 
Park-wards, beginning to talk like two 
children. 

All at once : 

' Here's your locket !' she said, taking it 



Leicester, 7 

from inside her coat, and holding it out, 
little and ronnd and silver. 

* Nay, yours :' I said. ' Not mine/ 

* You gave it me, though.' 

^ I did. That made it yours.' 

' But it w(is yours ; before that, or how 

could you have given it me ?' 

I acquiesced, with the reflection that 

Adam must have had some trouble to get 

an authentic account of the eatmg of a 

certain historical apple. 

* What are you laughing at V said 
Rosy. 

* Have you forgotten the Swallow 
Song r 

* Forgotten it ? My gracious, no ! 

* " She comes, she comes, the swallow, 
bringing beautiful hours, 
beautiful seasons. 
White on her " 

what are you laughing at V 

It was no wonder she asked. Peal after 
peal of laughter, quenchless, re-echoing, 
came from me. The more I tried to stop it, 



8 Leicester. 

the more it came. At last I stood still, 
exhausted, with my hands on my hips. But 
a glimpse of her face was enough to generate 
a fit of laughter as violent as the first. We 
went on together somehow or other, I still 
shaking with this second fit, she solemn to 
degree. All at once it struck me that she 
was a little afraid I was mad. I tried to 
assure her that there was nothing the matter 
with me but — ^laughter I 

Well, I settled down at last : and then 
came the task of appeasing Bosy's outraged 
sense of dignity. I was, of course, really 
sorry to have laughed in this way. I ex- 
plained that what had made me begin was 
the way she scampered over the Swallow 
Song . • . and so on. 

Her outraged sense of dignity took a great 
deal of appeasing, but I managed it in the 
end. Nay, I pleaded so hard, that I obtained 
from her a repetition of the Swallow Song, 
repeated as we sat on that seat not far from 
the top, which I knew so well, so well, and 
perhaps she remembered. 



Leicester. 9 



We parted at the door of No. 3 at about 
eleven. 

As I marched away down the Edgware 
Road, I thought of the evening I had spent 
with her, and of her grave bow of the head 
as I went back from her at the door with my 
hat down in my hand ; but, going across the 
Park, other thoughts came to me, and I had 
lost sight of the evening I had spent with 
her when I reached home. 

Here the Journal begins again : 
' Oh, Claire, Claire, that we should have 
met here in the time of eternity, and so 
parted ! Shall I ever forget the depth and 
sorrow of the eyes that were for that short 
hour as the air of my world ? Claire, 
Claire. Oh, it is a vile devil's earth, and 
good is only in the slave. To have held 
thee in my arms, and, with my eyes in thine, 
to have kissed thee once, and died. Death 
were sweet so. — But it is useless to think. 
This city is a market where souls are pledged 
for bodies, and bodies for souls, and wealth 



10 Leicester. 



buys all. I will go oat from it. It is use- 
less to think. 

* There is a poor devil outside playing 
furiously on a comet, and an Italian girl 
yaaing to her native concertina. A sweet 
harmony! Not unlike my disgust. Jam 
satis ! Nay, jam nimium I I am a damn- 
able idiot !' 

It was a few days after this that Rosy 
and I went our second evening walk to- 
gether. There is no allusion to it in the 
Journal, and as I was doriag most of it in 
more or less of a half-dreamy, half-abstracted 
state, I cannot remember much of what we 
said. That walk was not what might be 
called a success. We went up to the top 
of Primrose Hill again, and I snuffed in the 
breeze and was somewhat revived ; but (it 
had been raining heavily earlier in the day) 
that made me appreciate how stickily muddy 
it was going down, and I was forthwith 
driven into a state of utter saplessness and 
disgust. Bosy mocked at me as well as she 



Leicester. 11 

could, but I took no heed. Finally she 
declared she wouldn't walk with me any 
more. (This was half-way down the St. 
John's Wood Boad.) I acquiesced. We 
stood still, I looking in front of me at 
nothing in particular, not thinking of offer- 
ing my hand. Then she was tamed and 
walking away. I did not look at her. 
When she had got some twenty yards, I 
looked at her with a comical smile : and 
sighed: and hit my iron-tipped stick- end 
straight on the way: and said a little 
wearily, ' Oh dear !' and went with large 
strides after her. 

I caught her up in a little, and we 
walked on together in silence ; till I ob- 
served : 

* I'm sorry I was rude — ^if I was rude.* 

* Then you were rude then 1' said Kosy. 

* Eudeness implies deliberation,' I said. 
' My definition of sin is : the deliberately 
doing anything that may harm anyone else. 
Thus, it is sin to buy a pistol, intending to 
kill, and then absolutely killing, a man : or. 



1 2 Leicester. 



to ruin your body by excess, intending 
to beget, and then absolutely begetting, 
children/ 

* You talk great stuff,' said Kosy. 

* My dear child,' I answered, * I intended 
you to apply my definition of sin to the 
point at issue, my rudeness or unrudeness. 
But this, like so many good intentions, has 
gone to the artificial protection of infernal 
causeways.' 

Rosy vouchsafed no reply. 
I proceeded : 

* Well, be that as it may, considering the 
inability of the feminine intellect to com- 
prehend anything of subtle in the matter 
of metaphysical psychology, or anything 
else you like, I shall proceed to admit that 
I was rude : and apologize accordingly.' 

*I never asked you to apologize,' said 
Eosy. 

* I never said that you did, my dear — 
well, something or other.* 

* You're very aggravating to-night. 
That's what you are/ 



Leicester, 13 

^ Oh, Polyphemus and Abracadabra, did 
you ever hear such a Kbel as that ?' 

Eosy began to hum a tune shortly and 
defiantly. 

After a little I said gravely : 

' Lady, it seemeth unto mine uncultured 
ear that thou warblest the melody of which 
men say the venerable vaccine one rendered 
up the ghost. Now -' 

* You're very cruel 1' suddenly sobbed 
Rosy. * And I hate you. Why do you 
go on at me like that ? . . .' (The rest 
inarticulate.) 

* God bless my soul !' said I, standing 

still. ' If ' And I proceeded in a 

brotherly way to comfort her. 

And so I at last got her in a rather 
limp state to No. 3, where we said a 
final good-night after I had promised to 
write and tell her when I could get time to 
go for another walk. 

If it had not been for my recalling 
friend Horace to the effect that Dulce est 
desipere in loco, I should have, I think, 



14 Leicester. 

been in a most disconsolate humour going 
home. As it was, I could not help laugh- 
ing at the memory of our little squabble. 

The next entry in the Journal is a record 
of my having seen, or thought I had seen, 
at a theatre the girl of the nuts, she who 
struck me so on the night of my interview 
with Colonel James. (She was playing a 
second part in a ^ realistic drama,' and not 
playing it badly, it seemed to me.) 

^ I was with the Strachans in a box 
made for two people to see comfortably in, 
and three others to be as miserable as they 
disliked. I asked the Professor, when we 
two went out for a stroll in the passages 
during an entr'acte, if he had seen her 
before, and he said that he had not. 

* I should like to know her. She might 
marry me perhaps, and then I should be 
properly miserable for the rest of my life, 
if I didn't murder her or she me before the 
honeymoon was over. Well, the original 
expression holds all right, even then. I 
wouldn't much mind her murdering me, I 



Leicester. 1 5 

think, if I was only Bure she'd be hanged 
afterwards. I have thoughts of proposing 
to Connie. She is a sweet little cocotte, 
only wanting development. But it would 
be better fun to marry Isabel, and see 
what could be done in the way of ruffling 
her " grave sweetness " a little. — ^I'll stop 
here.' 

My feeling towards the book was, at the 
end, nothing short of positive loathing. 
Strachan I think perceived this ; for he 
did all he could to lighten my share of 
the work. And I accepted his doing so 
without remark. I remember his asking 
me one morning if I hadn't been a little 
out of my sorts of late, and my answering, 
with all solemnity, that my bowels were 
not as they used to be, and that I feared I 
had trichinosis. Pork, especially in the 
form of sausages, was a favourite dish of 
mine. (I never eat pork and particularly 
loathe sausages.) I don't know what 
he thought of my answer. He said 
nothing. 



16 Leicester. 

Late on in June is the next entry in the 
Journal : 

' Last night. — 

' Something making me come back 
quickly from the comer of the street, I 
found that she had not opened the door 
with her key yet : or even taken the key 
out of her pocket ; but was standing 
watching me seriously. I took off my 
hat, and stepped close to her with it 
in my hand. The moon was shining 
clear. 

^ Neither of us spoke. We looked into 
one another's eyes. 

* At last : 

* ** What made you such a serious little 
rosebud to-night ?" I said. 

* She sighed softly : 

* *^ . . I don't know." 
' '' Good-night, Rosy." 

' " Good-night." 

* *' Good-night!" turning, I repeated to 



Leicester^ 17 

myself, and put on my hat, and strode 
away. 

^ Bound the comer, and I drew a breath 
of relief. — That was temptation. 

* I mil not see that child again/ 



VOL. u. 28 



IV. 

CHAPTER I. 

It was four days after this, a Wednesday 
as I see, that I awoke at about half-past 
eight in the morning and found that there 
was a letter with my cup of tea. After 
a while I summoned up sufficient energy 
to pull the letter somehow from the table 
to onto the bed, and then must have fallen 
o£f into a doze again ; for I remember that 
the writing of the envelope that must have 
been just under my half-closed eyes, was 
wound with some other writing in and out 
of a fantastic sort of dream-space from 
which I suddenly started, with the recogni- 
tion that the letter was Eayne's. 

With all my soul in my eyes, I stared 



Leicester. 19 

at it. A large white glaring envelope 
with 

' B. Leicester, Esq., 

Colchester School^ 

Colchester/ 

in Bayne's hand, in the middle, the last 
three words lined through, and below in a 
thin scrawly hand : 

* 5, Dunraven Placcj 
Piccadillyj 

London.' 

These details realized, I calmly took the 
envelope, ripped it up at the back, pro- 
duced the thick white folded double sheet 
inside, and opened it. This is something 
like what I read : 

• 22, Balmoral Street, W. 

* My dear Bertram, 

*We are in London for a short 
time — three or four weeks, before going 
north to spend the summer at Kirkory, my 

23—2 



20 Leicester. 

husband's family seat, or I should say 
home. I have wondered a little at hearing 
nothing from you. You are, at the least, 
two letters in my debt. I do not even 
know where you are, and address this at 
random. I need not say, my dear Ber- 
tram, how pleased I should be to see yon 
again ; but I am afraid you have quite for- 
gotten me. Why it is — how long is it, 
since you last wrote to me ? I last heard 
from you at Montenotte in the autumn of 
— ! How long ago is that ? You ought 
to be ashamed to think ! 

^ But here is time and space and patience 
(yours) all exhausted. I must end, as usual, 
in a hurry. Write to me and tell me what 
you are doing. You know that, if for no 
other reason than because you were loved 
by what I loved best in the world, you are 
and always must be dear to me : and so let 
me write myself down as being what, I 
trust, I always shall be, 

* Your friend, 

* Rayne Gwatkin.' 



Leicester. 21 

I lay still for a time and thought about 
what I had read, and then re-read it, and 
thought of the past that concerned all this 
strange present, and of my whole life. And 
at last got up and went to my small polished- 
oak box (a small box in which I kept cer- 
tain things that were, or had once seemed, 
precious to me), and, having opened it, found 
a letter, which began : 

' Mt dear Bebtbam, 

* It is a wet and tempestuous after- 
noon, and therefore I consider it a fitting 
occasion to .answer your long and with 
difficulty decipherable epistle/ 

Through this letter I glanced, till I 
came to words that stopped my glancing 
and steadied it : 

' . • • Eather a tempest going on out- 
side, and so I am going to try to dodge my 
dear old daddy and Sir James, and get out 
my boat and enjoy it. — ^By-the-bye, I had 
forgotten to tell you that an old friend of 



22 Leicester. 



ours, Sir James Gwatkin, has been staying 
with ns this last week. He is a most 
amusing mondain en villegiature, with a 
marvellous French and Italian accent, and 
altogether a very amusing companion to the 
father, and myself at times. He knows 
what seems to me a great deal about « . .' 

And I folded up the letter and put it 
into the box, and re-locked the box, and 
went back to bed : and lay thinking for 
another half-hour, when I got up and 
dressed. 

At breakfast I reconsidered the matter : 

The news amounted to this : Rayne had 
married the amusing mondain en villegia- 
ture, and was here, in London, for a short 
time — ^three weeks or so, before going north 
to spend the summer at Earkory, her hus- 
band's family seat or home. Where was 
Mr. Cholmeley ? 

I started : 

' That could not be. . . . And yet ' 



Leicester. 23 



I took ont her letter and considered it. 
' ** You know that — ^if for no other reason 
than because you were loved by what I hved 

best " Nay, that may be nothing: or 

only mean that she loves her husband best. 
And there is no black edge on this white 
sheet, " By what I loved best in the world, 
you are and always must be dear to me : 
and so let me write myself down as being " ' 
(I hurried) ^ ^^ what I trust I always shall 
be, your friend, Rayne Gwatkin." — It is 
puzzling r 

All at once I exclaimed : 

' She oughtn't to have married that 
man!' 

* . . . Why V said the faint voice of the 
air and the room. I answered to myself : 
* I wish she hadn't J 

* . . . Why V said the same faint voice. 
I frowningly considered a few moments, and 
then rose, a little viciously. Some of the 
viciousness was expended in the sharp 
putting of my chair directly in front of my 
plate : the rest in my casting myself into 



24 Leicester. 

the arm-chair in the window, and, with my 
hands at my mouth, scraping my lower lip 
with my upper teeth. My eyes were half- 
filled with tears as I looked out of the 
window. My hand fell on to the chair- 
arm, and some of the water in my eyes 
welled out. 

Then: 

^ What is the matter with me ?' I said to 
myself ; and, after a pause : ' I don't know. 
I wish I knew what was the matter with 
me. Is there anything, then, in the whole 
world would make me happy? I don't 
know. I don't think so. I'm just weary 
of it all ! wretchedness of disbelief in 
everything I What of that new soul's life 
of mine, produced before Starkie, and be- 
lieved in then! OmyGodl what a miserable 
devil I am ! What have I done ? What 
shall I do ? What do I believe in ? What 
do I doubt about ? Everything : even 
doubt.' — I let my thoughts rest for a 
moment. 

Then: 



/ 



Leicester. 25 

* If I only knew something 1 If I only 
hved something ! Oh, is there not a woman 
in the whole wide world who would take me 
as I am, and help me to be what I want to 
be ? A woman to save me ? Oh, God, 
God, God, God, I would I had never been 
bom ! — ^Nay, is it not strange that, in an 
hour of weakness like this, the only thing 
I cry out to for help is what I have always 
thought I despised as being itself incarnate 
weakness — woman t I don't know what's 
the matter with me. I'm not myself. 
Virtue is gone out of me. This must be a 
passing humour. I shall be strong again, 
as I used to be. Or was it that I did not 
know my weakness ? . . • I don't know.' 
A complete sense of loneliness and purpose- 
lessness seemed suddenly to grow like a 
great grey-cut chasm in me. I could 
struggle no more to find out what was the . 
matter with me. I turned and let the cur- / 
rent take me where it would. 

From that depth of weariness I raised 
myself a little to take up a book off the 



26 Leicester. 



table beside me and read it. It was no 
good staying stretched on the bottom of 
that dark submarinity in that way. Better 
kill myself at once, and that most certainly 
I would not do. . . . Why not ? I was 
afraid of death ? I didn't know. I had 
not thought about it. I would not think 
about it. A piano-organ was playing out- 
side. I opened the book, A Tale of Two 
Cities f and began to read at one of the last 
chapters. 

The reading of it to the end stirred me 
considerably, enough to send the humour of 
weariness and purposelessness out of me. 
I felt this as, my under-thoughts full of 
Sydney Carton and envy of his death, I 
looked out into the sunshiny day ; for some 
little of the sunshine had entered in me even 
then. I would go out for a walk. Nay, I 
would go and see where Bayne lived. Why 
not? 

Away I went, and out for my walk — 
out and away to beautiful summer Hamp- 
stead, fresh and green from the late showers. 



Leicester. 27 



in Ihe soft early- day lights. I did not think 
much of Bayne. I do not remember what 
I thought of : probably of hundreds of un- 
connected things, passing in a fairy-proces- 
sion in the yellow-gold light before my 
eyes. I wandered about happily till about 
one o'clock, when hunger made itself per- 
ceptible, and I went off in the pursuit of 
bread and fruit and milk. Followed another 
Pythagorean feast on the grass, with de- 
lightful half-dreams as in the old time ; 
till it occurred to me to return home and 
read. Accordingly, after a little trifling 
with resolution in the shape of dawd- 
ling about in hollows, looking at a 
small stream's meandering water, or the 
serried grasses and the earth, I fairly 
set off. 

After a little, it occurred to me again to 
go and take a look at Rayne's house. So I 
asked the next bobby I saw where Balmoral 
Street was, and learnt that it was on this 
side of the Park, and, more particularly, 
close by Lancaster Gate, for which I had 



28 Leicester. 



better ask. That was all I wanted at pre- 
sent. I set off again, and was in Maida 
Vale before I was aware of it. I had no 
idea of going to see Bayne to-day : I only 
wished to look at the house. 

I went on seriously enough, and began 
to think about Rayne ; where she was now 
and what she was doing ? somehow as if I 
had wondered about some other woman some 
time and somewhere ; till my old faint far- 
away tremulousness came into me and was 
perceived. 

I came sharply round an area railed cor^ 
ner, and beheld ... a low carriage and 
horses, two footmen, the pillars of an exit 
into the street, a lady just out of the open 
door — on to the top step — descending. 
Bayne ; I stood still. 

Some one followed. Bayne was on the 
pavement, making for the low carriage door, 
now held open. Stopped a moment : half 
turned. And the some one following was in 
her view and mine. It was the mondain 
en villegiature : I knew him. But Bayne 's 



Leicester. 29 

face was all to me ; and yet I could not see 
it properly. Then our eyes met. 

Somehow or other I was moving to her 
with my hat in my hand, and she said: 
' Bertram I' and I had stood stUl again. 

Her face was, perhaps, as it were worn. 
I only knew that it was filled with the half 
light of steadfastness, and that her eyes were 
quiet and deep. I had seen, not her faoe, 
but her face's form, and, as it were the half 
light of it before, and this memory was on 
me now almost as in the dim low distance 
of a dream. I cannot say what either she 
said, or he or I for a little; not that I was 
bewildered by their presence and its thoughts 
with me, but that this memory of the likeness 
to the half-light of her face, perhaps kept me 
in the dim low dream-distance. 

At last I had shaken hands with the 
mondain, and she was sitting in the carriage 
and we two standing by the low back-opened 
carriage door, talking together. 

' It was, indeed, a surprise to see you in 
London,' she was saying. ' I thought you 



80 Leicester. 



were . • • In fact I did not know what to 
think, for you did not answer either of the 
letters I sent to you ' 

^ Letters, Lady Gwatkin ?' I said. * I 
received no letter from you, excepting this 
morning, since November — two years 
ago/ 

'I am a witness to the writing of at 
least two,' said he, looking at me with a 
little smile round the comers of his mouth. 

* Then you did not know — ' she said . . • 
^ And I had wondered why you had not 
written to me. . .' 

^That Mr. Cholmeley was dead — ' I 
said softly, perceiving that her dress was 
of black. * I feared so this morning.' 
What sorrow was in me for her was given 
in the words here. 

*And where have you been all this 
while ?' she said, looking up : * if I may 
ask?' 

I bowed my head. 

* I left Colchester last February. I was 
in London for a little, and then in Paris 



Leicester. 31 

for a little, and then in London again till 
now.' 

* Perhaps/ he said, * Mr. Leicester would 
go with you a little way ? You must have 
a great deal to say to one another after so 
long and so silent a separation ?' I saw or 
thought I saw, that she did not desire that 
I should go with her. Half-hesitation of 
hers was not enough to entice me. I said : 

' I am afraid that, even if Lady Gwatkin 
should be so kind as to think of allowing 
me to inflict my company upon her, I 
should be unable to do so.' There was a 
surprise in this for him, perhaps for her : 
pleasure for me to find my nerves my own, 
and under the government of a Jupiter will 
in a serene heaven that might have seemed 
Olympus. She with some few gentle low 
sentences, bowed to or accepted my words' 
meaning, and then it was time for her to 
be going, and I drawing back with an 
apology to Sir James for being in the way. 

Then preliminaries of movement followed 
J)y movement, and her (and his) expressions 



32 Leicester. 



of wish to see me again soon, and she (with 
him) was away, while I stood bareheaded, 
watching her as she sat, till the comer was 
rounded, and she was gone and I alone. 

The next morning I fonnd a note from 
Rayne, asking me to dine with them on 
Monday. I smiled, and, when I had had 
breakfast, wrote an answering note of ac- 
ceptance. Then Strachan came in, and 
had a short talk with me. He had his 
doubts about the financial success of the 
Book, considering that I wished to have 
illustrations. I was in an absent humour, 
and simply echoed his remark : yes, I 
wished it to have illustrations, maps, and 
everything of that sort. 

* Of course,' said he. ' We have abund- 
ance of material ; but I am rather inclined 
to doubt friend Brooke's accuracy in these 
matters, and, in short . . .' 

' Has he taken it ?' . asked I. ' Parker, 
I mean.' 

' No:' he said, 'he hasn't taken it — yet ; 



Leicester. 33 



but . . . Well, well — ^we'U talk about that 
later on. What are you going to do with 
yourself this morning ? A walk ; what do 
you say ? I'm just going to the Museum 
for half an hour or so, to look at some 
bones Davies has got hold of. Will you 
come ?' 

* I'm very sorry,' I said. * But I do my 
work in the mornings. I find that if I go 
out then, it ends in my doing no work at 
aU.' 

We made talk of this sort while he was 
nearing the door and at last had it a little 
open, when : 

* By-the-bye,' I said. * Did you ever 
hear of a man called Gwatkin ? Sir James 
Gwatkin, a knight or a baronet, I don't 
know which.' 

* Hum,' he said. * Gwatkin ? Gwatkin ? 
I know the name somehow. — Oh yes, I 
know him ! I met him down at Oxford at 
dinner at a don's — ^now, two years ago I 
One of the Culture people. He has written 
a book about Michaelangelo. I remember 

VOL. II. 24 



34 Leicester. 

him quite well now. The next ,day I 
stumbled upon him with Sir Horace 
Gildea ' 

* Horace Gildea ?' said I. * I was at 
school with him. Do you know him T 

The Professor grimaced : 

* Yes, a little. He did me the honour of 
seducing one of my maids/ 

I could not help laughing. The Professor 
proceeded : 

* They're an odd lot, those Culture 
fellows. I don't believe in them myself. 
A — ' (turning his eyes to mine) * I hope 
they're not friends of yours, either of these 
two ? If so, of course I ' 

* Nay,' said I, * they're no friends of 
mine ! I only wanted to know if you could 
tell me anything about Sir James Gwatkin 
— what books he'd written, and that sort 
of thing. I mean — as I happened to be 
dining at his house on Monday : one likes to 
know something about one's host's par- 
ticular line of thought, if he happens to 
have one.' 



Leicester^ 3 



K 



* Ah yes, just so, yes/ said the Professor, 
taming his eyes to and then away from 
mine. And on that we parted. 
n I came back from the closed hall door 
into the library, and went to the window 
and [stood looking out on the sunny day. A 
feeliiig of disgust at work rose in me. I 
sighed as I took down Antigone, the Greek 
play I was then reading, and lexicon and 
translation : and then bundled myself into 
the easy chair. Folly ! and I knew it. 
None the less I intended proving it once 
more. 

I had last time stopped just before a 
Chorus. I began on the Chorus now; Such 
a delightfully corrupt Chorus ! and here (in 
two nice close-printed note columns) was 
what Hermann thought about the first 
lines, and then what somebody else 
thought, and then what the present Editor 
thought, damn him ! Finally I gave it up 
in disgust : got myself out of the easy 
chair and the books into it : and stood 
looking disconsolately into the atmosphere 

24—2 



36 Jjeicester. 

of the fine morning. Then the idea of 
taking a steamer down the fresh breezy 
river came to me — to Greenwich, and go 
into the Park, or, first, to see the Painted 
Chamber, and then for a walk over the 
heath to look at all the old places. Why 
not ? 

I went. It was a fair sweet morning on 
the river, somehow as I suppose my Italy 
to be, with the air so pure, like wine that 
had no fieriness in it. I got out at Green- 
wich : I saw the old Painted Chamber 
again, my heart making its flutter felt as I 
passed along that coloured gallery where I 
had moved and dreamed in the dimmer air 
of my boyhood. — ^Ah, here was Nelson, and 
here ! And here the sacred relics of him« 
How long, how long ago it was since I 
stood looking'' at that pallid body going 
with its heroic message of, * England expects 
every man to do his duty^' up to ... . 
Where ? Somewhere where the pallid 
bodies of heroes, who have fought the 
fight and done that duty well, are taken by 



Leicester. 37 



soft hands and lain in the quiet of the 
Eternal Fields. — ^And how I nsed to think 
that, in some simple way, although it 
seemed so dreamy, that body was my body 
and that duty well done was my duty : and 
this small child here, with eyes half- 
brimmed with tears, so saw the final 
requiem of its own manhood, the seal of 
death with which it had sealed life, the 
fight well fought, the duty well done, and 
the pallid body taken by soft hands and 
laid in the quiet of the Eternal Fields,— 
* It is all changed now /' 

I turned from it with the lump of tears 
in my throat and went out into the air, and 
away, and I thought in this wise : that the 
dreams of boyhood are for boyhood and 
are dear, while the sights of manhood are 
for manhood and are bitter : and, that it 
is given to many to desire the well-fought 
fight and the well-done duty and the tender 
progress to the quiet of the Eternal Fields, 
but that few, the dwindling sacred few, 
achieve to it : and that it is very hard to 



88 Letce8te7\ 



learn this simple lesson, that I, this me, 
this only real existence that I know in space 
of Time and Life, is one of the many. 

As I slowly climbed up the hill, I noted 
the old tree in the middle of the path, 
against which I, dizzy and faint from the 
pernicious tobacco smoke inhaled in the 
shade of a gnarly oak while the small 
gentle deer fed round me, leant full of the 
nausea of this wretchedness, and thought 
never to incur it again I Then I came in 
tsight of the haunted house, darksome abode 
of awe and wonder. Then there was the 
field on the brow of which I had reclined 
with Wallace, playing some game at 
* chuck ' with clasp-knives, looking at times 
out over the dark, silver-twining Thames, 
and duskily, far-stretching London ; till 
one unlucky throw of his spiked my hand 
(here is the scar on my right thumb still), 
and how I insisted that there was not the 
end of chuck for the day ! 

It is all changed now. The field in 
which we played that game or, lying 



Leicesie)*. 39 



along the grass, talked as we ate sagared 
compounds or the satisfymg parkin. Even 
the school is changed. The brass plate is 
gone from the gate. The* house is freshly 
painted and enlarged, but empty. I see 
the top of the cherry-tree over the wall. 

I turned from it and went down the 
little lane, passing many remembered spots 
and things, and down the hill and to the 
small boat pier. And as I stood I began 
to think of my future. There was some- 
thing of Capua in my present case : not so 
much bodily, as spiritual, Capua, and yet I 
knew quite well that at the best it was not 
in either case a campaigning ground. It 
was time I took some steps towards the 
great object of supporting myself. Timef 
more than time ! Why had I not thought 
of it before ? This money of Brooke's — 
it was not mine. I had said that I would 
not take it : or I had said that I could not 
devote myself to the Cause. Oh Jupiter 
and the other immortals ! I should think 
not. . • • And yet, why such a decided 



40 Leicester. 

not? Supposing I did devote myself. 
Well. . . . No, it would not do. * I don't 
care about it. No : I won't do that- 
No I I couldn't take and keep the money. 
• . . God knows it's a poor earth enough, 
this earth : and I don't believe in fire and 
brimstone being my reward for doing this 
— or any thing. That's nothing. There 
is the tribunal of my soul — that ideal of 
myself, by which I measure the actual of 
myself, and do not care to find too great a 
difference between them. It is a poor 
earth, this earth ; and it does seem piteous 
cruel that I must leave what I love and go 
out into the dull world of man to draw in 
foul breath and jostle with the crowd for 
bread's sake. Perhaps it will be better for 
me so. 

* And yet,' I thought, standing up at the 
bow of the boat and looking across the 
river. * I could wish that I was sleeping 
the sleep of death, under the earth: at 
rest.' 



CHAPTER II. 

When I awoke on Monday morning it 
was into a state of dreaminess : the 
shadowy realm that is between the nigl^t's 
dreams and the day. Bayne moved in it, 
with Claire, and now myself; bat all so 
dim and bodiless that they conld not be 
called by names whose counterpart were 
realities. They were not of the night's 
dreams: they were not of the day; but 
emanations. Qutside this shadowy realm 
there was some other emanation, some 
child's, that was more of the earth than 
ours that were of this middle place, and it 
would have entered therein, but could not. 
So I lay thinking of these things : if 
thinking is in the realm of thought and no 
thought, if will and no will. And all the 



42 Leicester. 



while this child's more-earthly-like emana- 
tion would have entered into the shadowy 
realm and could not. And if this was a 
distress to any one, I could not tell, not 
even if it was to myself, — The end was that 
a start shot up through me, and I awoke to 
fuller waking. The green blinds covered 
the two large windows opposite my bed. 
A little light came in through them and 
made a submarine atmosphere in the room. 
This I had known before. I sat up : then 
raised myself, till I could see myself in the 
large dressing-table mirror between the two 
green-blind-covered windows. That made 
me smile. 

After lunch I went out for a walk. 

The knowledge that whatever humour I 
went out in was sure to be different from 
the humour in which I returned, held to 
me a momentary trouble now. For I was 
happy enough with the life of the morning, 
the mild sunny air and soft heaven, to 
wish for no better state in which to face 
the ordeal of to-night. * Ordeal ? Ay : the 



Leicester. 4$ 

faint tremor that comes to me at the 
thought is snrely enough to tell me that 
to-night will be an ordeal. Ordeal ? No : 
what ordeal can there be ? Of what am I 
thinking ? I do not know. Ay : that is 
the truth : " I do not know." And yet the 
sense of the unknown does not. • • • 
What ? — ^Was ever such confusion ? No : 
not confusion. What then? I don't 
know. It's folly trying to be subtle.' I 
gave it up* 

That day was a day apart. A day apart 
is a day in which the past is pallid : the 
present pallid : the future a mist into which 
the earth-floor goes, not even unknown : a 
days of feelings about feelings, of dreams 
about dreams. 

I came in from my walk of feelings about 
feelings, of dreams about dreams, by about 
five* I had seen many things, known 
nothing* I realized as I was coming up 
the hill that I was hungry. I went to the 
top of the kitchen-stairs and called to Mrs. 
Herbert, asking if I could have some soup 



44 Leicester. 



and rice ? She agreed. I went into the 
study again, and stood in the window, and 
looked out. 

All at once I drew in a deep sniff, and 
said aloud : 

* You're a damnable fool \ I wonder if a 
blue pill would do you any good T 

I sat down in the arm-chair and began to 
think about things actually. The past came 
out of its pallidness and took vari-coloured^ 
ness and shapes : the present likewise, with 
a permeating yellow light. I tried to realize 
what was meant by ' J, going to dine at Sir 
James Gwatkin'sj and Bayne/ Then the 
soup came in with Mrs. Herbert : and I 
drank it, and felt better internally. I set 
to again upon the work of realizing the fact^ 
the meaning of the fact, that ' I was going 
to dine at Sir James Gwatkin's.' In such 
hours as this, when one is still in the border* 
lit mist of the day apart, the difficulty of 
realizing anything is great. I had only 
half succeeded by the time the rice came in* 
I sugared and half-floated it in milk, and 



Leicestei\ 45 

began to eat it: the work of realization 
being consigned for a little to the place of a 
remand. (It must be remembered that all 
this was devoid of self-consciousness.) I 
finished- the rice. 

Dinner was at seven. I had not the in- 
tention of eating a dinner then. It was 
almost six now by the mantlepiece clock. 
I got up and rang. Then : ^ But Mrs. 
Herbert/ I thought, * tells me she has vari- 
cose veins.' — Oflf I went to the top of the 
kitchen-stairs, and requested a can of hot 
water. 

In a little she brought it up. Then I 
began slowly to mount the staircase. 

As my heavy foot struck the soft carpet, 
and one or two of the rods sounded, I sud- 
denly recalled my going up the staircase that 
last night of ours in London. After a few 
steps, I stopped and looked over the broad 
banister down upon the dark shiny table 
where my bed-candle was, and where two 
had used to be then. Went on again : the 
thought had occurred to me before this. 



46 Leicester. 



But, what are such thoughts ? Maybe it 
was that I noticed nothing here then with 
any endearment : nor do notice anything so 
now. And yet, I have always supposed 
that there would be something of ^ . . of 
something or other, in living in a house, 
and alone too, where you had lived with 
some one that is dead. The sharp sound 
that struck your hearing would startle you. 
The lonely depth of the darkness, or the 
shadowiness, or the gloom would contain 
its spectre ? I cannot say. Death is so 
dim a thing, if it is anything at all, to me. 
What do you mean by death ? You are not 
dead. I am not dead. Who is dead ?- — 
And with the thought that this was rather 
ridiculous in me, I came into my bedroom 
with the hot-water can. The gas was 
low. 

I put down the can on the washing- 
stand, and went and turned up the gas. 
The room was all light. I took off my coat 
and threw it onto the bed. 

I washed slowly, thinking, not in an 



Leicester. 47 

ordinary way, but also not pallidly, of 
general things. There was a little of the 
tremnlousness in me somewhere, I felt for 
a moment vaguely. But I went on think- 
ing as before, and forgot it. I put on, 
first one, and then the other dress-boot, with 
the small steel shoe-horn, and tied their 
laces tight. Then changed my trousers, 
and brushed my hair before the mirror. 
Then put on my white shirt, and found and 
fastened the studs, and my collar to the top 
stud. As I was looking for the glass- 
topped box that held the white ties, I 
thought the gas seemed burning low, and 
looked up at it. It was, confound it ! I 
found the white tie-box in the shadow of the 
curtain, and took out a tie, and began to tie 
it. My fingers confused. At that instant 
everything in me contracted. I stared into 
the mirror. Brooke teas looking over mxj right 
shoulder. 

My body was a creeping thrill. I jerked 
round like one half-mad, with my fist 
tightly clenched, in some way saying : 



48 Leicester. 



' Devil r 

I would have beaten his pale, cold, 
corpse's face with my bony fist. There was 
not anything — except the shadow of, I 
saw^ the bed- top on the upper wall- 
paper. 

I paced up and down the room, looking 
to right and left. 

* Assuredly/ I said aloud in an observer's 
way, * I will never believe in ghosts. It is 
far too easy to see one.' 

In a little I came back and finished my 
hanging tie. I had been startled. There 
was no mistake about that. If I had really 
believed that I should have seen him, I pon- 
dered, then I should have seen him. And 
yet I desired to strike him. And yet I did 
not believe in him, someway. 

So, having turned down the gas, I came 
to the staircase-head and began to descend. 
A certain something, not too far from fear, 
prompted the idea of a hand reaching onto 
me from behind. I desired to turn and 
look. My will overcame my desire. I 



Lekestei*. 49 

descended slowly, step after step, in an 
actor's way rather. My heel sounded on 
the tesselated floor of the hall. My eye 
observed of the big clock that it was a 
quarter to seven. I had beaten that some- 
thing not too far from fear. I had not 
looked either round or behind. 

I went to the coat-rack, took down my 
theatre-coat, felt my latch-key in my right 
pocket, and went to the door. Opened it : 
went out ; and drew it to with a low clang. 
I left certain things behind in that house 
— ^with Mrs. Herbert and her varicose 
veins ! 

I laughed as I, walking on, put on the 
coat, shot open my gibus, and put it on 
my head. I had been startled. There was 
no mistake about that. But I was wide 
awake now, surely. And I was going to 
dine at Sir James Gwatkin's, and Bayne. 
I stood on the pavement-edge (in Piccadilly 
now) and called out : 

' Hansom I' 

I should be there, with him, with 

VOL. II. 25 



50 Leicester. 

her in ten minutes — ^in all human proba- 
bility. 

The hansom came up, and I got in, and 
gave the address — 22, Balmoral Street — 
up through the opened trap to the man. 
We set off quickly, the horse, a small beast, 
trotting. When we had gone a little way, 
I knocked up at the trap, two or three times 
before the man opened it, the horse's speed 
slackening. 

' Go through the Park,' I said. ' Through 
the Park.' 

He shut the trap, and the horse's speed 
quickened again. The evening was light 
and cool, the sun hid behind thick horizon 
clouds. We turned through the gates into 
the Park. I bent forward a little, looking 
at the carriages and people that we passed. 

Then we passed by the Marble Arch into 
Oxford Street and past the mouth of the 
Edgware Boad, up which, some way up 
which, by a bye-way to the left lay in a 
small street, Maitland Street, a small house, 
No. 8. She would not be in yet. She 



Leicestei\ 51 

would be still at her work, sitting sewing 
probably. Should I ever see her again ? 
N09 best not. Oar paths of life went on 
in all but opposite directions. Poor child ! 
' Alone in the world, as if nobody else be- 
longed to her.' All me! In a hundred 
years, perhaps fifty, perhaps less, it would 
all be as if it had never been. And yet I 
was not leaving a thing that had to do with 
me in a low plain, whereas I was going 
away to mount up into a rich bright 
country of gentle sunshine ? I was going 
I knew not where, except that it was into a 
dull slate atmosphere like the sky there ; 
only that there was no sun, and my feet 
scarce held the ground. ' In a hundred 
years y it would all be as if it had never been.* 
We drew up sharply. I looked out. It 
was the house alright. I threw open the 
flaps, and jumped onto the pavement, and 
went back and paid the man. Then 
ascended the steps, and knocked and rang 
as the little brass plate bade : and waited. 
A flunky opened the door and ushered me 

25—2 



52 Leicester. 



in. Sir James was coming along the pas- 
sage parallel to, below the stairs, and saw 
me. He at once advanced to me, saying 
cordially : 

* Ah, Mr. Leicester, how do you do ?' 
We went upstairs together slowly, I just 
a step behind him : and then through a 
tall doorway with a deep-red velvet hang- 
ing, and along a room that was like a 
passage : and then he had opened a door 
and we were together in the soft light of 
the drawing-room, he just a step behind 
me. 

I at once saw Bayne and some other 
woman, a young woman, seated close 
together under the pink-shaded candles, but 
my look was for Bayne's face, not for her 
companion's. How beautiful it was 1 How 
steadfast, and how sweet ! And I thought 
that where I had before seen, as it were, 
the half-light of her face's form was in the 
sad wistful face of a child whose body, had 
been sold to an evil task-master — Claire/ 
And, at the thought, something of tearful- 



Leicester. 53 

ness rose in my heart and gathered to my 
eyes ; for that sad wistfdl child's face had 
grown so bright for me and mine so 
bright for her, and then we had been parted 
by the task-master, who was jealous of the 
soul of the body that he had bought, and I 
had never seen her again. 

*Rayne/ I thought, * would to God or 
Fate or Chance or what it may be, that I 
had not found that half-light on your face 
too. • • • Your hand is soft/ 

We had been speaking to one another 
with low tones and movements, and now I 
was turned from Bayne, bowing to this 
young woman her companion, whose name, 
his voice had said, was Cholmeley. And 
as I looked at her seated there before and 
below me, I smiled. 

' It is strange,' said I, sinking with the 
smile into a chair by her, between her and 
Bayne, but nearer to her, ' It is strange 
how much men and women have in com- 
mon. I mean/ I said, leaning on the 
elbow next her, and looking at her, 



54 Leicester. 

* how much we have in common with one 
another/ 

' Yes ?' she said, elevating her brows a 
little, being a little Borprised, I snpposedi 
and wondering what sort of strange mascu- 
linity she had come across. 

< I mean/ I said, with narrowing eyes, 

* that — ^perhaps no one, can live a life of 
their own. Suppose a man or a woman 
give themselves up to (say) love of money, 
as common a ruling-passion as any other, 
then that man or that woman will notice, 
if they only know how to, that their love 
of money generates, as it were, a subtle 
odour in their souls, and they will recognise 
that subtle odour in the souls of others who 
have given themselves up to the same 
dominion/ 

' Nul de nous n'a Thonneur d'avoir one 
vie qui soit a lui. Ma vie est la votre,' 
went on the voice, the voice of him now 
standing on the end of the hearthrug by 
Bayne, ^ votre vie est la mienne, vous 
vivez ce que je vis ; la destin^e est une/ 



Leicester. 55 

' Who says thfA V asked I, tumiiig, with 
the comprehension of it, to him. 

^ Victor Hugo, in his preface to the 
'' Contemplations/' ' 

' I do not see how destiny is one/ said 
the yonng woman. 

' Here/ said he, * is the answer for you 
in eternal words : 

' " We are what sun and winds and waters make 
us." ' 

* I do not see yet/ she said. 

^ We are all what we are made. Some 
of ns are made by the sun : and some by 
the winds : and some by the waters : and 
some by them all. And that is how, is it 
not ? (as Mr. Leicester has just pointed 
ont|) we have so much in common with 
one another/ 

* And you think/ said Bayne to me, with 
something of a smile, * that the children of 
the sun recognise one another accord- 
ingly?' 

^ I suppose I do/ I said, now a little off 



66 Leicester. 

the direct scent. ^ That is, I think that 
any given passion, as a role, expresses itself 
in the same way in different people: and 
so one is constantly being struck by resem- 
blances between people, and wondering 
wherein these resemblances lie. Am I 
clear to yon, Miss Cholmeley ?' I asked. 

'Yon are too subtle for me/ said the 
young woman. ^ I am content to do my 
duty in that state of life — and the rest : 
and leave metaphysics to the choice spirits 
like you, and Sir James, and it would 
seem you, Rayne.' 

But it seemed to me that this young 
woman did not, for some reason, care to 
have matter of this sort talked now, and 
had quietly taken steps to stop it. 

We went down to dinner soon after, 
Bayne and I, and Sir James and Miss 
Cholmeley: we two so far ahead, that I 
could say to her in an odd way that I did 
not know she had any relation . • • like 
Miss Cholmeley. 

^ Miss Chohnondeley is no relation of 



Leicester. 57 

mine/ she said quietly » as we passed 
through the dining-room door. ^ Our names 
are spelt differently.' 

And there the attendant flunkies stood by. 

* C-h-o-l-m-6-n-d / said I half to 

myself, the actor's sense growing in me. 
* Ah — ^I beg your pardon I' 

The actor's sense went on growing in me 
as we took our placesi and culminated in 
my high slightly-frowning downward survey 
of my menu-card : Soup, Turbot and Lobster 
Sauce^ Quenelles. — 'Damnation!' I said under 
my breath. 

I shivered. And then tightened my jaws, 
and in an instant thought : * What foolery 
is this ? I . . / I might have been 
sitting, as I sat in my place that prize- 
giving day at Whittaker's, waiting for my 
turn, with my lips rather dry, and every 
now and then shivering as if a draught 
came upon me from an opened door. But 
Blake was dead. And Brooke was dead. 
and Mr. Oholmeley was dead. — ^And I 
raised my eyes and beheld this vision of 



58 Leicester. 

fair yonthfulness ; with dark-gold hair 
whose floating outskirts were sonnyy and 
deep slow eyes, and red lips ripe, and half- 
transparent teeth-tips, and soft sweet white- 
ness of the ronnded throat whose thought 
was of the soft sweet white cool body. — 
There was devilry in it I Up it rose, the 
unfailing companion, surely for ever the 
unfailing companion, of my haunting time 
of inevitable gold-light and mockery that 
rises. Then it left me, this clearer, dawn- 
companion : left me to the inevitable gold- 
light risen mockery, and I could not well 
know what the voices said in the half- 
dancing goldy air. 

' Is this like the radiations of yellow 
foaming wine-circles in the brain?' I 
thought at last. And all the while they 
talked, and ate from their plates, and I 
talked and ate from my plate, and the 
swift quiet liveried dolls moved hither and 
thither and bent, ministering to us. One 
thing was sure, it was a gold-light, half- 
dancing mockery. 



Leicester. 59 

' Ton do not take wine ?' he was say- 
ing. 

* Nay/ I was answering, * I love wine : 
wine that is yellow and foaming.' I could 
not, or would not, or did not see any face 
but his, bending with a mask's upward smile 
to me. 

' But you refused to have any champagne 
just now ?' 

VMy dear Lady GwatkinJ' she was say- 
ing, the beautiful, voluptuous young woman 
was saying (Oorisande is her name. It 
sounds like a cleft pomegranate), * but you 
really cannot mean . • .' 

' I did not notice it,' I said. * I will 
have some, if you please.' 

And then from a gold-papered bottle- 
mouth out came the clear stream into the 
large round low glass, all foaming, but 
yellow as I lifted it up and drank it. And 
all the while these rings of gold-hued silver 
light round my eyes revolved, revolved, re- 
volved outwards : most certamly a gold- 
light, half-dancing (half-dancing in the mid 



60 Leicester. 

yellow air) mockery. If this was not 
devilry, what was ? ^ It's nonsense/ said 
I to myself, ^ to tell me that I don't see all 
this. I do. It's devilry. The room is 
foil of the mockery of imps.' I could have 
put up my left hand and tried to tear off 
this large ring of gold-hned silver light, like 
sun's water-reflections on a wall, from 
round my eyes, and seen things fitly: I 
could have done it, once, twice, three or 
four times ; but I did not. I sat there, 
filled with the actor's sense, smiling, and 
bending and smiling, and smiling and bend- 
ing and smiling and talking, and, in my 
deeper heart, in a sort of way, defied this 
devilry. I knew what they were saying, I 
knew what I was saying, although I have 
forgotten it now. Once, or twice, or three, 
or four times, I could have laughed out- 
right at all this ; but restrained myself with 
the feeling that I did well to restrain my- 
self. I drank more champagne, and then 
fell into a somewhat dreamy state, that 
made the seeming endless revolution-out- 



Leicester. 61 

ward of my eyes' rings fade into a dimmer 
distance. 

They were talking of French literature ; 
a string of names and words scarcely com- 
prehended by me, bnt there was light 
laughter in the yellowy air and restrained 
sadness. There was no one in the room 
now but us. I was slowly twirling my 
champagne-glass round, with my eyes on 
it and a smile ; for the light laughter was 
foaming in the yellowy air, and the sadness 
almost withdrawn. 

Suddenly she, Bayne, rose. I started 
up. Corisande rose. Then they were 
moving round the table, and I was with my 
backward hand on the door-handle, and 
my face towards her. I had opened the 
door. She had passed out, lovely Bayne ! 
The young woman was by me, Corisande, 
the cleft pomegranate, the sweet soft harlot 
body. I crushed my right hand on the 
smooth hardness in it. I could have gripped 
that soft white throat just below the rounded 
half-shadow of the apple and throttled her ; 



62 Leicester. 

and, as I cast down the breathless limp 
body, softer but less sweet, the harlot body, 
been glad with a quiet half-fierce gladness. 
I closed to the door softly upon her, and 
came back quietly to my place. Sir James 
was looking at something just before and 
below his eyes, with the little smile round 
the comers of his mouth. I all but loved 
him, for, having a swift thought of that older 
' Arise begone/ I had another of one sitting 
in a summer parlour, with the fat closing 
upon the blade. I too had a little smile round 
the comers of the mouth. 

We talked in a quiet orderly way for a 
little ; and then we went upstairs together. 

Bayne was seated in her old place on the 
sofa, looking half-absently before her ; and 
Miss Gholmondeley lying back in the easy 
chair in which I had sat. She stopped 
speaking as we came in, looked up at us, or 
at Sir James, and smiled slightly. 

We talked in low half-nonchalant tones. 
The night breeze bulged in the window- 
curtain behind Bayne and the sofa with a 



Leicester. 63 

slight ruBtle. There seemed something of 
hashed, but withal dreamy in the air : per- 
haps the quiet after the sonny wind tempest 
of dinner-time. 

Then Sir James spoke, his words somiding 
somewhat as a return to one^s past humanity. 

' I have as good as promised Mr. Leicester, 
Gorisande/ he said, ' that you would give 
us Betsky's setting of Vivian's Lullaby. I 
hope I did not take too much upon myself ?' 

She raised her eyebrows a little and the 
comers of her mouth, as she answered : 

^ But you forget that I only sang it to 
you the night before last. Bayne, I am 
sure, must be heartily tired of the very name 
of Vivian by this time.' 

^ No,' she said, ' his story is too sad for 
one to be so soon tired of hearing his name. 
I should like to hear the Lullaby again.' 

* Vivian,' said Sir James, now addressing 
me, ^ was an old school-fellow of mine, and 
I might add — ^friend.' 

I asked about Vivian. Sir James gave 
particulars of him : 



64 Leicester. 

* He ran away from Eton and came up to 
London, with the idea of achieving fame 
and fortmie with his poetry. It is needless 
to say that he achieved neither. His parents 
were poor and obstinate — ^like him, poor 
fellow! He had the pride of Milton's 
•Satan. He died — ^starved, rather than ask 
help from anyone. A volome of his poems 
has just been published : this is it. Yon 
were reading it, Bayne ?' 

* Yes/ she said : ^ I was reading it this 
morning.' 

^ How old was he ?' I asked. 

^A mere boy/ he said. ^Eighteen or 
nineteen. — There is nothing very remark- 
able in any of his poems, as poems. Their 
chief interest lies in the fact of their having 
been written by one so yonng. It is idle 
to speculate abont what he might have 
written if he had lived, but . • . well, one 
speculates !' 

I still stood, thinking. — * Poor fellow ! 
Nay, but I account him rich ; for the strife 
of living and the terror of dying are for him 



Leicester. 65 

both past and over now, and he is at 
rest/ 

MisB Cholmondeley had passed on to the 
other half of the drawing-room through the 
hanging lace-curtainSy to where Sir James 
was standing fingering the music. Here 
was I with my head thrown down like a 
meditative cow. I made a few steps to by 
Bayne, and standing before her, with 
my head half-bent, said something or 
other purposeless about the Lullaby and 
Vivian. She answered with something of 
the same sort. I asked if she liked Betsky's 
music ? She said she did not much ; but 
she was afraid she didn't altogether appre- 
ciate Betsky. I said that Sir James had 
been talking about him to me, saying he was 
the subtlest of modem composers. Doubtless 
he had written many pieces that were very 
precious, if not entirely so ? She took no 
heed of my smile, but said that doubtless 
that was. the reason (his subtleness was the 
reason) that she did not appreciate him. 
She only cared for simple music, and 

VOL. u. 26 



66 Leicester. 

freely admitted that classical mnsic wearied 
her. Bat this Lullaby was not like any 
other music of Betsky's that she had heard. 
It was simplci and soft and sweet. — ^I was 
about to say that two of these were rather 
necessary qualities in a lullaby, especially 
if the baby was teething, when a flow of 
soft low notes came and made me think 
better of it. Certainly Miss Gholmondeley 
knew how to play. 

I listened attentively. The soft low 
notes flowed on, flowed on, flowed on, but 
into their softness was gradually growing 
a some other sound : more like an invasion 
of still dimy water by rolling slaty- 
coloured volumes than anything else I 
could then think of. I was the song's 
now: my whole soul filled with it. A 
softer, lower place was heard: softer, far 
away from that now gradually fading sound 
that was as the rolling slaty-coloured 
volumes : lower, closer to the front of the 
picture that was in me, the place in which 
I felt a presence, two presences were. They 



Leicester. 67 

were sleeping : or they were lying together 
in rest. Then one of them ronsed — him- 
self, for it was a man, or a boy with some- 
thing of a man's sonl : roused himself, and 
his voice began, at first with unrecognisable 
words rolling over the low slaty glassiness 
of the water, and rolling about, till that 
first melody of soft low flowing notes, all 
but filled with the rolling volumes, was 
hidden away. And another voice, a woman's, 
or a girl's with something of a woman's 
soul, answered softly and sweetly. And the 
other voice answered softly and deeply, with 
the depth of passion. And the rolling, 
slaty-coloured volumes of his first unrecog- 
nisable words, which had filled the space 
between this softer lower place and that first 
mingled melody, had filled it into peaceful- 
ness, were growing disturbed : the volumed 
column of that first mingled melody was 
passing down over the slaty glassiness to- 
wards this lower place. The voices rose in 
an unspeakable harmony together, but some 
of it losing itself in the slaty-coloured 

26—2 



68 Leicester. 

rolling volames that came over the glas8i- 
ness of the water of the now back-confased 
picture. And the last line, half-dying, half- 
fading away, left the whole picture lost in 
the coloured rolling volumes : from which 
now came short, sharp notes, like the crack- 
lings of connected and disconnected electric 
lines : crackle : crackle : crackle. And 
then the whole thing was whelmed in a full 
slaty silent flood. 

I awoke. 

'You remember,' Sir James's voice was 
saying, * with what thought Eeats closed his 
sweet, short nightingale's song ? that wish 
to the bright star to be steadfast as it 
was — not in lone splendour hung aloft the 
night and watching the moving waters round 
earth's human shore or the soft-fallen mask 
of snow on the mountains and the moors — 

' " No^yet still steadfast, still unchangeable, 
pillowed upon my fair Love's ripening breast, 
to feel for ever its soft fall and swell, 
awake for ever in a sweet unrest : 
Still, still to bear her tender-taken breath, 
and 80 Uve ever,— or else swoon to death." 



Leicester. 69 

There is jast the difference between that 
death-Bong of Vivian's and this of Eeats' 
that there was between Hylas and Nar- 
cissus/ 

^ Perhaps/ said Miss Gholmondeley, by 
him with the music in her hand, and look- 
ing at it, ^ the difference was between their 
deaths rather than their songs. Do yon 
think Vivian would have said : " Severn — I 
— lift me up — I am dying — I shall die easy^ 
don't be frightened — be firm, and thank God it 
has come"? I don t/ 

* No,' said Sir James, * he would not. 
He probably would have died in trying to 
lift himself up, as Emily BrontS did. But I 
was not prepared to have my words pressed 
home. I only meant to notice the two 
death-songs as being characteristic of the 
two singers: the likeness and the differ- 
ence. Vivian's is a child's dream of a 
sensuous death, Keats' a man's. Of course, 
any further comparison than the superficial 
thoughts suggested by the two death-songs 
would be ludicrous.' 



70 Leicester. 

* Would it ?' asked Miss Oholmondeley, 
looking up. * Personally, I prefer Vivian's/ 

I suddenly thought she was teasing him. 
I thought he was mocking Bayne and mock- 
ing me ; so that that she-devil was as the 
laughter inside the laughter, the aerial 
merriment that came from Comus under the 
low horizon clouds. Her song had be- 
witched me. I had been arrayed against 
Bayne a moment ago. — ^Nay, I cried out 
to myself, could this be real ? Could any 
human being have gone through what I 
had this day — ^in this house? It was a 
dream. It was a dream. It was a dream. 
I could not believe. ... I was bewil- 
dered. 

I watched Sir James and Miss Oholmon- 
deley cross into the piano-room again, talk- 
ing, I felt vaguely, about Retsky's con- 
ception of the LuUaby. I looked at Bayne. 
I sat down in the chair I had sat ia before 
going down to dinner. The sensations of 
being in the chair unsettled my bewilder- 



Leicester. 71 

ment. I spoke, scarcely expecting to hear 
my voice's sounds. 

* That was a very — ^marvellous song — 
the Lullaby/ 

^ Yes/ said Baynei looking at me. 

Her look shot through me. I scarcely 
realized what it meant ; I only felt it, felt 
it, it seemed to me, in every part of my 
body and my soul. A mass of ideas rushed 
into my mind. My eyes flashed. 

We spoke some words together. I do 
not know what I said. I do not think she 
knew what she said. Surely some feeling 
was in her, as it was in me ? There was a 
sense of mystery in this half-sympathy of 
ours. I went on speaking to her, not know- 
ing what I said (we were in a low soft 
melody that rose and fell, and rose and fell. 
We were alone.\ and not knowing what she 
said, or what she thought ; but she knew, 
not what I said, but what I thought. My 
thoughts grew more distinct : 

' Bayne, Bayne, I will not leave you I I 
will rend you from him. He shall not have 



72 Leicester. 

yon. Let him have his soft-bodied hftrlot 
there. You are the queen of my soul. Oh, 
my queen, my soul, my love, thou art my 
hope and strength : in thee have I put my 
trust. Bayne ! ' 

I knew that they were together in the 
next room, and that she was playing what 
had been that soft melody that rose and fell 
and rose and fell. I knew also that they 
were absorbed with that now louder melody, 
or with it and one another. We were alone. 
There was something of the vUlain and his 
chance in my heart. — I looked at her. Ay, 
she was dazed, a little dazed; not alto- 
gether. But (I looked into my back- 
thought again) how could I get her away ? 
Get her away f I clenched my teeth. Take 
her by the hand, lead her out, awayl awayl 
away! 

' Bayne 1' I said, ' Bayne ! Listen to 
me. It is the night of our lives, this. It 
is the night of all eternity for us. Gome ! 
quickly 1' (She was looking at me with 
dilated, almost sightless eyes, opened 



Leicester. 73 

breathless month, beatless heart : I, tooi in 
some way. I did not know where we were 
r— in heaven, in helli in the earth, with sea 
around us, in life, in death, in life-death, in 
death-life; but we were moving, moving 
onward, nearing something. For one 
moment we, two yet a mingled one, were 
together in it, in the centre of Time-Space, 
God's-'-one moment : then gone.) ^ C(yme V 
(She had fallen from me and faded into the 
air-space. I was alone.) 

Then she and I grew, she more quickly^ 
into ourselves here: and found ourselves 
looking at one another. 

^Are you ill, Bertram?' she said. 
'What is the matter?' I half threw 
myself back in the chair with something 
that partook of smile and laugh and was 
neither smile nor laugh. I had been 
dreaming agam 1 She knew nothing 1 A 
phantasy 1 A pure phantasy 1 An inner 
part of my poor little soul which I had 
taken for the centre of Time - Space, 
God's 1 



74 Leicester. 



Then: 

* Nothing is the matter with me/ I sold ; 
'now. I Buffer from my eyes occasion- 
ally/ I rose. ' BeaUy, Lady Gwatkin, I 
am afraid I mnst be saying good-night/ I 

said. *I ' I looked at her* 

* Whither away so fast ?' I thought. ' Are 
yon so snrCi oh wiseacre, that she knew^ 
knows nothing ? She knew. She knows/ 
Then I thought : ^ Shall I pass it over in 
silence ? Shall I say anything of sorrow 
for it ? No. I am not sorry for it. — My 
dream 9 My dream in Paris.' I rose and 
crossed over the stone bridge : came to behind the 
carriage and began climbing over it from the 
back. The lady turned and^ seeing mCf put 
out her brown-gloved hand to me : and then 
when I would have caught and pressed it 
into my bosom^ touched my chest with her 
finger-tips^ the carriage moved. . . • For a 
moment a superstitious feeling all but 
possessed me. Then I cried to myself 
thati at this rate, I might as well become 
a clairvoyant, or an augurer, or a fool. — 



Leicester. 76 

I looked at her again. (It was not more 
than four seconds perhaps since I had 
looked at her before.) 

I said: 

* I did you wrong. I ask your pardon.' 

I left her. I passed across the room and 
through the door and down, and, as one in 
a day dream does the things that his body 
remembers but his soul forgets, took hat 
and coat and passed out into the night. 

I went on. 

Then the thought came : 

What ? Was it done ? Was it really 
done ? Was I not in that room with them 
yet and this was not a dream ? 

No, I answered to myself, it was no 
dream. I had left her. What did it mean 9 
I had left her. I had left her. I had left 
her. I had left her. I had left her. — 
Ay ; I knew now 1 That woman was the 
woman of my heart and soul. My life 
had been lived for her since the day I had 
first dreamt, of the dear-girl-comrade. I 
had left her. The cross-road of my heart's 



76 Leicester. 

life and soul's was reached. — I had Uft 
her. 

I stopped, stopped still: looked in- 
wards. 

It was too late I — I had recognised 
nothing. I had been played with : having 
been fooled with the phantasy of a free 
will. It was too late ! I had been played 
with. 

I went on again. 

^ The malice of fate is infinite/ I said. 
^ It is too late.' 

And everywhere was dim. 



CHAPTER III. 

Eyebywhebe was dim. It seemed as if 
all the rigging of my soul's bark had 
turned to calcined semblances, that fell, as 
calcined semblances fall, making no noise. 
And then it seemed as if some semblance 
of myself wandered to' and fro, and ronnd 
about, in this strange dim place of noise- 
less falling calcined semblances, and 
thought and thought, trying to regain its 
hue and presence of health, and could not. 
Snatches of the music of that lifefhl past 
came to me and grew into deeper colour, 
bringing hope of permanency — only to be 
lost again in this strange dim place of noise- 
less falling calcined semblances. 

At last the great dim mass was grown 
pale and receded: my own figure stood 



78 Leicester. 

darker in the foreground. I began to 
think. Thought led to criticism of what I 
had been thinking about. Then, as think- 
ing of the past led to criticism of the 
past : so criticism of the past led to think- 
ing of the present ; and, in the same way, 
thinking of the present to criticism of it, 
and criticism of it to i;hinlring of the 
fature. I had vaguely felt in the earlier 
part of my walk that my body was a little 
weary : perhaps it was but the action of 
the mind on it; for, now that the mind 
was in almost healthy activity again, the 
body was in sympathy with it. I walked 
on with a springy step, and began whist- 
ling, turning my thought into the parallel 
though less distinct expression of music. 

I had given up Bayne: I mean, my 
senses did not sympathize with my soul in 
making her precious to me. I did not 
altogether recognise this : perhaps I did not 
care to. I went on, with some enjoyment 
in the fine clear night, its air and its star- 
sown heaven, thinking, as I have said, in. 



Leicester. 79 

the two forms of outward and visible 
whistling and inward and spiritual thought. 

I had been la Trafalgar Square, where 
bells had been ringing and the air filled 
with an aerial swinging merriment: and 
the clear-soaring moon up aboYOi and here 
and there stars. And one particular star 
twinkling through a slanting downward 
bank of gauzed clouds. — The memoiy of 
this scene that I had half-knowingly ab- 
sorbed, now came to me as I stood for a 
moment and looked up at the heaven. I 
was in that road that I knew so well, that 
road by which I went to Hampstead. A 
little higher up on the left hand side 
was the concrete pillar : the memory 
of which and its accompaniments made 
me smile, as, now moving on, I looked 
to it. 

Then I stood looking in the Hampstead 
pool at innumerous small up-leaping some- 
what crescents of moonlight, as from a rain 
of moonlight only turning to colour as it 
struck. Sadness came to and grew of me, 



80 Leicester. 

sadness almost of tears, thoughts of that 
past that was no more. 

I turned and set off homewards. The 
walking inTigorated me, driving away the 
sadness ; but every now and then my new 
and brighter thoughts were dimmed by some 
Banquo-like appearance of memoried things 
that had taken place in Balmoral Street. At 
last I was foolish enough to bring my will to 
bear affirmatively upon these troublesome 
appearances : then unconsciously brought it 
to bear negatively, and they faded away in 
a new soft train of thought. 

By the time I had got to Dunraven Place, 
I was almost happy. I let myself in, and 
entered the library with a light step. The 
lamp was turned low, casting a tender rose- 
tinted shadowy light into the air. My 
supper was laid out, fruits and bread. The 
scene, colour and scent pleased me. The 
tender rose-tinted shadowy light, the mel- 
lowed silver of the knives and forks, the 
subdued colour of the rich-bound books and 
costly ornaments around me. There were 
two letters on my plate. 



Leicester, 81 

' Two letters ?' I thought. ' Who the 
devil should write to iiie V 

I sat down in the soft chair, reached to 
some grapes (I was a little hungry), and the 
plate with the letters on it : put them on 
the table-cloth just under the lamp, and, 
eating grapes, observed them. 

*One blue, stiff, and with two stamps. 
A double weight of nonsense probably. The 
other — oh . . . Rosy. Yes, that's her 
handwriting. What does the child want? 
I have not seen her for . . .' (I took up her 
letter and looked closer at the address.) 
* How long ? Three weeks ? Eh ?— Up 
you go onto the table-cloth ! . • . Good ! 
Scientific, quite ! Miss Rosebud can wait 
a little. And now for you, my mystery of 
blue paper double- stamped. Who the devil 
are you, and what the devil do you want ? 
. . . You rip up tenaciousl3\ ... An en- 
closure. Two. What's this? A cheque- 
book. Eh ? What ? And you, oh foreign- 
papered ' A sudden suspense was in 

me before I knew of it. I opened the 

VOL. II. 27 



82 L€icesi€7\ 



foreign-papered letter of four sheets, and 
looked at the end of it. * Colonel James !' I 
recognised the writing. I had the other 
letter open in a moment (from my mother, 
perhaps ! from my father !), and had 
glanced at it. * Dead V I glanced on : 

* . . . Sunday night . . . sympathy 
. . . last thing . . . spoke . . . name 
. . . reparat . . . heir ... in all some- 
thing more than £1,000 . . • beg to 
enc • . .' 

I looked up. 

* Great God/ I thought, ' what's this ?' 

I read the letter : then re-read it, more 
slowly. This is what struck me in it. 
Colonel James had died on Saturday night : 
had left me his fortune, and a letter —this 
letter enclosed, about the sending of which 
to me was almost the last thing he had 
spoken. 

I took up the foreign-papered letter from 
my knee and began to skim it : 



Leicester. 83 

^ . • • I have, after some thought, con- 
cluded that • • • proper and seemly. . . . 
Your mother . . • the regiment stationed 
« • • theatre in London • • . against the 
advice of all • . . married. [Pause for a 
moment.] . • . Quartered . • • Cork . • • 
unhappiness owing to religious ... I 
• . . and the attentions of a • . • Captain 
Melire . . • exchanged • . . Guards . • , 
of whom I frequently warned . . . but in 
vain . . . shortly ordered to Dungarvan 
and subsequently . . • Guernsey. I regret 
to have . • . attentions continued, and I 
was compelled to speak to your father . . . 
neglected warning, and . • . next day 
. . • scene with your mother, in which 
. . . common talk. I . . . could do no 
more, and remained. . • . One night . . . 
dining at mess with . . . walked home to- 
geth • . • and . . . silence in the house. 
She was gone. I could not have imagined 
that anything could have made your father, 
a man naturally of the most remarkable self- 
restraint, and rendered doubly so by his 

27—2 



84 Leicester. 



steadfast relig • • . sat down and cried 
like a child. I felt that I could not leave 
him in this condition, and accordinglyi after 
having done all I could to comfort him by 
religi ... so completely prostrated by the 
blow that I began to fear lest • • • sofa ; 
lay there with his face . . . groaning. . . . 
From that time strange personal dislike to 
you . . . till at last . • . almost madness 
• . . considering the state of his health . . . 
did not, then, think it advisable . . . and 
as soon as you were able to bear the % . . 
village in Derby. Most of the rest j^ou 
know already; for it has been your own 
life, I mean your education at Mr. Whit- 
taker's and subsequently at Colchester with 
Dr. Craven. . . . Your father . . . while 
you were with Mr. Whittaker • . . died 
. • . Scotland , . . leaving his affairs in a 
. • . owing to his fatal confidence in. . . . 
It remains for me only to . . . [* God 1 
what's this ?'] ... Late one bleak, windy 
night last March, about a fortnight after I 
had . . . you, coming from my club in 



Leicester. 85 



Waterloo Place . . . Regent's Street • • . 
lamp-post . . . unhappy woman pestered 
me, and • . . [A low cry smothered itself 
in my throat, my eyes growing to the 
paper.] I turned, saying, **Here is some 
money for you. For heaven's sake, go 
home and ... on such a night as this ..." 
. . . then suddenly caught me by the arm, 
and cried out : ^' Captain James, Captain 
James, don't you know me ? — I'm Isabel 
Leicester." I fell against the lamp-post, 
and almost . . . The news of her death, 
the . • . seemed like a horrible dream. At 
first I could not . • . then she told me 
that she had accidentally heard from a 
Mend that he was dead, and had . . . and 
then asked about you. I answered nothing, 
for reasons which you will, I think, under- 
stand. But on her repeating her question, 
and adding that surely she had a right to 
know how you were, even if I refused to tell 
her ^vhere you were, I felt constrained to 
speak. I told her that you had been sent, 
first to a small school^ and subsequently to 



86 Leicester. 



a public school} where you had^ I believed, 
done satisfactorily : and then proceeded to 
inform her of the events that had led up to 
your interview with myself three weeks 
agO; blaming myself as much as I justly 
considered I could, and you also in the same 
manner.' [I had made an effort to control 
my rising feelings, and was forcing myself 
to read every word.] * She listened to me 
very quietly, and, when I had concluded> 
asked me if I had any idea where you had 
gone to. I answered that I had none. 
Then, as she remained silently looking in 
front of her, and as I began to perceive that 
any further prolongation of the scene could 
only be very painful and quite useless to 
both of us, I . . .' [I suddenly slipped a 
paragraph, catching only the word * money.'] 
* . . . reviled me and flung it into my face 
with . • . went away. After some mo- 
ments' thought, I decided that my duty 
. . . followed her . . . with a policeman 
I had happened to ... to an arch under 
a railway-bridge, where the unhappy crea- 



L€ic€ste7\ 87 



tnre . . • approached and found that she 
was sunk in a stupor-like dream . • • and 
ultimately . • • hospital . . . comforts • • • 
died/ 

Dkd. 

I stood up with the letter in my hanging 
hand. 

Nay, what was the meaning of all this ? 
— I turned to the table. How many apples 
were there on that plate ? One, two, three, 
four, five, six. I rent the letter into 
pieces. 

I strode across the room to the opened 
Ayindow : then looked back sharply, viciously, 
over my shoulder, almost expecting to see 
some one, some semi-human figure, with a 
cold smile on his cold face, behind me. 
Then the idea of Brooke, come from his 
grave to mock at me, seemed to cut my 
brain with a lash of anger's madness. 
Then it was a loin-swathed, emaciate 
Christ that stood sardonically there in 
the shadow. I leaped fiercely to the place. 



88 Leicester. 

and found that light and shade bad tricked 
me. 

. Tricked me ? Everything had tricked 
me ! I was in a cave of tricker}^ I cried 
out : 

* Will you tell me that such a combina- 
tion of circumstances as this could come 
about without design ? my poor mother, 
O my poor mother !' 

Then the realization of what I had been 
reading suddenly came to me again, and 
with it the frantic suspicion of false play : 
then I began thinking of my mother, taking 
my suflFerings as being the shadow of hers, 
for she, too, surely had gone through all 
that I had : then an idea came to me that 
almost made me shriek out. ' At lasty pass- 
ing sometvhat quickly into an alleys I met one 
face to face tinder a protmding shadowed lamp. 
For a moment I stood breathless, tcith my eyes 
in the woljishness and glitter of hers, and thenj 
like a lightning-fash that fills the whole air, 
terror of her filled me quite. I leaped aside, 
and then p^/.s*f her, phmged into a darlc-covered 



Leicester. 89 

way that was behind and beyond her, and 
hurried on^ past. . . .' I began to 
langh. 

Yes, yes, yes, I was the cub of the she- 
wolf that was driven by hunger into the 
public way to see what price her empty, 
filthy carcase would bring ! But she found 
no purchasers. Nor shall I ! 

Then suddenly : 

'Oh, you cursed city!' I cried. *You 
furnace- fire, in which life writhes with the 
corruption of death, you ... If I could 
sweep you oflf the earth with every — God V 
I cried, wheeling round convulsively with 
clenched fists. ' I have a few words to say 
to you, and then I have done. You have 
given me sight. I have used it : and it 
has told me that the earth that you have 
made and the creatures that you have put 
into it are foul. You have given me 
thought : and it has told me, it tells me, 
that you have no right, be you God a thou- 
sand times, to make your creatures foul 
and then damn them for their foulness: 



90 Leice8tei\ 

You have no right to make them fonl at 
all ! You have given me, too, love and 
hatred. With the love you have given me, 
I loathe you. With the hatred you have 
given me, T hate — nay, I despise and scorn 
youl I am not even a heggar at your 
gate. I am but a worm in the earth that is 
but an atom in your universe. But I stand 
here and scorn you ! Behold, I am in your 
hand. You can do with me what you will 
— all except this : turn from my heart that 
scorn I have of you. Hear my last word 
to you, God. It is the last I will ever 
speak to you. Henceforth I endure your 
acts in silence. If I have joy, I will not 
thank you for it. If I have grief, I will 
not curse you for it. Henceforth, I am a 
stranger to you; If you are, you are to 
me as if you were not. If you are 

not * I smiled. 

* Enough of this,' I said : ' perhaps some- 
thing too much. I am sorry I railed. And 
yet the poor cuckold that we call soul must 
pour forth the lava of its discovered decep- 



Leicester. 91 

tion, or it would burst. I have done now, 
I think.' 

I sat down in the chair and straightway 
hegan thinking, or trying to think, of what 
must now be done. In simple words, I had 
enough money now to live pretty well what 
life I cared to live. 

The eflfort of will required to break away 
from the past thought, and make a new pre- 
sent thinking, was greater than seemed at 
first. I found my thought flowing in two 
<^urrents at the same time : the upper shal- 
lower one of this new present thinking, the 
lower deeper one of that past thought. I 
looked up and saw the other letter lying on 
the table-cloth, where I had thrown it past 
my plate. This letter was Rosy's. I might 
as well read it. 

I stretched across to it : opened it : and 
glanced into it : 

' • . . I waited for you on Friday night 
for an hour and a half. And I really did 
think you would come some time to me, or 



92 Leicester. 

you would write and tell me why you hadn't 
come these three Fridays. And I am very 
sorry if you are angry with me for writing 
to you to tell you of it ; but I think you 
must have forgotten that you told me that 
evening that you would come again the next 
Friday, and I thought perhaps I had made 
a mistake about it, and that is why I waited 
these three Fridays, and I think you might 
have written to tell me why you could not 
come. 

' Minnie is dead. A man hit her across- 
the back with a stick yesterday, Mrs. Smitk 
says, when I was away, and it killed her. I 
cried about it ; which thing I have never 
had to do before quite like that. Please- 
write to me and explain why you did not 
come these three Fridays, as you said you 
would. I hope you will please excuse this 
long letter and the writing, but I don't sup- 
pose you care enough to mind. 
*I am, 

' Yours truly, 

* EOSY HOWLET. 



Leicester. 93 

'P.S. — I hope you are sorry abont 
Minnie. She was jast going to have some 
kittens, and now I suppose they're all dead 
too. Is it not dreadful ?' 

I was smiling. I re-read some parts of 
it, and then threw it np onto the plate, and 
rose and began to pace abont the room, 
thinking. 

After a time I stopped at the open 
window. 

*" There is a budding mon-ow in mid- 
night," ' I said. 

And then : 

* Yes : as well that as anything else.' 

And then : 

' Perhaps better.' 

I took up the lawyer's letter, and having 
folded, put it on the plate, and Colonel 
James's letter, and Bosy's, and put the 
cheque-book on the top. Then, standing 
thinking, ate all the grapes, and drank a 
glassful of water, and gathered up what was 
on the plate, and went upstairs into my room. 



94 Leicestei\ 

The gas was low as I had left it. I 
tamed it up. I set about doisg what I 
intended. I changed my clothes and boot& 
quickly : put the papers I had brought up^ 
together with my usual cheque-book and a 
pocket-book containing bank-notes to the 
value of twenty-five pounds, into my breast- 
coat-pocket, all the gold I had into my 
right waistcoat-pocket, and all the silver I 
had into my right trousers' -pocket. I had 
a sudden thought of packing a portmanteau r 
or my old black hand-bag. No : I couldn't 
be troubled with it. I would get what we 
wanted on the way. 

Then I turned out the gas, went do^vn- 
ctairs again, and wrote a short note to Mrs. 
Herbert, saying what I wished to be done 
in this matter. And as I sealed up the 
letter (force of habit, I suppose) I thought 
that it was lucky Eosy's letter had come in 
this way. Perhaps I should not have been 
doing this if it hadn't. 

Luck favoured me again : I lit upon a 
hansom at the end of the street. I told 



Leicester. 95 

the man to drive up the Edgware Bead, 
and I would tell him where to stop. 

The gas -lamps burned very faintly* 
There was a hush in the place, broken 
every now and then by distant sounds of 
stirring life. We were going quickly. I 
sat thinking. 

We were almost at the turning that has 
to be taken for Maitland Street. I thrust 
my hand out and waved. We came up a 
little, as it were, sideways to the pavement* 
I got out. How much should I give 
the man? I stood with two fingers 
in my waistcoat-pocket, thinking of a 
sovereign and an order to wait here 
for me. Then I determined no : and 
took out some silver, and gave him four 
shillings. 

I went on alone to the comer of the turn 
that was to be taken for Maitland Street, 
and crossed over into the deeper shadow of 
the other side. The horse was wheeling 
round : the cab drove away with sounding 
hoof-strokes. I went on, but rather slowly. 



96 Leicester. 



Then an idea came into my head to run as 
far as the comer of Maitland Street. I set 
oflf. I knew the place. I had a thought 
of Eosy, passing in front of that fish-shop 
and the three flaring gas-jets, with her 
bent-down head and hands holding one 
another in front. But there were too 
many thoughts of the place, and I thought 
them too many times, for them to be any- 
thing more than a flight through my tired 
brain now, in it and passed away. I came 
to the lamp-post. I crossed over, and 
knocked with strong knuckles at the door. 
I dismissed the thought of another knock- 
ing of mine at that door. I waited. No 
sounds I knocked again as before, but for 
longer. I listened. No sound. I knocked 
a third time. Nothing. This was foolery I 

I paused for a moment to think About 

what ? Now, if she had only slept in my 
room ... I drew back and looked up. 
God ! she did ! That girl, that friend of hers, 
don't -know-anything - about-her-history-sir. 
I went into the road, and bent down to 



Leicester. 97 

pick up something to throw. There was 
nothing of the sort there. 

I gave up an idea of thrusting my finger 
down between the stone-blocks, to jerk out 
problematical pebbles, and went into Hill 
Street, and set about searching for some- 
thing to throw. I could find nothing. I 
went on looking in the road, in the hope of 
seeing a mended place, whence I could 
take gravel. At last I found one, and 
found the gravel. Not such bad luck, 
on the whole. The eternal cussedness of 
things demanded that I should have wan- 
dered a mile or two before I got what I 
wanted. 

I returned. There was no sign of life in 
the house: no sign of life anywhere here 
apparently. Her head would be by the 
left-hand window. I threw up a pebble. 
It struck a pane : cracked it, I thought, 
and, falling on the pavement, bounded and 
rolled into the gutter. I made a step, 
picked it up, and, standing, threw again. 
Same result. But I didn't look for the 

VOL. II. 28 



98 Leicester. 



falling pebble : I looked steadily .at the 
window. Surely she was awake. 

Now for a little soft earth. Up it went. 
I looked steadily at the window. 

No : nothing. 

I sent up some more soft earth, and 
stood steadily looking at the window. 

No — ^yes. A movement : a movement 
of the blind. I stepped back, and, taking 
off my hat, and turning a little sideways, 
so that she might if possible see something 
of my face, looked up as before. Another 
movement of the blind. It was, I thought, 
drawn aside a little. I held up my out- 
stretched arms. 

All at once I knew the blind ran up, 
heard a hasp strike, and the top half of the 
window came down. There was something 
white in the dark space that had been the 
top half of the window. I cried out with 
something of a child's exultation : 

* Rosy, it's me ! — me ! Come down and 
let me in.' 

* Good gracious!' said her dear voice, 



Leicester. 99 



*how you frightened me! What's the 
matter ?' 

' Let me in ! let me in ! let me in !' I 
said. 

* " Do thou roll forth a fruit-cake 
out of the rich house, 
aud a beaker of wine 
and a basket of cheeses, 
and wheat-bread the swallow 
and the pulse porridge 
does not reject. Say, shall I go away, or some- 
thing receive ?" ' 

Heaven only knew what the poor child 
thought of it all ! I began laughing at the 
idea. Then, suddenly serious : 

^Mrs. Smith is fast asleep/ I said 
quietly, ' down here. I want to tell you 
something — something of the last import- 
ance to us both. Will you come and let 
me in ?' 

A pause, then : 

* Yes/ she said ; * I will come down.' 

Then the window was drawn up, and I 
stood waiting for some minutes. At last I 
heard her coming down the creaking stairs. 
A bolt was softly undone at the top of the 

28—2 



100 Leicester. 



door, a lock shot back : the door opened in, 
and I was standing by her in the narrow 
passage. 

^ Don't make a noise,' she said, ' or else 
you'll wake ' 

' " The baby ?" ' I said- She had put on 
her dress. 

She softly closed to the door. 

* What's the matter ?' she asked. I was 
struck and pleased by her quiet tone. 

* Let's go upstairs,' I said, * and I'll tell 
you.' 

We went up carefully ; she first, stopping 
once to tell me to be quiet, or Miss Martin 
would hear. My fickle thoughts that had 
become rather pallid (the trouble of 
going up so carefully, that is so slowly, and 
the hitting of my head against some damned 
beam or something), brought me into the 
shadowy room in no cheerful state. Why 
had not she lit a light ? She was groping 
on the mantlepiece for the matches now* 

She found them, struck a light; and 
then there we were in the yellow full glare 



Leicester. 101 



of the gas for a moment, before she turned 
it lower. I had not anything to say ready. 

At last : 

^ I am too tired/ I said, ^ in body and 
soul to do more than tell you what I want 
to, simply and shortly. Will you sit down ? 
there' — (pointing to the foot of the bed), *and 
I will sit here' — (at the head where the bed- 
clothes were drawn back). The child 
obeyed in silence. Although I did not look 
at her, 1 noticed her : to this extent, that 
her hair was all disordered, and rather 
matted, and her cheeks flushed with what 
I knew was a hot dry flush. I put my hat 
on the chair by me — the old cane-bottomed 
chair I knew (the same as of old, save that 
the hole in its bottom was grown larger). 
Then 1 said (she looking at me in a strange 
way all the time) : 

* My dear Eosy, I have come to make an 
offer to you, I have committed a crime 
here, in London, to-night, which necessitates 
my bolting out of England at once. I have 
scarcely any money left — in fact, just 



102 Leicestei\ 



enough to get oat of the place with. I 
want to know will you come with me V I 
heard her breath go suddenly sharply in- 
wards/ and stop for a moment. 

Looking at my booted toes shoving to- 
gether on the carpet, I proceeded : 

*I don't know what I'm going to do — sup- 
posing I am not caught, that is. But I 
dare say I shall be able to turn my hand to 
something or other that will do to keep 
body and soul together, and I dare say you, 
supposing you would care to come with me, 
might do the same. It's not a very inviting 
prospect to ofifer anyone — and there's worse 
to come yet. I don't believe in marriage. 
You would have to qome with me as my 
mistress. I might tire of you. You would 
have no guarantee but my word that I 
wouldn't bolt from you there, just as I am 
bolting from justice now. You know the 
sort of creature I am.' I looked up at her. 

Then, in a moment, she was in my arms, 
kissing me, laughing, crying, kissing me 
over and over again^ and I her, speaking 



Leicester, 103 



unintelligible sentences, uttering unknown 
words. A thrill went through me — the same 
thrill, it seemed, that had gone through me 
that winter's evening in the farm-house kitchen 
where Mary kissed me with her soft red lips, 
the same thrill that had gone through me 
when I saw Bayne standing there on the sta- 
tion platform, while I was carried away from 
her. Mary, lifeless mouldered corpse, lying 
in the oozy earth : Bayne lost to me for 
ever — v/orse than dead ; they only had 
found their ways into this lonely, longing 
boy's heart of mine, and she Bosy. 

I pressed her closely to me, my cheek 
against hers, the tears welling out of my 
eyes. The stubborn will seemed, broken at 
last. But I was tired, tired in body and soul. 
Breathless as she was from my embrace, she 
yet strained me to her with strength, strained 
me to her when my embrace relaxed, held me 
when, all things turning and swimming, I 
would have fallen. In that place of confused 
and dreamy sensations, I felt her hold, and 
had some comfort in it. I think I moaned and 



104 Leicester. 

muttered things scarcely intelligible to my- 
self. I say, it was the place of confased and 
dreamy sensations, but all the while I felt her 
hold and had some comfort in it. ^I, ' I thought 
at last for one moment stationary in mind ; 
* I, who had never in my life . . .' And I 
smiled; for maybe I had felt her hold be- 
fore, and had some comfort in it. ' The 
dear child ! the blessed Rosebud ! the little 
flower !' (Here were the tears again.) * If 
she had said No. ... if I had gone away 
without her : what I should have missed ! 
But I should never have known it.' (I was 
becoming conscious through the skin of my 
closed lids of the low gas-light) ^ I should 
have • . .* She was holding me in her 
arms : my cheek and the weight of my 
head on her breast, and the weight of my 
body on hers. I opened my eyes. She 
was smiling at me as a new-made mother 
might at her wakened child. For a moment 
I felt the pleasure of that hold and look. 
Then I loosed myself from her and said : 
^Damn it, I must have been fainting.' 



Leicester^ 105 



She nodded her head at me in her old 
half-merry way. 

* That's just what you did, then/ 

* My dear child/ I said, getting up to my 
feet, and making some steps, ' I'm a con- 
founded fool. Let me see. What did I 
say to you just now ? — ah, yes 1' wheeling 
at the door but, feeling a little dizzy some- 
how, and not desiring that she should be 
aware of it, came back and sat down on 
the bed before I said any more. 

Then, looking at my booted toes shoving 
together on the carpet as before, I began : 

* We've been making fools of ourselves, 
especially me — ^I mean, I. Now listen to 
me. Did you intend this to mean that you 
wanted to go with me abroad? Answer 
me : Yes or no ?' 

* Yes,' she said, * yes !* 

•Did you understand what I told you 
about the crime I'd committed, and the rest 
of it ? Did you understand it, I say — 
what a meant r 

* I don't mind about it,' she said, * one 



106 Leicester. 



bit, so long as they don't catch you. And 
I'm sure they worCC 

* How do you know that ?' 

* It would be so cruel/ 

' What would be so cruel ?' 

* Now that I've got you, for them to 
take you straight away from me again/ (I 
knew she shook her head.) * I'm sure they 
won't ! I'm sure they won't !' 

Her tone of voice, almost fierce, made 
me smile. 

* My dear Eosy,' I said, * I'm too tired 
to spend an hour in asking you to consider 
what a serious question all this is. You 
must take my words at their full, true 
meaning. Do you understand that our life 
will be a liard one — -perhaps a very hard 
one ?' 

^ Yes,' she said ; ^ I don't mind one bit.' 

^ Do you understand that I won't marry 
you — now or ever ?' 

No answer. 

*Just so,' I said quietly. *You didrit 
understand that. You thought I was 



Leicester. 107 

joking, I was not. I am not. I am in 
earnest. I will never marry you, if you 
come with me : never !' 

I rose and stood before her, and looked 
at her looking fiercely at me. 

* Now, my dear child,' I said, * answer me 
simply ; but do not hurry. Reflect before 
you answer. Don't be afraid of saying *'No." 
Believe I shall not break my heart if you 
say " No." Are you ready to go with a 
forger, a beggar, an atheist, as his mistress 
— ^not as his wife, mind — to a life that 
must certainly be a hard, perhaps a miser- 
able one ?' 

She looked down now, and seemed to be 
thinking. What of ? Bid she believe that 
I wouldn't break my heart if she said * No ' ? 
If that was her thought, I must answer it. 

* This very night,' I said, * I asked 
another woman to come with me, and she 
wouldn't. You see the sort of man you 
have to deal with.' 

I waited. 
At last : 



108 Leicestei\ 



* Yes/ she said in a low voice, * I'll go 
with you.' 

^ You'll have a hard life of it with me — 
even supposing the life itself wasn't hard. 
I mean : you see the sort of man I am. I 
am a little mad. I care for nobody but 
myself. Then I'm a terrible liar : you can 
believe nothing I say. I have told you 
bushels of lies to-night.' 

She rose, and looked me in the face. 

* I don't believe you 1' she said. * You're 
not selfish ! you're not a liar 1' 

* But I'm quite mad.' 

* How can you talk like that ?' she cried 
out pitifully. * You know I'd go with you 
wherever you liked in the whole world! 
You know I would 1' 

* Very well,' I said, beginning to feel 
head-confusing eflfects of this new eflEbrt. 
*Very well;' and I sat down on the bed 
almost exhausted. 

As I sat with my head bowed, looking 
at the carpet and not caring to struggle 
any more, she knelt down in front of me, 



Leicester. 109 

looking into my face, and then put her 
arms np and round me. I opened my 
knees: she put herself between them. I 
closed my eyes. My head nodded, and 
nodded, and nodded. 

^Ha!' said I, waking with a start, 'what's 
the time ? I mustn't forget to wind up 
my watch.' I took it out. A quarter-past 
three. Time had gone quickly. 

* Let me see,' I said* * What time's 
the morning mail to, Paris ? . . . Can we 
get a cab here easily?' 

^ Yes,' she said, ' there's a mews at the 
end of the street.' 

* It'll be all right if we start by six, I'm 
sure.' I was thinking what time it was 
when Brooke and I left Dunraven Place for 
that train. 

The end of it was that I lay down on the 
bed to rest myself for a few minutes, while 
she did something or other (I did not notice 
what she said), and then I fell asleep. 
Then I was half-awakened by feeling some 
one bending over me, to kiss me on the 



110 Leicester. 



lips : to which I objected, and moved my 
head, bat the other lips came after mine, 
and almost caught them, despite a sharp 
move back again. I awoke after that : and 
saw Rosy standing by the door, and the 
room filled with light not the gaslight. 

* Is it time to go ?' I asked. 

* Yes,' she said. 
I got up. 

* Now, what about the cab ? Where is 
this mews place you told me about, Rosy?' 

^ The cab's downstairs at the door wait- 
ing.' 

* You didn't go and giet it, did you ?' 

* Yes, I got it.' 

A pause. Then : 

^What's that?' I asked, looking at a 
bundle on the table. 

* My things.' 

* You needn't take them, you know,' I 
said. 

i But ' 

*No; we'll get everything we want in 
Paris/ 



Leice8tei\ 111 



i But ' 

* There, now ! there, now V said I, oflfer- 
ing her my arm, and getting her along, 
expostulating, to the door and opening it. 
^ Don't talk any more about it ! It's no 
good talking about it ! Get along with 
you r 

*But ' she said, turning at the 

top of the stairs. I put my hand on her 
mouth, whispering : 

* You'll have Miss Martin up in a mo- 
ment. By-the-bye,* I said, * do you owe 
Mrs. Smith anything ?' 

* No,' she said. * Hush !' 

She went down the dark stairs, I follow- 
ing her. Mrs. Smith was standing by her 
door. She made a sort of a curtsey to 
me. 

* Good-morning, sir,' she said. 

* Good-morning,' I said. 

She had the door open for us in a 
moment. Bosy went out quickly, and was 
into the cab (a hansom), and I followed, 
without a further word or sign to the old 



112 Leicester, 



devil. As I was getting in, I told the 
man, * Charing Cross/ over the roof, and 
then sank down beside her. I bent for- 
ward and puUed-to the flaps, and sank 
back again with a sigh. 

^ I have had rather a hard day of it on 
the whole,' I said. 

* But why did you make me leave ' 

I /put my hand oveY her mouth. 

* My dear child,' I said, * I preferred to 
let the dead past bury its dead as much as 
possible.' 

i But ' 

I pressed my hand closer. 

* And if it's your economical soul that's 
alarmed, know, my pippin, that there's no 
need for it. I'm not a forger. I'm not a 
beggar. I am an atheist. I am a liar. I 
told you that I had told you bushels of lies 
to-night, or rather, this morning.' I took 
down my hand, adding : 

* Now please don't ask more than twenty 
questions at a time, and I will do my best 
to explain matters.' 



Leicester. 113 



I looked at her, seeing her pretty puzzled 
face, laughed, and gave her a kiss side- 
ways. 

* You are mad !' she said. 

*I am!' I answered. * Everybody's 
mad. It's only a question of degree. And 
the maddest people of all are those that are 
most sane !' 



VOL. II. 29 



CHAPTER IV- 

Fortune favoured our flight. We arrived 
at Charing Cross in good time for the 
morning mail. I took two first-class tickets 
and tipped the guard heavily, and, despite 
several attempts to break in, successfully, 
for the privilege of having the compartment 
to ourselves. I lay back deep in my seat, 
with my feet up opposite me, full of thought, 
and almost unobservant of the child, for 
the first half-hour or so : when I felt her 
hand steal into mine, and, looking up at her 
sweet anxious face, smiled, and said : 

* Well, Rosy. Here we are, you see !' 

* Yes,' she said. * Here we are.' 

My brows came down a little, thoughtfully. 
Then : 



Leicester. 115 

* Are you sorry you came, child T I 
asked. 

* No, no. Not sorry.' 

* Glad then ?' 

* I would be — if you'd only speak to 
me.' 

I drew down her face and kissed the 
cheek, and laughed a little. 
Then she said : 

* What were you thinking about all this 
long time, that you didn't say anything to 
me?' 

* Well,' I said — * among other things, 
al)out where we were to go to.' 

* You . . .' she paused. 
I proceeded : 

* I think the best thing for us to do will 
be to get out at Calais ; not go on to Paris; 
Suppose we went to some little seaside 
village in Brittany for a month or so ? It 
must be very hot in Paris now.' 

' I will do what you like,' she said. 
' Nay ; but it ought to be the other way 
on. Should you like to go to a little sea- 

29—2 



116 Leicester. 

side village in Brittany for a month or 
so?' 

* Yes/ she answered ; * with you ; I have 
never seen the sea/ 

. * Very well/ I said ; * we'll get out at 
Calais/ 

We had a beautiful crossing, the sea like 
a mill-pond. Rosy wasn't sick. Fortune 
still favoured us, I thought. 

At Calais we got out, and I set about 
making inquiries as to the whereabouts of 
the desired little seaside village in Brittany. 
After many difficulties, that ended in — for 
me at any rate — complete weariness, I 
found out a place that seemed eligible, Pier- 
laix. 

In Pierlaix we arrived that evening, and 
found our way to an inn, where we entered, 
and I demanded two rooms for the night, 
and something to eat at once. After some 
trouble, that would have been amusing if it 
had not been so dreary to us completely 
wearied out, we were shown two rooms, a 
bedroom (as we thought) and a sitting-room, 



Leicester. 117 



which I accepted on the spot, and proceeded 
to iterate my demands for something to eat 
and drink at once. (We were in the sitting- 
room.) They left us. 

I opened the folding- windows wide, and 
stepped oat onto the little balcony, into the 
noise of the sea and the coolness of the 
evening breeze from over it. As I leant on 
the rail I felt Bosy at my side, and turned 
to her. Poor child, how pale and tired she 
looked I 

'Nevermind, Rosebud,' said I, putting 
my arm round her shoulders and smiling at 
her. * Keep your heart up I You'll be all 
right in the morning 1 I'm afraid the sea 
disturbed the equanimity of your stomach : 
What? you don t feel iU ?' 

* No,* she said ; * I'm all right, thank 
you/ 

' Then let's go up and wash ourselves,' I 
said. * I feel very filthy, I don't know what 
you do.' 

We went up into the bedroom together, 
and made some discoveries regarding the 



118 Leicestei\ 



quantit}^ of water here considered safficient 
for the ablutions of two. However, this 
difficulty also was at last overcome; but 
we gave up the soap in despair. It was 
just after this that the fat hostess reappeared 
with considerable complacency, producing a 
species of scrubbing-brush, as being a coup 
sur what monsieur required. (All the English 
gentlemen had the habit of using it, she 
explained to the puzzled host beside her.) 
When they had gone away : 

* I thought you knew French,' said Rosy, 
a little piteously. * What did she bring 
that scrubbing-brush up for ?' 

Weary and dreary as I was, I exploded 
into loud laughter at this, and kept on at it 
till I fell exhausted backward into the bed, 
and lay. From there, having rested a little 
while Bosy was trying to wash her face in 
the bowl that did duty for a basin : 

* I was only trying,' I said, * to make 
them understand, that I should like to have 
a tub in the morning.' 

' I believe the whole hotel was on the 



Leicester. 119 

stairs listening/ said Bosy, rather disgust- 
edly. I went o£f into laughter again. 

' I don't see what there's to laugh at/ 
she said : which made me continue louder 
than before. 

She dried her face and hands at the win- 
dow, with something of dignity in her air — 
I suddenly* stopped. 

' It will be rather fun/ I said, ^ seeing 
us buying new clothes to-morrow. You 
can't expect me to do that for you^ you 
know !' 

* I shan't/ said she. 

* Very well/ I answered philosophically. 
* Then . . .' she was crying. I jumped 
up and came to her. 

* Good gracious child, what's the matter?' 
I said, taking her in my arms; I'm 
sorry I . . . what is the matter ? I hope 
I . . / 

* It's very unkind of you,' she sobbed, 
^ to go on like that at me, and you know 
it is.' 

* Indeed,' I exclaimed, * I'm very sorry. 



120 Leicester. 

I didn't think you minded my fun, Rosy. 
I was only joking, you know . . . There, 
there now ! It's all right. Give us a kiss, 
and let's he friends again/ 

* I'm tired,' she said, wiping her eyes : 
* and hungry.' 

I continued chattering to her, till I at 
last succeeded in making her quite cheerful, 
and in that happy humour we went down 
together into the sitting-room. But, her 
hunger somewhat appeased by shrimps and 
fried sand-eels, the tiredness began to ac- 
quire the ascendant. Before we were half 
through dinner, the big brown eyes were 
blinking fast and frequent, and the little 
head nodding downwards, and suddenly 
starting up when it was approaching the 
table-cloth, at ever shortening intervals. I 
persuaded her to sit in the arm-chair in 
front of the window, so that she might look 
at the sea, since she didn't care to eat any 
more, while I finished the stewed fruit and 
three shrivelled apples. 

When I had peeled apple number two 



Leicester. 121 



and cut it into four pieces, I went round to 
have a look at her. She was fast asleep. 

I went hack and ate the four pieces, and 
then apple nnmher three, thinking all the 
while ahout things, till I hecame quite 
dreamy, and, after that, sleepy and very 
incoherent in my ideas ahout things. The 
end of this was that I awoke with a start, 
and having realized where I was and with 
whom, decided that hed was the best place 
for both of us. But when I came and 
looked at her breathing asleep, so pale and 
tired, I did not care to awaken her. And 
going, first opened and left open the sitting- 
room door, and then the bedroom door, and 
returned, intending to carry her up to bed. 
The poor child let herself be lifted with no 
more trouble than a few uneasy sounds and 
movements of her arms ; and then up with 
her I went, and laid her softly on the bed. 
She sighed, and sank into unruffled sleep 
again. I made her as comfortable as I 
could, and shut the door. 

Over the door there was a small window. 



122 Leicester. 

The walls of the room were simply boards, 
polished* I went to the other end, opened 
the window, and leant out. Below was a 
garden. I could hear, but not see, the sea. 
The evening breeze still blew softly and 
coolly. I gave a large long yawn, and be- 
thought me of sleep. I took off my coat, 
putting it on the back of a chair, and 
came and lay down quietly beside the child. 
I must have fallen asleep almost imme* 
diately. 

When I awoke, the room was half-full of 
sunlight, a bird was singing outside, and I 
saw Rosy, half a yard away, seriously look- 
ing at me. 

' Good-morning,' I said, 

* Good-morning,' she answered. 

* ... I wonder what time it is ?' 
I got out my watch and looked at it. — 
Half-past five. 

* Stopped,' I said. * . . . How long 
have you been awake ?' 

* Oh, a long time.' 

* ... I feel hungry.' 



Leice8tei\ 123 

^ What time is breakfast going to be T 

* God only knows or the fat woman. 

I don't know what even the French for it 
is. Suppose I get np and see/ 

I got np ; and, feeling very dried and 
not a little dirty, pulled off my waistcoat 
and shirt, and entered upon the best course 
of ablutions possible with the basin and 
neither sponge nor soap. 

^ This is certain,' I said, drying myself 
on the small towel : ^ we must have . . • 
In factf we must have everything; I never 
knew what it was to be without a sponge 
and soap before !' 

We talked a little about such things, till 
I was dressed. Then, on my way to go 
out, I stopped by the bedside, and stooped 
down over her. 

^ May I have a kiss ?' I asked. 

She put her arms up round my neck, 
and drew me down to her. Our lips would 
have met, but that I, avoiding hers, kissed 
her on the cheek. Then I, supporting my- 
self by my two arms on either side of her 



124 Leicester. 

(for she still held me), and^ looking at her 
thoughtfully, said : 

* If you think you wouldn't he happy with 
me, my dear Bosy, it is not too late for you 
to go hack again. You know that * 

' Naughty boy !' she said, smiling at me* 
' Fancy talking like that !' 

* Nay,' I said, * I was quite serious. 
You see what a weathercock sort of fool I 
am : one moment laughing, the next crying, 
the next cursing. It is not too late to go 
back again to your old life. Nay, it will 
never be too late. Whenever you are tired 
of me, you must leave me. Half of what 
was mine is yours. That goes without the 
saying. You are your own mistress — ^now, 
as always, as far as I am concerned.' 

' Very well,' she said. ' Then 111 take 
you, if you please.' 

After a moment : 

^ That being so/ I said, smiling, * I am 
yours — till you are tired of me, that is, and 
reject me. Till when, I will do my best — 
what in me lies, that is — to make you 



Leicester. 125 

happy. So help me my own poor will and 
love for you !' I bent down and kissed her 
on the lips. 

She seemed to me to understand what I 
meant. 

For the first week or so, there was no 
one in the inn — or, as they called it, the 
Hotel du Midi — but us ; but a good many 
people came over from the two adjacent towns 
of St. Denys and Mamy to spend the day, 
going back by the diligence in the evening. 
Then two Englishmen, evident 'Varsity 
men or aspirers thereto, en tour, arrived and 
stayed for a short time ; but, beyond talking 
with them a little at dinner (what I had 
taken, by-the-by, for our private sitting- 
room, turned out to be a public one), we, or 
rather I, saw nothing of them. 

The following, ^vritten later on in my last 
year's autobiography, refers to now : 

^ I had some things to trouble my peace : 
to write, and more than once, to Mr. 
Sandford, the solicitor who had informed 



120 Leic€8tei\ 

me of Colonel James's death and of my 
inheritance of his fortune, and to Strachan 
touching the book. 

^ I scarcely knew what to say to Mr. 
Sandford. Certainly I was not going to 
explain to him the cause of my sudden 
flight, and as certainly I was not going to 
lie about the matter. In the letter in 
which he informed me of the burial of 
Colonel James in Eensal Green, and of the 
probable cost of a suitable tombstone, etc. : 
he said that he now regretted, after his 
long, he might say, personal affection for 
the deceased, an affection which, etc., and 
in which, etc., etc., but he must request 
that I would transfer the conduct of my 
affairs to, etc., etc., etc. 

* I sat frowning over the regular winged 
writing for a little, with a vague wonder as 
to the nature of the friendship here alluded 
to, and sorrow that I had apparently pro- 
faned it : then tore the paper across, and 
threw it on to the table beside me. And 
Bosy came in with her hat on, ready for a 



Leicester. 127 

ramble over the reefs now the tide was out: 
and that was the end of the matter — as 
regarded the friendship, I mean. 

* One afternoon, in a fit of despondency, I 
sat down and began a letter to Bayne. I 
am not quite sure whether in my inmost 
mind I intended absolutely sending it. I 
think that the chief reason for my writing, or 
rather attempting to write it, was the relief 
thereby given to my pent-up feelings. 
Sheet after sheet was ripped up, and at 
last I sat still in a disgust that was aknost 
petulant. 

' As I sat thinking, a hot flush stole up 
to my cheek, and I looked fixedly at the 
pile of tom-up paper in front of me, which 
contained shameful words : hints, vague 
enough, of what I had done. '^ I could 
never see her again," I had said once. ** I 
could never forget what had passed between 
us. How could she expect me to return 
and look at her being consumed alive at the 
stake of Duty ? No ; I was made of flesh 
and blood, and I would I believed in God 



128 Leicester. 

that I might thank Him for it 1 Sach a 
sacrifice as she was making was a sacrifice 
to Moloch : sin, not heroism." — In any case, 
how purposeless, all this 1 in every case, 
how unmanly ! She had to dree her own 
weird, and I too now, with what light 
conscience could impart. That was all. 
All that day I felt I had done a wrong to 
Rosy. If there was a victim anywhere, it 
was she. 

* Then came Strachan. — I told him simply 
that it was impossible for me to return to 
London, at any rate, at present : I hoped 
never. I was going on to Paris in Septem- 
ber, and might perhaps take up my per- 
manent abode there. Could not the proof 
sheets be sent to me there, and from me 
on to him ? I would write to him again 
from the Hotel de Manchester, Rue Fau- 
bourg St. Honore, when I got there. I 
hoped Parker, Innes, and Co. had accepted 
the book all right. I should stay at the 
Hotel de Manchester till I found a house 
to please me, I thought. But, more later. 



Leicestei\ 129 



I asked him to excuse haste and confusion. 
As a matter of fact, I hated pens, ink, and 
paper now. To write at all required an 
effort. I was thinking of buying a vine- 
yard, and eating fruit till I brought on — 
whatever the disease was that was induced 
by a surfeit of grapes. I hoped Mrs. 
Strachan and the Miss Strachans were well. 
It was rather dull weather here. We had 
not had a fine summer for long. I doubted 
we ever should have one again. And so on.' 

A few days after this, a small troop of 
students and . young ladies who, the fat 
hostess assured me, were their brides, ar- 
rived, and we had rather noisy times of it 
at dinner. Bosy did not like any of them. 
They amused me, I used to talk with the 
men, or rather boys, as I best could. 
(Among other articles purchased by me at 
St. Denys, was a French dictionary and a 
stock of French novels at which I studied 
some hours a day.) But my belief in the 
brides (I mean in their brideship) was soon 
first considerably shaken, and then alto- 

voL. ir. 3i) 



130 Leicester. 



gether demoliBhed. I remember how one 
evening I was sitting out on the veranda 
(in the evenings the sitting-room was nearly 
always deserted for the garden or the country 
round about), having been reading the 
Memoires de Jennes Mariees with some plea- 
sure, when I became aware of one of our 
young couples at the bottom of the garden, 
sporting together somewhat as I supposed 
Isaac to have sported with Bebekah on a 
certain historic occasion not unconnected 
with Abimelech and a window. The idea 
made me laugh, and laugh again, shook 
my book down off my knees : when a hand 
was put over my eyes and firmly pressed 
there. I threw it off, and beheld Rosy 
standing absolutely glaring at me. 

* Hallo,' I said, * what's the matter ?' 

^ You were laughing at one of those girls,' 
she said. 

* What do you mean ?' I asked. * I was 
laughing at a couple there in the bushes, 
playing together.' 

* You were not ! You were laughing at 



Leicester. 131 

that girl ^ith the red hair. I saw her go 
out there a moment ago on purpose to make 
eyes at you/ 

* Are you joking ?' I said surprisedly, 
getting up. I could see she was not. I 
shrugged my shoulders.. She turned, so as 
to keep her eyes on mine. Our eyes met 
and stayed together while I spoke : 

' My dear Bosy, I do not tell lies, at least 
of this sort. Once and for all be it understood, 
that when I tell you I have done a thing, I 
do not expect you to question— to dream of 
questioning the truth of my words. Let 
this be enough. I'm tired of it already.' 

* But you did /' she burst out. ' You did 
You know you did !' 

•Did what?' 

* Nod to her, and laugh at her. I saw 
you!' 

I lost patience and gained what may be 
called wrath. I gave one step to her, with all 
that wrath concentrated in my piercing look. 

^ I warn you never to say such a thing 
again,' I said. • If you do, we part. There 

30—2 



132 Leicester. 

must be trust between ns^ or nothing. I 
did not tell you this before. I thought you 
understood it. Now choose. Believe me, 
or we part this moment — for always. I 
will never see you again.' 

If I had not caught her she would have 
fallen. She writhed about in my grasp^ 
muttering quickly, her face and hands work- 
ing, her eyelids quivering. I held her and 
looked at her steadily. I did not know 
what was the matter with her; but was 
decided that she must say she believed me, 
or we would part at once. Life with a 
woman who did not trust you would be 
nothing short of the popular conception of 
hell. 

At last she became coherent enough for 
me to gather that I had terrified her. Then 
she appeared to recognise me, and covered 
me with a hundred endearments, beseeching 
me over and over again not to leave her, or 
she would kill herself. I did not know how 
she loved me. Indeed, indeed, she couldn't 
help it. She always %cas jealous — from a 



Leicester. 133 

child. If I would only kiss and be friends 
again as we were before, she would never 
be jealous again. But that girl with the 
red hair was so forward-like, she didn't care 
tvhat she did ! 

Weary of this, I sat her down on the sofa, 
and stood, half- turned away, before her. She 
went on in the same strain for a little, and 
then came a pause. Perhaps she was ex- 
hausted. I said : 

* Well, Kosy, have you considered ? I 
was not joking just now. I asked you to 
choose. Do you believe what I said to you 
about those two down there, or do you not ? 
You know what your choice implies ?' 

* What ?' she asked ; * what do you 
mean T 

I patted my foot on the ground to keep 
me in patience. I answered : 

* I cannot live with anyone who thinks 
that I have told a deliberate lie. If you 
think I have told you a lie, then I will 
leave you.' 



134: Leic€stei\ 

^ I don't think you told a lie. I never 
Eaid I thought yon told a lie/ 

* Didn't you say just now you thought I 
had heen ** making eyes/' as you put it, at 
that red-haired girl ?' 

' Yes, I said I thought you did/ 

* And didn't I say I had not ?' 
'Yes/ 

* And didn'i you say then that I had ?' 
' Yes/ 

' And didn't I assure you that I had not ?' 

* Yes/ 

' And didn't you refuse to believe me ?' 
'Yes/ 

' And what is that but teUing me straightly 
and directly that I had lied to you T 

* I don't understand it,' she said pite- 
ously, bewildered. I walked round the 
table, with my hands in my pockets. 

Then, standing in the middle of the open 
window, I stared out into the dull evening 
and my thoughts. I do not know how long 
I stood so: maybe scarcely two minutes, 
but it seemed more than two hours. I roused 



Leicester. 135 

myself with a sigh, turned round, and going 
to her, knelt down by her knees, and put 
my arms round her, and said : 

* My little Eosebud, I'm sorry, I forgot 
for a moment that you were so • • so like 
a rosebud, and thought (how foolish of 
me !) that you were something like a great 
big palm tree I I'm sorry. I won't forget 
again/ 

How the child smiled, and cried, and 
laughed, and caressed me 1 

We came on to Paris in the first week or 
so of September, to the Hotel de Man- 
chester. A letter had arrived there for me 
the night before, from Strachan. He ex- 
pressed surprise at my flight in the night- 
time, and hoped that there was nothing 
serious the matter with me. But Mrs. 
Strachan had been pestering him to take 
her and the girls to Paris for a fortnight, 
and as his term at the Queen's College did 
not begin till the end of October (by-the-by 
he had not informed me that he had just 
got the chair of Natural History there, had 



136 Leicester. 

he ?), he thoaght he might manage it (say) 
half-way through September. We conld 
talk over matters about the book then. 
Parker had agreed to publish it all right ; 
but there was some lumber about plates, etc. 
He would write again shortly, or^ perhaps 
better, when he arrived in Paris. 

I answered this letter at once. 

First, as regarded the book. No ex- 
pense was to be spared to make it attractive. 
That was my affaii*, or rather it was Mr. 
Brooke's own. I only held his money and 
property as a guardian till Mr. Starkie re- 
tamed from Africa, when I should hand it 
over to him with the account of what had 
been expended of the one or made use of 
of the other, during his absence. But, I 
was quite sure, no possible objection could 
be raised to any expense undertaken in 
behalf of the book. I would be responsible 
for that. For the rest I need not say how 
glad I ehould be to see him (Strachan) here 
in Paris, but it would be, I thought, impos- 
sible for me to see Mrs. Strachan or his 



Leicester. J 37 

daughters. For this reason : there was with 
me now one who had given np all she had 
for my sake, for which I loved and rever- 
enced her, and considering that the only 
reason that she was not my wife was because 
I did not believe in what was known as 
* marriage/ I would go nowhere where she 
could not come with me, and be assured of 
the same respect as if she were my wife. 
This I knew was more than I could ask 
(my first form of the sentence was : than 
either I could ask or desire) of Mrs. Strachan, 
with the beliefs that I knew she held. I 
repeated that I should be indeed glad to see 
him here, I hoped in my own house, and 
have some opportunity of returning him 
some little of the hospitality which he and 
his had given to me while I was in London. 
There was, I thought, no more to be 
said than this. If he were a true man it 
would be enough : if he were not, then let 
each go on his separate way. It was as 
nothing to me. Only one acquaintance the 
less. . . Should I never have a friend ? 



138 Leicester. 

In the morning we set out together in 
pursuit of a house, or rather a flat, to suit 
us. After some trouble, I remembered that, 
when I had been at the pension in the 
Avenue de Fontenoi, I had noticed a flat 
that was to let, some way up the street, 
and which had impressed me favourably for 
some reason or other. I suggested that we 
should go there now, and we did. The 
place suited us, and we took it. 

We, or rather I, began with a delightful 
scheme of doing each room (there were seven, 
not counting the kitchen, all opening into 
one another) in some particular style : as, 
for instance, there was to be a terra-cotta 
room, and a brass room, and a silvered 
room, and so on. I got through the first 
two pretty well, I think, but with great 
trouble, in the next three or four days. 
Then one morning came a letter from 
Strachan. — He would manage to see me 
soon somehow, and we could arrange about 
the book. He was bound to cross the 
Channel in any case, he found, before . the 



Leicester. 139 

term began. There were some bones in the 
Museum of Natural History that he must 
manage to see somehow before he went on 
any further with a monograph on the 
Elephas Primogenius he was now working 
at. Mrs. Strachan and the girls were not 
coming to Paris this year. I must excuse 
haste, and, hoping to see me well, he re- 
mained, etc. 

What a time that was, furnishing the 
house and putting my money matters in 
order ! As for the idea of doing each room 
of the house in a particular style — ^Homme 
propose, les commis disposenti I really 
don't know how we ever got the place done 
at all. However, at the end of a fortnight, 
we, or rather I, had made five of the seven 
rooms habitable, and the two servants I had 
got had done the same for the kitchen. (The 
servants of the whole house slept up above 
in the grenier, as they call it, not in the 
several flats.) I worked like a slave, and 
rather liked it: hanging all the pictures, 
deciding where, and generally helping, to 



140 Leicester. 



pat all the things in their places, and so 
on; for I had my doubts about the Parisian 
sense of the beautiful in the matter of 
furniture arrangement. 

Bosy's chief anxiety in the matter was as 
concerned the fate of the things which she 
had herself ordered, all the linen and the 
household utensils. • She did not care to 
come up to the place itself, for reasons of 
her own: not unconnected, I thought, with 
a small co£Gba which had happened to be 
exposed by the door the morning of her 
first visit, covered with flowers, a child's 
coffin. Her fear of death was a fear, 
as far as I could make out, not of death in 
the abstract but in the concrete : perhaps I 
should say, she had a fear not of death but 
of the dead. And yet there must have 
been some other causes at work ; for when 
I had asked her, as we went up the stair- 
case, why she hurried by so quickly, she 
had said in a half-whisper : 

' It was a child. Don't let's talk about 
it.' 



Leicester. 141 

It mast have been a fine thing in the 
way of amusement to have seen her order- 
ing her things at the Louvre, her favourite 
shop, lists in hand. The composition of 
those lists in the evenings with pen, ink, 
paper, and dictionary were amusing enough ; 
but she would not hear of my going with 
her to see their fulfilment. 

At last all was ready for her, and the 
next morning we installed ourselves. 

I remember that as we sat together that 
evening, I looked across to her sitting with 
far-off eyes with her book, and thought how 
impossible it was' to know anything about 
anyone else. I felt that in her mind a 
train of ideas eidsted of which I was abso- 
lutely ignorant. 

At last : 

* Rosy,' I said, getting up, * I have not 
welcomed you to your home.' 

She rose, and I took her hands, and, 
looking into her eyes, went on : 

* Welcome to it, and may you be happy 
in it I And here at the beginning of our 



142 Leicester. 

new life together, let us say that, whatever 
may happen, one thing shall always be 
between us — Trust. Beheve me/ I said, 
taking her in my arms and looking closer 
into her eyes. * Believe me, child, that 
without Trust, happiness can never live, 
let love be as broad and as deep as is the 
sea. My life is yours, almost to make or 
mar, and maybe yours is mine. Love, as 
I take love to be, the caring for another 
more than for yourself, — alas, I have it not 
to give you. It is best that I should tell 
you this. I do not love you as I should, I 
know, to have taken you as I did. That 
was the wrong I did you. But I may love 
you some day ; and in the meantime, be- 
lieve me that all I have to give you, child, 
my dearest liking, — I would say love, 
knowing that what I mean is of love, but 
that I have but just hallowed the word by 
its highest flight, and would not now stay 
it half-way up. — ^But do not think that 
word of *' liking " cold. It is not. Can- 
not you know this now, as I hold you so, 



Leicester. 143 



and look into your eyes ? Oh Rosy, give 
yourself to me, heart and soul 1 It seems 
to me as we are now that Love is not so far 
away from us.' 

Her arms pressed me with strange 
strength. Her face grew to mine. I 
breathed rather than heard the coming 
words she said : 

* I love you I' thrilling through and 
through me. 

And with the words came something of 
her soul ; for our lips met in a kiss that 
was her full surrender unto mine : a kiss so 
sweet, so long, so mingling, that I knew 
not whether this was death or life, or earth 
or heaven. And then I thought that it 
was love. 



CHAPTER V. 

The Professor came in upon us after twelve 
o'clock lunch, one mild, late October day, 
when we were standing together leaning 
over the library balcony-rails and watching 
the aerial manoeuvres of two swifts. 

* I am very glad to see you/ I said, 
holding his hand and looking into his face. 
Then turning to Eosy, who had drawn back 
on the sudden appearance of this stranger 
by my side, I explained : 

* This, my dear, is the friend for whose 
sake I wished our house to be in all readi- 
ness — ^Professor Strachan/ 

Rosy put out a timid hand, and said 
blushingly and softly : 

* I am very glad to see you/ 

The Professor smiled. Who could help 



Leicester. 145 

it ? And then gave an odd glance at me 
which I rejected, and that, I think, dis- 
missed some invisible commonplace trouble 
of ours into the outer air, and he and I 
were in some way more really friends than 
we ever had been. 

He stayed in Paris for eight or nine 
days, daring which I had the pleasure of 
taking him and the Bosebud to see the three 
plays I thought were the best worth seeing. 
Those three evenings were quietly happy 
ones. He and the child took to one 
another, I thought, remarkably : and 
therein lay the quiet happiness of those 
three evenings to me, to sit still and listen 
to their talk, with a certain half-dreaminess 
in my thoughts of them, and with a certain 
half-wonder in the half-dreaminess — half- 
wonder to know this much of the gentle- 
ness and tender expansiveness of the man 
to the. child-girl. I remember how parti- 
cularly this feeling came into and over me 
the last night he was with us, at the Gymnase 
it was, and how I thought about it all the 

VOL. ir. 31 



146 Leicester. 



way home, and looking into his eyes as 
after snpper he said good-night to me a 
second time at the street-door, how the 
sudden thought came that he knew my 
thought, and to where did the thought 
tend? As I came up the dark staircase 
with my candle-light sending uncouth 
shadows about me above and below, I 
wondered, in a half-vague way, about the 
meaning of the thing ? And the meaning 
about this half-vague wondering about the 
meaning of the thing ? And to where did 
it all tend ? 

When I came into the dining-room, I 
found Rosy leaning against the mantelpiece 
warming one foot. 

* Are you cold ?' I said, putting down the 
candle on the table and throwing myself 
into an easy-chair, with my knuckles up to 
my mouth and my eyes to her. 

* Yes,' she said ; * I am cold — a 
little/ 

* Why, it's quite warm,' I said. 

She made a little motion with her back 



Leicester. 147 

expressive of a shiver. I took np a book. 
She turned her head : 

* Don't read any more to night/ she said. 

* You're always reading.' 

* Am I ?' I asked, looking at the tops of 
the leaves. ^ Perhaps I want to get wise 

• . . If I were you, I should learn French, 
Eosy. I'd be only too glad to get you a 
master. And why not music too ?' 

^I don't seem to care about it,' she 
said. 

* You are lazy.' 
A pause. 
Then I : 

'I wish you would learn French und 
music. I am very fond of music' 
She came to me. 

* Don't sit on the arm of the chair,' I 
said, * or you'll break it.' 

She stopped. I continued looking at the 
tops of the leaves. Then she drew a stool 
from by the table to by my feet, and sat 
down upon it and looked at me. In a little 
I met her gaze. 

31—2 



148 Leicester. 



*WeU?'Isaid. 

* I'll learn the French and the music if 
you like 1' she said. 

I laughed. 

'Nay, the liking must be yours. I 
don't want you to do what you don't 
like.' 

* You're always reading,' she said. ' I 
don't believe you ever think about me. 
You don't care xvJiat I do — really' 

* I don't,' I said quietly. • You are 
right.' She seemed struck speechless. 

I opened the book and began reading. 
At last : 

* You don't — care — ^what — ^I do ?' she 
repeated in amazement. 

* No,' I said. * You may go the devil as 
soon as you please. You are a trouble 
to me.' 

Silence. I reading. 
At last I said : 

* The Professor, you see, came over later 
than I thought he would.' 

A pause. 



Leicester. 149 

I felt her hand on my knee. 

* Are you joking ?' she said. 

^ Joking ?' said I, lowering the book and 
looking at her with surprise. 'Not the 
least in the world. I said I didn't caxe 
what you did. I don't. I've examined 
myself thoroughly in the matter this last 
week^ I was only waiting till Strachan's 
visit was- over. (By-the-bye, I am going 
to see him off to-morrow evening.) You 
remember my agreement with you ? You 
were to take half my fortune and leave me 
the moment you tired of me. I have come 
to the conclusion that it's only fair for me 
to be able to do the same with you; I'm 
tired of you. You may go to the devil as 
soon as you please. We'll arrange business 
matters later.' I lifted up the book and 
continued my reading. 

In a little she rose and went to the fire- 
place. I read on. She made no sign of 
life. A sudden idea came to me that she 
had fainted — was dead I I lowered my 
book: saw her gazing over the table into 



150 Leicester. 



the air. Got up, throwing the book onto 
the table by the candle, and said slowly : 

* Well, my dear, let's part good friends 
at the least. It was a blunder on my part, 
our acquaintance : also • • ; a blunder on 
yours. No ill-feeling on either side ; eh ? 
In token whereof we will spend one more 
night together, and then — part ? . . . 
What r 

Silence : she still gazing over the table 
into the air. I advanced, and recognised 
that I desired her, which made me laugh. 
It was the first time I had so recognised the 
fact. She answered nothing: made no 
motion. A sudden feeling of the cruelty 
of my experiment seemed to bite me. I 
had not thought of it in that way : cruelty. 
I at once began to undo my sewing : 

* Well, Rosebud,' said I, taking her two 
little still hands in mine. ' You little goose, 
what are you thinking about T 

At last she looked at me ; looked in my 
eyes long, till I laughed. 

* You are a bad man,' she said. 



Leicester, 151 

* You do not mean it ?' I said saucily. 
* You are a wise woman and — ' She had in 
a moment, smitten me smartly on the cheek 
with the palm of her hand I I hurst out 
into bright laughter, catching her, as she 
sat bolt upright with an expression half- 
startled half-defiant, in my arms, and 
smothering her cheeks and lips with 
kisses . . . 

In the end, she was echoing my laughter, 
and we were like two half-wild romping 
children. 

But the experiment was spoilt. Perhaps 
it was premature. 

I wondered that night, or rather morning, 
as I lay awake thinking in the grey light, 
while she slept sweetly beside me, why I 
had attempted that experiment, and what I 
had quite meant by it. And wondering, I 
fell asleep. 

The next evening, I met the Professor at 
the Gare du Nord, as we had arranged, and 
(he, at the end of our walk up and down in 
the hall, commending Bosy to my care as 



152 Leicester, 



a last sudden thought which I felt he 
hadn't liked to broach as of any other 
sort) I saw the last of him that was 
to be seen, and turned away a little sadly. 

As I walked home to Bosy, who was 
waiting for me (to go out a walk she had 
said, and I had half agreed), I had a half- 
vague feeling that we two, she and I, were 
entering upon a somewhat difficult stage of 
development, and thought of it, as usual, 
half vaguely. When I opened our door, I 
found her seated on the ottoman in the hallj 
dressed in furs, waiting. 

* My dear child,' I said, drawing out the 
latchkey, * it*s quite warm out. How can 
you expect to walk quickly when you're 
muffled up like a mummy ? and stays on 
underneath, I'll be bound.' I was smiling. 
She came towards me with a saucy strut, 
so to show her small pointed boots. I 
looked at them and said : 

* Oh, frightful 1' 

She caught me by the arm and half- 
swung there. 



Leicester. 153 



* You're in such a good temper to-day I' 
she said. * We'll go to a nice cafe on the 
boulevard, and drink cafe noir, in nice china 
cups, and play at dominoes. I do like 
dominoes. We will — Eh V 

*God help you!' said I. *You are 
incorrigible. If you die before me, I 
will have you buried in stays and patent- 
leather boots, and have a corset cut on your 
gravestone. You won't find corsets in 
heaven when you get there. You will 
have to migrate further south. There are 
plenty of them in hell. Satan invented 
them.' 

* How shockingly you do talk 1' 

* How so? tell me that ?' I said seriously. 

* You shouldn't talk in that way.' 

I sat down laughing on the ottoman. 

* Shall we go to the caf6 by the Frangais ?' 
I said. * You see, my dear, this earth is, 
after all, rather an odd place to live in; and 
we humans — or rather, webcasts — are really, 
after all, rather odd things to be living in 
it; and this is all the more so on account 



154 Leicester*, 

of murder and sausages. Yon might also 
include prophets and poachers. But, seri- 
ously, — shall we go to the cafe by the 
Frangais ?' 

* How ridiculous you are !' she said. 
*Very well.' 

' My dear/ I said, ' shall we take a cab?' 

We took a cab, and I talked like a 
rational (or irrational) being for the rest of 
the evening. 

It was late when we got home again, 
and the concierge apparently deep in his 
slumbers; for we stood, I pulling at the 
bell, Bosy seemingly tired into the quietness 
of speechless acceptance of things, for over 
five minutes. At last we got in, and went 
slowly up the dark staircase together, I think- 
ing of last night's experiment till I began 
to laugh. Then I found we were standing 
in front of our own door ; perhaps had been 
standing for some time. Eosy seemed 
resigned to my apparent eccentricities now. 
There she stood with her hands muff-wise 
in her sleeves, and her eyes half closed, and 



Leicester. 155 

her little head sleepily quavering downwards. 
I chucked her sharply under the chin. 

* It's time to get up and eat sally luns/ 
I said. 

* Good gracious, how you did startle me!' 
she said. * What's the matter ?' 

I drew the latch key out of my pocket, 
and, at the first shot, drove it into the key* 
hole, and opened in the door. The orna- 
mented, luxurious passage looked as it were 
warm and almost cosy in the red light of 
the hanging oil lamp's little floating redder 
core-flame. She went in, and I after her, 
closing and locking the door behind me, 
while she was on and into the morning-room. 
There was a small window halfway up the 
left-hand wall of the passage, and it looked 
into the library. I could see that the 
curtain, that was usually drawn right across 
the window, was now only half drawn. I 
went and observed what she was doing. 
She was on her way across the room — to 
the fire, of course. Down she sat on the 
hearthrug, and doubtless was staring into 



156 Leicester. 



the red-ember realm of castles and strange 
forms. Then she looked round : • Why wasnt 
he coming V Then back again at the red- 
ember realm. What a strange thing for me, 
here, in Space and Time and Life, so to be 
observing her; here, too, in Space and Time 
and Life. What were we to one another ? 
Not only Eosy to me, and I to Rosy, but 
each one of ns — each one of us humans to 
each other one. The dreamy thought grew 
broader in me, my eyes still looking at the 
firelight picture there, but not comprehend- 
ing it. She looked round again. The move- 
ment recalled me to my ordinary self. * Why 
wasn't lie coming V I felt a sweet tenderness 
for the poor child waiting for me there. Oh, 
Eosy, Eosy ! 

Then I was away : through the morning- 
room, where, on the sofa, lay her furred coat 
and hat, and, parting the curtains of the 
doorway, stepped into the library. She was 
looking back for me. I threw my hat into 
a chair, had off my coat, sent it after the 
hat, and came to her. I threw myself down 



Leicester. 15 7 



behind her on the soft hearthrug, and^ rest- 
ing my head, that was beside her, on my 
hand, looking into the eyes that were look- 
ing at me : 

* Rosy,' I said, • do you believe in God T 

* Yes,' she said. And with her eyes in 
the red-ember realm, •of course/ 

*Then don't you think you're doing 
wrong being with me ?' 

* Yes,' she. said, with her eyes still in the 
red-ember realm. 

* And don't you think you'll be punished 
for it r 

* I am sure I shall,' she said. . 

A pause. I somewhat surprised. 

* Then why do you do it ?' 

* Because I can't help it.' Her eyes always 
in the red-ember realm. 

* What do you mean ?' 

'I can't help it. Can't you see,' she 
said, turning full unfathomed eyes on me, 
* I can't help it. I love every muscle in 
your body.' 

The simplicity of thought, word, voice 



158 Leicester. 

made me say, with a Buspicion of a small 
smile romid the comers of my mouth: 
* That's awkward,' and bring my eyes down 
to the hearthrug, while I thought for a 
moment of that last expression of hers and 
its meaning. 

Then, looking up : 

* Would you like me to marry you ?' I 
said. 

Her eyes went as unfathomed as before 
into the red-ember realm again, and became 
distant. Her lips said slowly : 

* I should like to have you without the 
sin; but . • . / 

' WeU ' 

* I shouldn't like you to marry me/ 
^Why?' 

No answer. 
I repeated : 
*Why?' 

* Can't you see,' she said, turning her 
eyes to me, but with a more ordinary light 
in them, * why I shouldn't like you to marry 
me?' 



Leicester. 159 



* No,' I said. 

She looked to the red-ember realm again, 
but not into it, and her eyes became dreamy. 
She would, perhaps, answer me before we 
were both asleep ! 

She said : ^ I don t think you'd care for me 
even as much as you do now if you married 
me. No' (she shook her head), ^I wouldn't 
like you to marry me. Besides . . . .' 

* Well ?' I said, in a clear tone, that 

was meant to show that I really did expect 
her to satisfy what curiosity I had. 

* You will want to marry some one,' she 
said, suddenly looking at me with the more 
ordinary light in her eyes, ' some day.' 

* No,' I said, *! shall never want to marry 
— any one.' 

* Ah,' she said, * wait till you love some 
one — and then 1' She nodded her head. 

* Why did you think I didn't marry you ?' 
I asked. 

^ Because you didn't want to,' she said. 

* No — at least, no to your thought.' 

* What do you mean ?' 



160 Leicester. 



* I don't believe in marriage. You knew 
that. If I did, or had, I would have married 
you.' 

' That's sinful, not to believe in marriage. 
Don't you believe in God ?' 

* To the best of my belief, no. One thing 
I am sure about : I don't believe in Jesus. 
I suppose Jesus and God are one and the 
same thing to you, are they not ?' 

* Yes, Jesus is God/ 

* And God is Jesus ?' 
*Yes.' 

' How is that ?' 

* That's the mystery. We don't know. 
You ought to have faith, and believe in 
it.' I looked down. There was absolutely 
no good in attempting to say anything 
serious on these matters to her. I felt the 
tenderness I had felt for her a little while 
ago return to me. I looked up. 

*Eosy,' I said, *I don't like you to think 
what I can see you do think about my not 
having married you. Will you believe me, 
when I tell you that my disbelief in Jesus 



Leicestei\ 161 



is quite as strong as yonr helief^ and that 
that, and that only, was the reason why I 
didn't marry you ? I would not marry any 
woman in the world, however much I loved 
her. I could not repeat the words of the 
marriage service with my lips, and laugh 
at them in my heart. That would not be 
true/ 

^ You would, though,' she said, looking 
as if with a look of experience at me, who 
has none, ' if you loved a person.' 

What was the good of contradicting her ? 
I kept silence, with downcast eyes, for a 
moment : and then asked, I did not care to 
know why : 

* Why, if you believe that you will be 
punished for all this, don't you ask me to 
marry you and chance my not caring for 
you then even as much as I do now — as 
you say ? What sort of punishment do you 
think you'll get T 

' I shall be burned in fire. I knew that 
long ago. ... I knew quite well it would 
be like this some day. I used to pray to 
VOL. II. 32 



162 Leicester. 

God not to think about you, bat I conld 
not help it : I did think about yon ! When 
you went away to Paris, I was ill, and I 
thought I was going to die : and I promised 
Gx)d I would never think about you any 
more ; but I got well agam, and I went on 
thinking about you more than ever ! I 
couldn't help it. And at last I felt I 
couldn't do without you. You've no idea 
what a way I used to get in sometimes. I 
used to feel as if I must get up that very 
moment, and go and find you, and hold you 
in my arms and love you. I couldn't help 
it. I know I shall be punished for it ; 
but . . * I can't help it. I suppose I 
must be. — Then, you see, you came back, 
and we had those walks together. I 
knew you didn't care for me ; but you 
were so much to me. I covldnt do without 
youl* 

To watch the child as she sat, looking 
with her half-dreamy, unfathomed eyes into 
the fire, and to hear her telling her story in 
this way ! It was pitiful. 



Leicester. 163 

I drew myself up beside her, and put my 
arm round her shoulders, and leaned her 
body against mine. She did not seem to 
notice my movement : to feel my arm 
round her shoulders* She was silently 
looking into the to me unknown place before 
her. 

' Rosy/ I said, ' Eosebud/ rubbing my 
cheek softly against hers, * I would do any- 
thing, if it were only true, to make you 
happy. I would marry you to-morrow if it 
were not for those . • . those words that 
would be so false in my mouth, that I 
could not utter them. I could not do that. 
But there are, now I think of it, other ways 
of marrying people. I will find out about 
them. Then, you see, you would be my 
wife : I mean, as far as having my name ; 
so that no one could think or say anything 
against you.' She was shaking her head. 
* Nay/ I said, smiling, * can't you see that 
in this way you would have a greater, a 
more lawful claim, you might say, upon 
me, in case I ever did want to marry any- 

32—2 



164 Leice8te7\ 

one — with the marriage-service and the 
rest of it/ I was smiling. 

* No,' she said ; * I wouldn't care about 
that. Not one bit.' 

* But suppose/ I said — * suppose I ever 
did fall in love with anyone, and did want 
to marry them ? . . . What then ?' 

* Then you'd have to, that's all,' she 
said. 

* But what would you do ?' 

* I'd go away, and never see you 
again.' 

*I do hope you wouldn't, Rosy! I 
hope you never will, whatever comes or 
Roes. You must always be dear to 
me. You must always let me be your 
friend.' 

'While some other woman had you? 
That's likely 1 Oh, you don't know what 
love is r 

' I don't,' I said. * I was only putting a 
hypothetical case. — ^But you know quite 
well that I never would leave you, however 
much I loved anyone else.' 



Leicester. 165 



* But I wonld leave you, if I thought yon 
loved anyone else/ 

* But I wouldn't let you know/ 

* But you couldn't help it/ 

' But I never shall love anyone, bo ' 

* How do you know that ? I thought I 
never should love anyone ; but, you see, I 
do. I hope you'll love some one some day 
who doesn't love you, and then you'll know 
what I have to suffer/ 

A pause. 

* Supposing,' said I, * that I loved you, 
and you didn't love me/ 

*Yes/ 

'Well, supposing you loved somebody 
else, and left me, I shouldn't mind always 
being your friend/ 

She gave a short laugh. 

* Wouldn't you ! Oh no ! I tell you : 
if I ever found out that you loved any 
woman besides me ! I would go away from 
you. I Would never see you again. You 
neve r should have me again ! The idea of 
being your —fmnd, as you call it ! Do you 



166 Leicester. 



think I could look at any woman, and know 
that she had you for her own, and * • % 
and not Mil her T 

She stopped : then hegan shaking her 
head and langhing to herself. I eyed her 
from under gathered brows : I suspected 
the actor's sense in her as well as in myself. 
An old, somewhat vague idea, that had 
been gathered into a cluster of heads, it 
seemed, a half-century ago, but was really 
only what might be called last night, now 
suddenly took a one unmistakable head 
with two one-seeing eyes that saw one pur- 
pose. I turned her head round to me and 
kissed her full and long on the lips. The 
effect was strange. — ^It was a new child 
this, here with me in a new place of early 
day's air and light, I could scarce think 
of the old self of hers that was now gone, 
gone I knew not where. 

^ Eiss me again,' she said in a low, half- 
breathless voice, bringing her mouth towards 
mine. ' Eiss me.' 

A certain devil's light of mirth came into 



Leice8tei\ 167 



my eyes. • I laughed at her, and drew 
sharply back with back-spread arms. 

* No, no, no,' I said ; * you little green- 
eyed monster you ! You shall chase me 
for another kiss, if you want it. I • . / 
I had stopped. 

She bent to me with her hands half-up, 
frightened a little at the look in my 
face : 

' What is it ?' she said. * What's the 
matter ?' 

I leaped up onto my feet. There was 
devilry in it! Up it rose, the unfailing 
companion, surely for ever the unfailing 
companion of my haunting tune of in- 
evitable gold-light and mockery that rises. 

* No,' I said, between my teeth. * That 
is foolery 1 What is the matter with my 
eyes V 

There was a larger ring of gold-hued 
silver light, like sun's water-reflections on 
a wall, round my eyes. I took out my 
watch. It was ten minutes past one. 

She rose and came to me anxiously. 



168 Leicester. 

* What is it, dear ?' she said. * Oh, do 
tell mel What's the matter with you, 
dear ? Are you ill ?' 

* Nothing's the matter with me/ I said, 
putting my watch into my pocket, * beyond 
that I have something wrong with my eyes. 
I will go and see an oculist about it to- 
morrow. Now, it's time we were going to 
bed. There, there ! It's all right, I assure 
you. Now, oflf you go to bedl You're 
tired out.' 

I took her hand and patted it between my 
two : and then led her, with an almost 
playful gallantry, to the door-way and held 
up one curtain for her to pass. Just 
through it, she turned her head and 
shoulders back and asked prettily : 

* But you will come, too, soon ?' 
'Yes,' I said, smiling and laughing at 

her. ' I have something that I must do, 
that will take me a few minutes, and then I 
will come.' 

I let fall the curtain. In a moment I 
heard her step go on. 



Leicester*. 169 

I took the match-box from the comer of 
the mantelpiece and lit two candles, this 
seeming endless revolution-outward of my 
eyes' ring accompanying my every move. 
Then I sat down in the easy-chair and 
began to think. — * It was amazing how I 
could have been so fooled by such a natural 
phenomenon into such a state of (say) super- 
stitious hysteria as I had been by this affec- 
tion of my eyes. How could I have done it ?' 

I sat thinking of this for a little, and 
then of the events of that night of supreme 
folly, or best say madness at once : every 
now and then recalled to this physical 
revolution outward of my eyes' rings. All 
at once it stopped. I took out my watch. 
It was half-past one. It had lasted, then, 
twenty minutes. 

That something which I had said I must 
do was now done — done well, as it seemed 
to me. That something was the final and 
complete clearing away, I thought^ of all 
the clouding illusion that had blackened the 
sight of that strange time of devilry^ had 



170 Leicester. 



dimmed the sight of the time of acts that 
had followed npon the other as a summer 
upon a spring. I was at last free. I saw 
things as they were, not as they seemed to 
be. It might well be that illusion wonld 
play its part in my future's wilder hours ; 
but it never could be what it had been to 
the daily hours of my past. I was free. 
And that, I thought, meant something. 

I blew out the candles and drew back the 
hearthrug (for fear of some hot coals falling 
out of Eosy's especially procured English 
grate, and burning her and me and the 
house, and my at last freedom in the 
night), and then went in to her. 

She was already in bed, lying on her 
side, looking to the door- way curtains; 
with a deep-shaded candle on the reading- 
table by the bedside, throwing a light over 
the lower part of her face, and on one out- 
stretched arm in its long white worked frill, 
and the hand with upheld fingers on the 
white rounded edge of the bed. All the rest 
was shadowed. 



Leicester. 171 



' Well ?' I said, smiling, and standing for 
a moment with the curtains in my backward 
hands. 

She smiled* I crossed over to her, and 
sat down beside the outstretched arm of the 
long white worked frill and the hand of the 
upheld fingers on the white rounded edge of 
the bed : and took the hand of the upheld 
fingers, while her two eyes looked quietly in 
mine : and bent, and softly kissed her two 
soft red lips : and she softly said : 

* You see, I hadn't to chase you for it, 
after all/ 

* No,' I answered. * I cheerfully do what 
the dilly-ducks would noi do : I come to be 
killed. Death from you is too sweet to be 
fearful.' 

* . . . What do you mean ?' 

I kissed her, laughing : 

' That I love you.' 

*. . . Then I hope you will always 
mean that ; for I love you — oh, I do love 
you, ever so much V 

* More than you love yourself?' 



172 Leicester. 

'I haven't any self to love. It's all 
yours !' 

' Then, in loving myself, I shall but be 
loving you !' 

• Yes !' 

' And in loving you, I shall but be loving 
myself?' 

' Yes !' 

' Love must be unselfish, then, whether it 
like it or no. For, in loving itself, it only 
succeeds in loving somebody else. . • • Do 
you understand it all ?' 

And seemg she did not, all of it, I once 
more bent again, and once more softly kissed 
her two soft red lips : and she once more 
softly said : 

' I understand that part. . . • But I 
seem to think you might do it over 
again.' 



V. 

CHAPTER I. 

I HAD accepted something or other that was 
now the melody of my life : if such a note- 
less flow of mider-music, as of a low silver- 
shot river in a mist^ could he called a 
melody. I might have called that some- 
thing or other Fate, or Circumstances, or 
simply Bosy. I called it nothing at all. 
It seemed as if I were it, and it me ; or 
everything it and it everything. The child 
was, I think, very happy. 

I had divided the day off in this way : My 
books from ten to one ; then lunch ; then 
generally somewhere with Rosy till four or 
five ; then two cups of tea and slices of thin 
bread and butter in the library, with the 



174 Leicester. 

accompaniment of quiet talk, till talk almost 
died away in the inspection and desultory 
reading of desultory books and newspapers ; 
then, at half-past six, dinner; then either 
somewhere with Rosy again, or a less desul- 
tory reading of less desultory books and 
newspapers till, at ten o'clock, bed. The 
only real work I did was my morning reading. 
I devoted three hours each day of the week 
severally to Homer, Sophocles, Plato, Vergil, 
Horace, Juvenal, and Dante. I do not 
think I had any definite aim in view then for 
this study. I was content to do it, as I did 
all things, and be still. 

Walks with Bosy were not successes at 
first, for she walked both slowly and badly; 
but I soon grew accustomed to the slowness, 
and the badness was remedied by occasional 
lifts on the way. I liked to listen to her ; 
and she, if she was in good spirits, indulged 
me to the top of my bent. The childlike 
and seemingly endless interest that she took 
in life amused me. 

One evening, when we were in her 



Leicester. 175 



favourite position — she between my knees 
talking to me as I sat in the armchair. 

*Kosy,' I said, *I will tell you what you 
are/ 

*Well,' she said, 'what?' 

'You are a loving girL I have not 
before found the word " love *' used in the 
particular way you use it. So your own 
word describes you : you are a *' loving 
girl :" one who squeezes softly, and kisses, 
and tries to steal away breath — ^in all things 
soft. I will tell you who was your proto-. 
type : a certain Shunamite. ** And let 
her cherish him and lie in thy bosom." And 
moreover : " -4 bundle of myrrh is my well- 
beloved unto me ; he shall lie all night betwixt 
my breasts.*' And : ** I charge youj ye 
daughters of Jerusalem^ by the roes and by the 
hinds of the fieldj that she stir not up nor 
awake my hve till he pleases." ' 

* Yes,' she said, ' that's me/ 

And so it was. 

The weather grew colder : bracing and 



176 Leicester. 

invigorating to me, enervating to her. At 
last we had keen frost. She spent most of 
her time by the fire, generally sitting with 
her knees gathered up on the hearthrug, 
reading a book or thinking — heaven knows 
what about 1 

My walks were nearly always alone now. 
Consequently they ceased to be semi-rides 
and became pure walks. With the pure 
walks came thought again, to oust its poor 
substitute of dreamy-way-of-thinking. The 
frost continued. We had a little snow. 
At first I tried to get Bosy to take more 
exercise; but being out of doors in such 
weather was only misery to her, and so I 
stopped trying. 

* We will go to Italy next winter,' said I 
one evening, having been for a tramp in the 
now-falling snow, changed my clothes, and 
stopped by and above her (she on the 
hearthrug, that is), with hands alternately 
patting each other's palms. ^ To Italy 1 to 
Italy 1 Italy was the dream of my boy- 
hood. I am a true northman. I have the 



Leicester. 177 



migratory instinct in me. Oh Italy, 
Italy ' 

I stopped, and sat down in the easy- 
chair, with hands still alternately patting 
each other's palms, and thought about Italy 
and my past dream of Italy. 

At last : 

' You must be very cold/ she said. 

* Not I !' I answered, with a sudden look 
to her. ' I'm as warm as a toast. By 
Jove I' I said, * I must do something to- 
night.' (The something being a something 
in my head that seemed to wish for written 
expression.) My remark was a sort of 
outwork designed to stop any advancing 
objections on Eosy's part* 

None came. She sat silent on the 
hearthrug, with her chin by her up-gathered 
knees, and her eyes in the fire. I wished 
her away in bed — the best place for her. 
I disliked writing with anyone in the room. 
As I was settling my desk and writing 
materials on the table, I suggested that she 
would be better in bed, especially as , . • 
VOL. ir. 33 



178 Leicester. 

* What T she said, looking round at 
me. 

* You seem so tired/ I said, bringing a 
chair to my place. * I wonder you have any 
marrow left at all, and that your blood's 
not all curdled or clotted by this time,' 

* ... Is it very cold outside ?' 

* Very. The snow is all freezing.' 

* How long do you think it will last T 
' The snow ?' 

* No : the cold. — I do hate it so !' 

* How can I tell ? I . . .' (I had begun 
writing something) ' don't know.' 

* "Why do you talk in that way ?' 
' What way ?' 

. Ultimately Eosy went off to bed, in an 
injured frame of mind, and I was left alone 
with my writing. An opening scene of a 
story had occurred to me, and I was 
interested in expressing it : a not unfre- 
quent occurrence at that time, so far un- 
failingly accompanied by gradual loss of 
interest as the story proceeded till, quite 
disgusted, I either burnt or cast it into a 



Leicester. 179 

MS. drawer of mine, and thought no more 
of it. 

I finished my opening scene in the first 
heat of emotion, and then, after a pause, re- 
read what I had written. What seemed to 
me my grip on, my mastery over the 
characters I had created, pleased me ; not 
because it was mine, but because it was 
there, and in harmony with my mood. 
Then I sat for long thinking. I began to 
fi-ame, I framed a resolution in me. There 
was no need to think, say, or act anjrthing 
dramatic to be, as it were, a symbol or 
memoria technica of that resolution. It 
was early : I was beginning to feel both 
tiredness and hunger. It was impossible 
for me, I thought, to sink into mere 
sensuousness. I had a work to do in the 
world : I intended to do it. The work 
would require patient preparation: I was 
determined that I would give it. I had 
been unhappy in London : * Society ' was 
not enough for me. I had been unhappy 
with Kosy : Love was not enough with me. 

33—2 



180 Leicest€i\ 

I had been unhappy with my dreams : 
myself was not enough for me. I had lived 
for * Society,' for love, for myself, and had 
found that they did not satisfy me. It was 
time that I lived for something else — for 
something higher, and broader, and deeper. 
I had realized, or thought that I had 
realized, that I had a certain work to do in 
the world, and that if I was, as I had 
determined I was, to do it, I should have 
to apply myself to a patient course of 
preparation. I had spent the three or four 
days that followed on this determination in 
the same way outwardly as any other days : 
that is to say, had done my classical work 
in the mornings ; taken my ' constitutionar 
in the afternoons ; and read in the evenings ; 
but inwardly I had spent these days in a 
diflferent way from any others of my life. 
I reviewed my past in order that 1 might 
see what causes lay there, that were likely 
to have an influence on my future. I faced 
all these causes, good or evil, fearlessly, 
quietly resolved to encourage those that 



Leicester. 181 

were good, and do all that lay in me to 
eradicate those that were evil. The one 
idea that I kept constantly before me was 
the idea of Strength : I must be Strong. 

Eosy looked upon this, my new inter- 
course with her, with a somewhat suspicious 
eye. I believe she would far sooner have 
had the old intercourse with her back again. 
For, if my caprice leaped in evil-humoiured 
moments far away from her; so in good- 
humoured moments it leaped close to her ; 
whereas, now her line of life and mine 
seemed, nay, were parallel: now parallel 
lines are those which are always the same 
distance from one another, that is to say, 
that never meet. Bosy, like the true 
woman she was, was quite ready to oflfer 
herself up on the altar of my happiness. 
It troubled her that now, instead of being, . 
as I ought to have been, capricious, that is 
to say, selfish, I preserved a uniform cheer- 
fulness of demeanour towards her, was 
always ready to do her little services, was 
always ready to prevent her doing me little 



182 LdceMer. 



services. It is true that I had in that 
happy period of lotus-eating devoted myself 
to her en bloc ; but, as she had said^ or as I 
had said, in so devoting myself to her en 
bloc (* loving ' was our term) I was but 
devoting myself to myself en bloc, and vice 
versa. Then all the little services had 
been hers : I had^ been capricious ; I had 
been selfish ; she had delighted in my 
capriciousness, in my selfishness — whereas, 
now ! . . • Now I was the highest sinner 
that is arraigned by Love, the sinless one. 
What right had I to . the preserving a 
uniform cheerfulness of demeanour towards 
her? What right had I to the perpetual 
readiness to do her little services, the 
perpetual readiness to prevent her doing me 
little services ? Ah ! thought poor little 
Eosy, that old time was the better time ; 
for if it knew the depth of hell, it knew 
also the height of heaven : whereas, this 
new time knows only the dead level of 
purgatory. 

I remember how I sat one evening, in 



Leicester. 183 



the past dinner-hour when we were together 
in the library, observing her and trans- 
lating her thoughts into my words, some- 
what as above : and how at last, smiling at 
her for a dear child, I got up, and went 
and chucked her under the chin, and in a 
serious way that made her eyes looking at 
me brighten up at the anticipation of one of 
the old capricious hours, the old capricious 
hours so often full of the golden atmosphere 
of heaven. And indeed there was a temp- 
tation in the air for me to enjoy one of 
those hours again. Why not? I com- 
menced. 

But it soon made itself apparent to me 
that I had set myself, not to be» but to act 
Capriciousness. And yet, I thought in 
medias res, it is surely a mistake to suppose 
that I have passed quite out of my former 
self, as a snake out of its skin, and can no 
longer be, but am compelled to act, that 
former self ? No. It is with the humour 
I must quarrel : not the characteristic. 
Perhaps the fact of self-consciousness is of 



184 Leicester. 

itself quite enough to turn being into 
acting ? 

Ultimately Eosy showed that she too 
perceived, perhaps more clearly than I gave 
her credit for, that this was not the doer 
but rather the actor that was wooing her. 
She was up and away in a pet : I, tickled 
by the idea of energetic desire in such a 
child as the Bosebud, laughing consumedly, 
and next door to careless about how she 
took my laughter, — ^All at once I realized 
that I had once more been cruel to her: 
nay, but the word merited to be stronger, 
brutal. I was serious at once, and away to 
her to try and soothe her. At last I 
succeeded. 

Rosy's discontent with the new inter- 
course, as I now called it to myself, seemed 
to increase. At last I found out that the 
more cheerful and obliging I was, the more 
uncheerful and disobliging was she, and 
this discovery having come to a head 
during the course of a whole evening, 
erupted in the bedroom in the shape of 



Leicester. 185 

what is usually called a row, reproaches 
and tears versus sarcasm and silence. After 
a few minutes of Tears, Silence betook 
itself out of the bedroom and the house for 
a long ramble about the streets, at last 
joining itself to Thought in preference to 
Irritation, with which it had set out. — I 
began to draw a sort of picture of what life 
would have been with a woman — ^like 
Bayne, a strong woman. Bayne had, I 
felt, been for some time an elevation to me, 
and now it seemed that she was growing 
into an ideal. After all, was she not the 
outward and visible sign of that inward and 
spiritual Strength which I worshipped ? It 
was right that she should become an ideal 
to me ; she was a strong woman. 

The struggle went on. At times I had 
relapses into the old disgust, but, while 
there, learnt something about the meaning 
of the misery of humanity, and so from evil 
drew a certain amount of good. Kosy was 
meanwhile apparently in persistent readi- 
ness to be suspicious. It occurred to me 



186 Leicestei\ 

once or twice that she thought that there 
was a woman in the case, and so kept on 
the look out for proofs. The idea amused 
me greatly, and once led me to demonstra- 
tions of my feeling somewhat in the manner 
of that chucking under the chin that had 
heen the prelude to my second instance of 
cruelty, or perhaps brutality to her. She 
seemed to recognise something ungenuine ; 
for she would have nothing to say to me at 
that rate, and so I determined to do without 
the demonstrations in future, and did. I 
do not know if she was happy at this time. 
She took a greater interest in her house- 
hold affairs than before, going out shopping 
with Am6lie in the mornings, drawing up 
lists of things, and so on. I was pleased 
to see this ; for it gave her something to 
do. 

In this way it came about in a remark- 
ably short time that we two grew more 
like acquaintances or friends than lovers. 
Then I realized this, and was rather troubled 
by it ; for I felt that the reason for it was 



Leicester. 187 

mine, and that she could not like the present 
condition of aflfairs. But what was to be 
done? An inch with a child like Eosy 
meant, not an ell, but the whole article. 
If I suddenly softened, she would take it as 
a sign of repentance, and then — trouble of 
all sorts I At present I was working away 
at my classics and what composition sug- 
gested itself: with occasional fits of dis- 
gust, it is true, but avoiding the depths and 
getting out of the shallows as soon as 
possible. And I bore these occasional fits 
with a good deal of philosophy now, as- 
cribing them to some internal derangement, 
such as of liver, of kidneys, or stomach, 
and as such to be endured in patience and 
silence. Weather, I found, aflfected me 
considerably. 

It was now March, but more like the 
traditional May. I took long walks each 
day, ten miles as a rule : once out to Pere 
la Chaise, to look at Brooke's grave with 
its * Thy will he done^ and saw Balzac's 
bust, and De Momy's tomb (De Momy 



] 88 Leicester. 

being a gilded rascal that interested me) 
and others, and stood and looked thought- 
fully over the city that seemed like a great 
parasite that had driven its claws into the 
earth. Then there was the Louvre, and 
the Luxembourg and, sometimes, theatres 
in the evenings with Rosy. A quietly 
happy time for me, made happier as the 
days stole on and found me still unshaken 
in my scheme of life. 

One evening, Eosy having a headache 
and not caring to go out anywhere, I went 
for a ramble about the streets, observing 
the stirring multitude in a most delight- 
fully philosophic way. The conviction of 
the general poorness of life was the deepest, 
but quietly deepest, conviction in me. My 
view of the matter was that; since I was 
alive and in certain circumstances, the only 
thing that was to be done was to make the 
best of it. 

The dawn was breaking as I pulled at 
the concierge's bell. I was a little tired, 
mentally and bodily. I came upstairs, let 



Leicester. 189 

myself in, and wexit into the study- Not 
only the general poorness, but also the 
general, and also the particular purpose- 
lessness of all life and my hfe was in me. 
I did not care to go to bed, I did not care 
to do anjrthing. My eyes fell on my easy- 
chair : I went to, and lay back, in it, in a 
state that kept, every now and then, rising 
to a level, over the edge of which lay 
disgust, or may be despair. At last, I rose, 
with an impatient curse. Was there never 
to be an end of this foolery? Was I 
iicver to have rest, peace, comfort, self- 
sufl&ciency, call it what you please, that 
spiritual sailing with spread canvas before 
a full and unvarying wind ? Why was it ? 
Why ? Was it really because the strange 
shadow of Purposelessness played the per- 
petual-rising Banquo at Life's feast for me ? 
Or was it that I was one who could not 
lack the Personal Deity with impunity ? I 
didn't know, I didn't know ! I wished 
that I were dead. I wished that I had 
never been born. What Personal Deity 



190 Leicester. 



had I ever had ? What . . . My thoughts 
stood still. I saw a small child go to the 
hed and slip down on his knees and tell 
Him about it ; but then, remembering that 
He was up in the sky, clasp his two hands 
together, and look up to Him ; and say : 

* Dear God, You are a long, long way 
away from me : right up in the deep, blue 
sky, farther away than even the sun, 
perhaps, and the moon and the stars. — ^But 
I love You ! Oh, I love You ! because You 
know everything I think about and every- 
thing that I want to do. And I pray tha6 
You won't let me die till I am very old and 
have done all the things I want to do. 
But please help me to be a great man. 
Through Jesus Christ our blessed Lord, 
Amen.' 

I threw up my face with my hands behind 
my head, and the sob coming to my lips, 
and the tears to my eyes. * Oh God, God, 
why shouldn't I pray now ? Is there no 

one to hear me ? Is there no one to 

What ? Eatjnel—Raym I you liere I What ?' 



Leicester. 191 

Everything in me stood still. She was 
looking at me through the curtains. 

I made a sharp stride and opened them. 
It was Bosy* 

I smiled and then laughed, and — 

* You startled me,' I said. ' I took yon 
for a ghost.' 

* Took me for a ghost,' she said slowly, 
advancing slowly, till her eyes were close to 
mine. I scowled. 

* You called me Kayne,' she said. 

* No :' I said ; * not you — the ghost.' 
Fury seemed suddenly to possess her. 
*I hate her !' she cried discordantly. 

I took her in my arms, in a half- 
nnconscious way that meant quiet. 

* Don't be a fool,' I said. * Why did you 
get up ?' She was struggling a little to 
get free. 

I let her go : and turning, walked 
away to the hearthrug, and stood collecting 
my thoughts. I felt her hand touch my 
arm. I looked aside and down, at her 
face. 



192 Leicester. 

' Don't be unkind to me/ she said. 
' You're not kind to me !' 

*Then,' I said unaffectedly; 'I'm sony.' 
I turned again and, putting my hands on 
her shoulders, looked at her. ' As for that 
** Don't be a fool," of mine, you mustn't look 
upon it, or the things I say like it, as 
unkindness. The words that I say to you 
are, in reality, said to myself— if not at the 
time, most certainly afterwards. It is the 
cursed actor's instinct that makes me say 

them : that's all. I say them ' The 

expression of her full, half-dreamy un- 
fathomed eyes was pleading, pleading all 
but pitiful. I did not know what to do, 
what to say. 

At last : 

*My dear child,' I said seriously; *I 
believe you're in love with me.' 

She answered nothing. 

* I wish you weren't,' I proceeded. * If 
you only knew what nonsense it is — ^love, 
everything I In ten years, you may be a 
worm-eaten piece of carrion : in less, 



Leicester. 193 



perhaps. I too. Where do you think 
you'll be then? Where shall I be ? 
What'U be the good of your having loved 
me ? or of my having loved you ?' 

* You don't love me,' she murmured, with 
eyes now far away. 

* By love,' I said, *I don't know if I love 
you or not 1 Do you love me ?' 

She smiled a little. 

' Ah 1' said I ; * I wish to goodness you 
didn't then !' 

' Why shouldn't I if I Hke ?' she mur- 
mured, with her eyes far away and some- 
thing of the little smile round her lips. I 
slipped my arm round her shoulders, her 
cloak-clad shoulders, and led her gently 
towards the door. 

' Come,' I said ; ' we have talked enough. 
Let us go to bed, and sleep. If so be 
that ' 

Now at the door curtains, I turned a 
little, saying : 

*I have forgotten to blow out the 
candles.' 

VOL. II. 34 



194 Leicester. 



I went back and blew them out. She 
waited for me. We went on together, I 
with my arm round her shoulders as before, 
through the dark dining-room, and salon 
just lit with the light from the open door- 
frame, and into the lighter morning-room » 
where I said : 

* Are you afraid of death, Rosy ?' 

* No,' she said ; ' I'm not afraid of it/ 
(We were, through the drawn curtains, in 

the bedroom lit with two unshaded candles.) 
She said no more, nor did I. And we 
went onto the bed : where I sat her down, 
and myself close beside her. Her hands 
she put together in her lap, and her eyes 
were looking dreamily before her. 

* Would you be afraid to die to-night ?' 
I said softly in her ear — * Rosy.' 

' No,' she said. 

I showed my teeth, with an upward 
glance at her. 

* Will you die to-night ?' I asked, a little 
evilly. 

' What do you mean ?' she said, looking 



Leicester. 195 

at me. The same expression was still on 
my face, nor did I change it. 

Will you die with me to-night?' I said; 

* I am ready to die with you : although, my 
dear, as the saying goes, I don't love you.' 

* You are very wicked 1' she said, her 
eyes rounding. * That would be wrong.' 

' No :' (shaking my head down a little) ; 

* only tired of it.' 

Then I looked at her : 

* And so,' I said, * that would be wrong ?' 
I took down my hand from her shoulder 

and stretched out my arms backward and 
yawned. 

* Be it so,' I said ; * that would be wrong.' 
I lay awake by her in the dark for a 

little, thinking about my work, and whether 
I would go on with it, and whether I 
would go on with anything. By degrees, 
my thoughts grew to present occurrences, 
to to-night's: and then, without thinking 
whether she was asleep or not, asked — 
her, I suppose : 

' Why did you get up ?' 

34—2 



19G Leicester. 

' Because I wanted to see you/ 
I fell into my thoughts again; till at 
last, * Ah 1' I said to myself, * if I were 
but some poor, striving, struggling devil 
in some country town, and she my brave 
little wife — some poor, striving, strug- 
gling devil of a man of letters, with hopes 
of some day teaching a callous English 
society to know him as its ** teacher," and 
she the brave little wife that believed in me ! 
Ah ! why have I not had to strive and 
struggle ? Perhaps I should have become 
a great man some day, then. Life would 
have been self-sufficing for me. I have 
almost a mind — a mind to throw away 
all those disgust-bearing, despair-bearing 
golden grains, and go out and struggle and 
strive again. Surely, I was happier as a 
boy in London than • • / But there was 
little good in thinking in this way now, to- 
night. — I did not ask myself why. I left 
the thinking and its question alone : and 
dozed : and fell asleep. 

My brain rewarded my mind for its later 



Leicestei\ 197 



thoughts on suicide, by a morning dream. 
I was stricken with some disease, the pre- 
cise nature of which neither I nor anyone 
knew. It was at present existing in me 
somewhere, dormant. All at once it took 
shape in my head and breast. From my 
head came a puant reek of bluey corruption, 
infinitely foul : in my breast appeared a 
fathomless sore, from the crater of which 
oozed a sickly, yellowy fluid, infinitely 
loathsome. All my body was full of pain, 
and the only thing that gave me any relief 
was to moan ceaselessly. People stood pity- 
ingly around me. I seized pieces of wood 
and drove them away. I hated that any- 
one should hear me moan. But one person 
weanlessly returned, till at last I noticed 
her body, for it was a naked woman. The 
skin of her stomach and ribs was all 
shrivelled up and dry ; but her breasts 
were full and soft and sweet. This I knew; 
for I touched and kissed them without 
looking at her face, having laid aside my 
anger against those who had stood pityingly 



] 98 Leic€ste7\ 

around me. At last it struck me that the 
reason why the skin of her stomach and 
ribs was all shrivelled up dry was because 
she had once tight-laced them ; and, won- 
dering why her breasts, which I had kissed 
again, were so full and soft and sweet, I 
looked up at her face and saw that it was 
what had once been Bosy's. Then I turned 
away and stepped over a cliff, and sailed 
down obliquely towards the rock-foam-line 
of the quiet sea ; but, alighting closer, as a 
flying duck in the water, in the shingly 
sand in which I had left a little onward 
trail, I lay grabbling the shingly sand with 
my hands to under me ; till what had once 
been Kosy came to me again when, straight- 
way remembering and realizing the infinitely 
foul reek of my head's recesses and the in- 
finitely loathsome sickly yellow fluid and 
my fathomless sore, I arose and waded and 
plunged into the sea which closed over me. 
But what had once been Bosy was now 
pursuing me like a sniffing sleuth-hound 
bitch. The chase was terrific, and the 



Leicester. 199 



stench from me spread behind me as I flew 
on like the wave-line made by the nose of 
a fleet boat in pooly waters. At last I 
came upon the ruddy bubbling crater of a 
submarine volcano and dived in, she after 
me. I felt no heat : only a vague idea that 
this now slower chase, this pursuit, had been 
enacted before somewhere by some one. We 
went on for a long time in the liquid fire at an 
equal distance, till, at last, I felt that I was 
getting ahead of her. Then I slackened 
my speed a little, and the stench from me 
grew round me like a cloud. I moved on 
again, and began to think that I had desired 
to die and could not. I thought this over 
and over again, till the desire to die became 
almost maddening. In a few moments I 
had passed through five things that suffice 
to give death, unscathed. I turned and 
went through them again, unscathed. Then 
it was said to me : ^ Jesus Christ says that^ un- 
less you can die. He will inflict the punishment of 
perpetual life-with-death upon you V I lifted 
up my face frowning and answered : *If He 



200 Leicester. 

thinks that I would seek death from fear of 
anything He can do to me^ He is mistaken. 
Here I am, let Him take me.* Then I was 
taken away to a dim under-world place, 
and found my arms were round a body, 
great, naked, flabby, which would come 
down upon me, and the skin depended a 
little on the only part I could see of it, the 
thighs and belly and upper portion of one 
broad leg. The sweat flowed forth from 
all my flesh, till the great, naked, flabby 
body felt steamily wet. Then I perceived 
that this was my father, as I had held him 
up before. But I would make no sign of 
any emotion lest Jesus Christ, who was 
standing by, should see it. The stench 
from the recesses of my head and the 
hollow deep of my breast rose till I was 
almost suffocated. I knew that Jesus 
Christ was standing by, there, looking at 
me, and would make no sign of any emotion. 
Sulphur rose in my throat : my eyes were 
suffused with blood: the burthen of the 
body, the flesh of which was growing round 



Leicester. 201 



my arms, pressed heavily upon me. I 
knew that if I would I could escape straight- 
way from all these things ; but Jesus Christ 
was standing by, there, looking at me and 
thinking that I would at last come to Him 
and ask Him for His death: I made no 
sign of any emotion. Then the great, 
naked, flabby body began to press down 
upon me with a dull, mechanical force, so 
that my head was thrust backward, and I 
saw that it had a face. At the same time 
the dim under-world atmosphere began to 
be lit with a certain mild gold radiance, as 
of dusky gold shafts through a still, dim 
blue water : and I grew to see the features 
of the face. The eyes were turned up, so 
that only half the pupil was visible : the 
round over the cheek-bones was swelled, 
and with a little down of hair on the one I 
looked at: the mouth, with thick, out- 
turned, discoloured lips, gaped. I knew no 
more of the face, except that it had some 
resemblance to three people that I had 
known and one that I had never known till 



202 Leicester. 

now. The upward head came slowly down, 
as it were, settling upon mine. (I could 
not move : I was supporting the body.) It 
was not two feet from mine. I felt a slight 
breath on some part of my face, not of the 
mouth of the thing, but/rowi the mouth : I felt 
it again and again. The upward head sank 
lower : the mouth with the^outward-playing 
breath was by the top of my hair, by my 
eyes that looked into its black inner cave : 
the turned-up eyes, the half-visible pupils, 
were opposite mine that looked into their 
vari-radiated centres (I steadfastly looking, 
and, as it were, noticing, so as to master all 
expression of any emotion) : sank below 
mine. Then there was a steadying of itself 
in the ever-upward head before it came on. 
It came on : the thick out-turned discoloured 
lips had pressed mine that did not move. I 
felt that something would burst in my brain : 
every muscle in me was rigid, the blood in 
me was rigid, the thought in me was rigid. 
The breath from out of the mouth entered 
mine and rolled there in a cloud before de- 



Leicester. 203 



scending into me. The face, flabby, clammy, 
cool, grew to mine. I framed a tremendous 
curse in my heart, and made a one universal 
effort to bring it forth — and woke. I was 
full of many sensations. Eosy's eyes were 
looking into mine. Not realizing these 
things, and not unrealizing those things, I 
said: 

* Tliou hast not conquered^ Galilean /' 

1 was exhausted, wet with trickling 

sweat, my mind filled with the images of 
my dream. I shut my eyes, and, after a 
little, succeeded in thinking. At last, *What 
accursed shadows I saw ! Shadows of sin ; 
shadows of a tormented universe. Oh, my 
God ! My time is short. ... I know it. 
I shall not get further than Paris. I know 
it. . . . Blake, old fellow, Allan's dead. — 
'* Dead?" he . . . .'—Poor Brooke ! if he 
had a dream like that ^last night,' no wonder 
he was * troubled ' with it. 

I opened my eyes and looked at Rosy. 
The idea of her complete unconsciousness 
of my dream, of the part she had played in 



204 Leicester. 



it, and of the sort of kiss she had been the 
means of giving me, struck me as t)eing 
ludicrous, so that I laughed rather brightly 
at her. She was a little sleepy, a little 
languorous, lying with her pretty face deep 
in the soft pillow, and her escaped hair 
flowing — brown-gold tresses — round about 
her head. The sun was on our feet. A 
little canary she had bought yesterday was 
singing snatches of song in the morning- 
room. The idea of her solemn bestowal of 
that half-awakened kiss made me laugh 
brightly at her again. The httle canary 
there was singing snatches of song. The 
sun was on our feet. 



CHAPTER II. 

That evening I received a book and a letter 
from Mrs. Herbert, enclosing another — from 
Starkie, at last! I read Mrs. Herbert's first, 
in order to be able to better give myself up to 
Starkie's and the book, which I guessed was 
Brooke's. There was nothing of any interest 
in hers ; a mere report of the satisfactory 
condition of things at Dunraven Place. 
Then I opened Starkie's ; began reading it 
slowly. He had caught up Clarkson at 
Zanzibar. Things were not going as well 
as they might. Two months frittered away 
in taking great pains about doing nothing. 
But they had at last started, and here they 
were on the Continent. Clarkson wanted 
to turn down to Lake Intangweolo, instead 
of making for Lake Eugenie, to explore that 



206 Leicester. 



block, which was comparatively unknown ; 
whereas the other place was both known 
and interestless, save for the fact that old 
Osbaldistone died there. He, Starkie, shonld 
like to know what the devil was Clarkson 
going to do in that galere. Catch fever or 
dysentery and manure the sand ? He coald 
not possibly say when they might be back ; 
perhaps not at all. He had a faint hope 
that it might possibly be before next year 
was out. But he couldn't write any more 
of this stuff. He was out of sorts — in the 
blues. Clarkson seemed determined to give 
his name to a new species of beast, or die in 
the attempt. They'd do no good this time. 
Only another instance of wasted time, and 
wasted treasure, and wasted — life. But here 
was the end, or he would be tearing up this 
stuff in disgust. — Mine disgustedly, but 
truly, Oliver S. Starkib. 

I began to think about this letter till it 
struck me that it was odd I had not received 
it sooner. Then I examined the post-marks. 



Leicester. 207 

and found that it had arrived in England 
in early February. 

^Damn the old woman!' I said, and 
pulled the paper covering off what as I had 
rightly guessed was Brooke's book, the book. 
Eosy asked what was the matter ? I ex- 
plained, and, after a little small talk, took to 
examining the book. When I had satisfied 
myself, feeling in a sociable humour, I began 
talking to Eosy, and she, soon brightening, 
came to me gladly. We had a quiet talk 
about past things, one of the, if not the, 
most quietly pleasureful talks I had ever had 
with her. We talked about how she had 
made me eat the grapes and had made me 
call her Eosy {Miss Eosebud, I insisted. 
She had not had all her own way from the 
first I), and how Minnie (poor MinnieJ) had 
chased the piece of paper under the table : 
and how we had gone out for our first walk 
together when I was so weak — and stupid 
(where was the respectful clerk a good deal 
better dressed and, doubtless, fed, than 
myself, now?) : and how we had tea together 



208 L€ic€ste7\ 

that other evening in my room, with the 
frnit and the cakes and all the other things, 
including a solemn little owl who wouldn't 
laugh properly once the whole time, and the 
walk together afterwards. And so on. 

And we had in the bedroom a look at a 
certain little round silver locket (chosen in 
a jeweller's in Edgware Eoad), of which 
there had been some talk in the study, and 
I had repeated dramatically : 

* But I shall always be able to keep the 
locket, you know : and when I look at it I 
shall think of you and give a sigh f (and I 

gave one) ' for — ^you've been ' 

'Don't tease me!' cried Kosy, with 
puckered brow and a slap on my arm. And 
I didn't. 

The next day after breakfast I set upon 
my work again, but could make nothing of 
it. I felt I had better go out. I went out : 
down to the Seine and frittered away half 
an hour or so looking at books in the book- 
boxes on one of the river walls. It was a 
dull grey day, with a certain amount of wind. 



Leicester. 209 

east wind I thought : altogether quite like a 
half-bred London day in early March, before 
Boreas had grown boisterous. 

I lit upon an ill-used copy of a book by 
an English vmter whose name I had heard 
spoken, evilly spoken, of in my later London 
days. I was in the humour for buying the 
book of such a writer, so I bought it and 
came home with it and straightway began to 
read it. The subject was an author whom 
I had been of late accustomed to read both 
rather frequently and rather carefully. I 
was struck by the number of my own 
thoughts that I found. Then there began 
to creep over me the sense that I had done 
nothing yet, written nothing yet, that is : a 
displeasing enough sense when coupled with 
another that I never should do anything, 
write anything; anything, at any rate, 
worth the reading. I envied this man who 
wrote with such assurance of work done. — 
About which point Bosy came in from her 
afternoon walk and we had tea. 

It often happened that I was silent at 
VOL. II. 35 



210 Leicester. 

meals and Bosy content to let me so, I 
thought to myself, but this evening, ap- 
parently because she saw that I particolarly 
did not care to talk, she kept on asking me 
questions and chattering ceaselessly. For 
some time my sense of duty kept successful 
guard over my temper and I answered her 
quietly ; but at last I sent my sense of duty 
packing and began to answer her a little 
irritably : then, gradually worked into an 
aggrieved state by her persistent chatter, 
answered her irritably, and at last kept a 
frowning silence. She was defiant : went 
on chattering and laughing with flushed 
cheeks and sparkling eyes, and at last pro- 
ceeded to tease me. I was not in a humour 
to be teased. I said so. She was excited 
now and not to be stopped, despite that 
Marie was in the room clearing away the 
things for dessert. I kept my frowning 
silence till Marie was gone, and then said, 
as playfully as I could, that I was rather 
tired of hearing a certain little tongue wagging 
and wished it would stop still for a little. 



Leicester. 211 



Then came an indignant flare up, to which 
I made no answer, not even by looking at 
anything bnt the grapes I was eating and 
my plate : then a second indignant flare up 
spiced with hot reproaches. I expected wet 
reproaches to follow : and expected rightly. 
She was getting tired of them when, having 
finished my grapes, I got np and went into 
the stndy. 

I made an attempt to work, but failed : 
made another attempt, and failed again. I 
determined I would go oat. Then, under 
the influence of a collapsing sense of tired- 
ness and sleepiness, thought of bed ; but 
bed meant Bosy, and I could not stand her 
just at present. I went into the dining- 
room. She was sitting knitting, or what- 
ever it was, in a chair. I told her that I 
was going out, and might not be in till 
late : to which she deigned no answer. I 
went into the hall and, taking my hat and 
stick, down and out. Which way to go ? 
Where to go to? I stood, beating my 
trouser-leg with my stick, considering. It 

35—2 



212 Leicester. 

was a beautiful night, clear and cool — no 
moon, with the heavens star-sown. 

There was evil in me. I felt it in a 
little : and did not care to combat it. I 
walked to the right, a little jerkily. It 
was not now. Which way to go ? but, 
Where to ? 

I began to think of piquant pictures of 
Grevin's — dumpy, strutting little cocottes 
of undeniable chic, and laughed at the 
thought. There was evil in me, and I did 
not care to combat it. Names I knew of 
the supposed haunts of said dumpy, strutting 
little cocottes — ^Eue Blanche *le Skating 
Theatre ' (the pronunciation of which, * le 
Skatting Theatre,' made me laugh again), 
and the Folies Bergere. 

I took a cab to the Bue Blanche. 

When I entered the hall there was a cer- 
tain tremulousness in me, chiefly the result 
of an imperfect sense of wrong-doing, and a 
little, maybe, of the music and the bright 
scene. I stalked round the rink, not quite 
daring to openly regard anyone : in fact, 



Leicester. 213 

very self-conscious. I sat down at a table, 
and, having ordered a bock, began to argue 
with myself for a perfect fool. Here was 
I, who had pondered on Life and Death 
and Time and Space and God, absolutely 
nervous in a hall filled with harlots and 
harlot-mongers! What more ludicrous? 
I paid the waiter, drank a little of my bock, 
and looked about me. 

In five or six minutes I was master of 
myself. In ten I was stalking round the 
rink, observing the people with interest. I 
thought I would speak to one of ces dames, 
and see what she had to say for herself. 
Variety is pleasing. But ces dames had 
such uninteresting faces, and such puffed- 
out breasts and contracted waists, that I 
found I had no inclination to speak to 
them. I wandered about for half an hour 
or so without seeing any face that attracted 
me : and then went out and (not analysing 
my motives) took a cab to the Folies Ber- 
gere. 

At first sight, I liked the place better 



214 Leicester. 

than the Bue Blanche : the fonntains 
pleased me, and the seats. Then I was 
attracted hy a vendense of somethings or 
other, who had a finely developed pair of 
whiskers, quite bushy. I stood and began 
imagining her point, of view of life, till, 
catching my eye, she smilingly proffered 
one of her somethings or other, addressing 
me. This made me laugh, and laughingly 
declining, pass on. I wandered about. The 
faces of the women seemed to me a little 
more interesting than those at the Eue 
Blanche, but not interesting enough to be 
spoken to. 

Once, coming down a staircase, I found 
myself faced by myself in a mirror. I 
paused in my descent for a moment, in 
which I saw my solemn face set above my 
shoulders, squared by my hands being 
clasped together behind my back. The 
idea of this figure and face stalking about 
among these people, made me laugh. 

At last I grew wearied of it, and went 
away for a long walk about the streets. 



Leicester. 215 



When I came home I found Kosy sitting 
in the library, in the easy-chair, looking as 
if she had kept herself awake by means of 
some sort of emotion : I soon perceived 
jealousy. In a little she began question- 
ing. Where had I been? why was I so 
late? I answered her simply. First, I 
had been to the Skating Theatre, in the 
Rue Blanche, and then to the Folies Ber- 
gere : and then for a walk. 

Those were bad places : bad women were 
there ; I needn't have kept her up all this 
time, and then come and told her that. 

How did she mean that I had kept her 
up ? since when had she taken to sitting up 
for me when I went out at night ? 

She believed that I had been talking 
with a lot of those women. And why 
hadn't I gone home with one and never 
come back here again? She (Rosy) had 
always thought it would come to this ! she 
knew quite well when I went away this 
evening that I was going after some • • 
some one else (tears) : I was a cruel . • • 



216 LeicesUr. 

I thought the child was ill, and tried to 
comfort her. She would take no comfort. 
I came to her, intending to try more per- 
sonal comfort. She was op and, with an 
intense : 

* I hate you ! ... Go away !' herself 
went away. 

After a little pondering, I decided that it 
would be best to let her alone, and composed 
myself to sleep in the arm-chair and another 
chair for my feet. 

Marie, entering to dust the room, was 
apparently the instrument of wakening me 
from bad dreams. For a little I did not 
know whether to laugh, or pull a face at 
myself, or take Bosy's quarrel with me 
seriously: then, observing the sunshine in 
the room, determined to go out and get rid 
of all these spiritual cobwebs. Dried and 
somewhat dirty as I felt, I would not go 
into the bedroom and wash myself with the 
chance of awakening her. I went into the 
hall and, taking up my stick, onto the land- 
ing. I was going down the first flight of 



Leicester. 217 

steps, with my mind full of thonght, when, 
all at once, there was a stnmble, a fall, a 
clutching at and a missing the bannister, 
and I was lying, half-stunned and dazed, 
on the brbad step at the foot of the 
flight. 

Then a wrath rose in and burst forth as 
I rose in a keen : 

' B 1 !' 

This foolery was past all endurance ! — I 
dropped down again : my foot had failed 
me : the anguish in it, in my ankle particu- 
larly, was almost intolerable. I rolled onto 
my stomach and face, stiffening my muscles 
so as to bear it without the threatening 
childish collapse, or, at least, moan. After 
a little I determined I would get up — up 
the flight, into the house. 

With great pain, aided by my stick, I 
reached the door, opened it, went in, into 
the study, and into the easy-chair. 

There I began to think. At last I found 
that I had to wrestle with the old man of 
the wiry muscles and the hateful breath, the 



218 Leicester. 

Natural Sapematnral, once more. If I had 
not wrestled with him, I was quite capable 
of believing that there was a conspiracy 
here. I threw him at last, and, having 
thrown him, felt how much better it would 
be when my carcase was rotting under the 
sod and my soul melted in the air, and all 
these troubles over. 

At last Bosy came in, dressed, still in the 
sulks. I did not speak to her. Wishing I 
were dead was not the sign of reconciliation 
or comforting. I was thinking now whether 
I would send for a doctor for my foot, or 
no : deciding no. Bosy pretended she had 
come to look for something, and, not being 
able to find it, went out again without a 
word. I could have laughed, but scowled 
instead. 

I got up and made my way to the dining- 
room doorway, then through the dining- 
room to the salon doorway. She was in 
the salon. I had only a moment's hesita- 
tion. I crossed half the salon as ordinarily 
as I could ; but I knew I hmped a little^^^^^ 



Leicester. 219 



and this angered. Then I suddenly thought : 
Why should I care to disguise from her the 
fact that I am hurt ? and limped altogether. 
She said nothing. (I noticed by the morn- 
ing-room clock that it was half-past eight : 
she was, as I had supposed, up early.) 
In the bedroom, I rang the bell and 
went and sat on the bed. 

I got my boot off myself, and Amelie, 
following my directions, bandaged my ankle 
up in a wet napkin. Her final adjusting 
touch of the bandage extorted a noise of 
some sort from me, and I looked up. Eosy 
was standing by the doorway, watching: I 
scowled and looked down again. She went 
away. 

I ordered my breakfast in the study, where 
I went, passing by Rosy in the dining-room. 
My foot was ceaselessly painful. 

I ordered a bed to be put up in what 
we called the bath-room for me. Eosy 
came into the study at about five, found 
a book of hers on the mantlepiece just 
above my head, and went out without a 



220 Leicester. 



word. I Bat thinking, or rather, trying to 
think. 

At half-past Marie brought in the tea, 
Kosy following her. Then Rosy poured out 
a cup, put sugar and milk into it, and, 
taking a piece of cake, retired to the chair 
in the far- window, where she began to drink 
the one and eat the other in silence. As I 
wished for my cup of tea, I got up and 
poured it out, and, taking a piece of cake, 
retired to my seat again. I determined that 
I would have dinner in here, in the shape of 
some fruit and bread and milk. 

When Eosy had done her cup of tea and 
piece of cake, she renewed them : I, after 
some thought as to whether the pain of 
getting them was worth the candle of par- 
taking of them, and the (foolish but natural) 
display of my feeling toward her in this 
matter, did not. When she had finished, 
she put her cup and saucer on the table and 
went out of the room. I rang and told 
Marie what I wished about my dinner. I 
was not angry or even piqued by Rosy's 



Leicester. 221 



conduct : I was too indiflferent to it to be 
either. The reason why I did not make 
advances towards reconciliation with her 
was, that I did not care to trouble myself 
so far. 

During the course of the day Rosy con- 
trived what little annoyances she could for 
me ; but with no other elSect than making 
me laugh at her simpleness. ' If you quarrel 
with a woman/ 1 thought, * you must expect 
this sort of thing.' 

When I was in bed, I considered what 
was the real condition of my feelings to- 
wards Rosy. Without doubt, they' were 
those of complete indifference, and, per- 
haps, something more. What had I written 
even in the lotus-eating time ? * If to- 
morrow I were to be transplanted to Egypt 
or wherever you like, I do not believe that 
I should be sad, being told that I should 
not see you again.' And now ? — ^I ven- 
tured to doubt that I was anything but a 
fool not to myself transplant myself some- 
where where I could myself tell myself that 



222 Leicester. 

I should not see her again. There was no 
* imperfect sense of wrong-doing ' in the 
thought. It seemed to me to be some- 
thing little short of folly to stay here and be 
troubled with her. I ought to go out into 
the world and see its ways, so as to prepare 
myself for my work ; that work which was 
nothing else than, having by self-culture 
and observation got an impression of things 
generally, to put down that impression on 
paper. Truth was the object of my work, 
and, by the very fact that I was a quite un- 
prejudiced viewer of the phenomena of what 
is called Life, I did not see why I should 
not produce such an impression of things 
generally * as posterity should not willingly 
let die.' The idea of telling the truth about 
things was a pleasing one. I could almost 
believe that some day that idea might be of 
itself a sufficient incentive to a love of 
existence. 



CHAPTER III. 

FouB days passed. Then it seemed to me 
to be best to put an end to this. 

The reconciliation with Rosy was there- 
fore effected, and then there came a flow of 
gentle tears, soft embracements, and the 
rest of it : all of which I endured in an 
actively passive sort of way, as being to the 
femaFe mind the necessary sequence of a 
quarrel. 

The days sped on again. I was content. 
Once or twice, I thought to myself that I 
should, perhaps, have been more content if 
I had not been content; for indifference 
was to be avoided by me. But there was 
always the answering thought of this inevit- 
ably undecided position of Rosy's and my 
relation towards one another. One inter- 



224 Leicester. 

esting particular I had, as it were, 
parenthetically learnt from Bosy : that her 
departure from No. 3 on that memorable 
evening, with head bent down and hands 
evidently holding one another in front, was 
not, as I had supposed^ to the streets, but 
to the house of a Mrs. House, who owed 
her money for some work she had done. 
It had been some sign of my philosophy 
(or indifference) that, on realizing that the 
whole of this luckless connection of ours 
rested on a mistake, I had not done more 
than remark to myself that it was a pity, 
and, after thinking about it for a few- 
moments, gone on with other thoughts. 

One afternoon we were having tea to- 
gether in the study, both of us reading or 
skimming illustrated newspapers, when I, 
hearing a ring at the bell, looked up, and 
said : 

' What's that, I wonder ?' 

She suggested that it might be some 
things which she had got at the Bon 
Marche in the morning, and proceeded to 



Leicester. 225 

explain that she had transferred her custom 
from the Louvre to the Bon Marche for 
some reason or other which I do not 
remember. There came a knock at the 
door. She said, 'Entrez !' and Amelie 
came in with a letter on the letter-tray 
and towards me, saying that it was a letter 
for monsieur. I was reflecting that that 
knock at the door had struck me as not 
being in harmony with the eternal fitness 
of things (Marie had, at my request, been 
broken of the habit), when Kosy inquired 
who had brought it up ? As I had my 
upward hand on it, Amelie was answering 
that it was monsieur the concierge who had 
brought it up that very moment, and had 
said that he was sorry to have overlooked it 
in the morning. A glance at the redirected 
address had shown me that it was Bayne's 
handwriting. My heart went up to the 
bottom of my throat. 

* Is it from Professor Strachan ?' asked 
Bosy as Amelie was going on. 

VOL. II. 36 



226 ' Leicester. 

* No,' I said, striving to be full master of 
myself. 

Bosy refrained for farther question, and 
I slowly opened the letter : 

^Dear Bebtbam, 

* I should not have written to you, 
but that many things have come upon me. 
My little son is dead. God, in His great 
Love, saw fit to give him to me, as I 
thought, for my consoling : and He has 
seen fit, in His great wisdom, to take him 
away from me again. God's ways are not 
as our ways. 

' I do not say that my affliction is not hard, 
very, very hard to bear. At times I have 
doubted that I should ever see the good of 
it. I do not deny this. But I pray always 
for Faith in His Goodness, and Faith full 
and perfect, I am sure, will be given to me 
before the end. Yes, I am dying ! Perhaps 
it is better so : and yet, I do not quite 
mean that. My head, you see, is not quite 
clear now. There is something I should 



LeicesUr. 227 

like to say to you. Will you come to me ? 
But yet do as you think you ought to, and 
remember, that any liking of mine is as 
nothing in comparison with your duty. I 
have written too much already. But you 
will understand. For my head is not clear 
now. 

^ My husband sends this. He has been 
very good to me. Remember about your 
duty. If I do not see you again, I ask God 
to bless and keep you and make you His at 
last, as I know He will.' 

* Brave heart,' said I to myself — ' brave 
heart !' 

My eyes stayed fixed on her name for a 
little : then I thought ; till my thought 
from thick shoaledness turned to confusion. 

I half crumpled up the letter in my 
hands. Some one touched me on the arm. 
I had risen : was standing up, here, in the 
room. It was Rosy. I did not know she 
was here too. 

I looked aside at her : her cheeks rosy 

36—2 



228 Leicester. 

red, a star-gleam in her eyes, her brows knit. 
A vixen. — ^What did she want ? 

* It is from her. I know . • • it is from 
her. — She wants you to go to her T (She 
was half-panting out her words.) 

* Yes/ I said. 

' You wiU go r 

* You shall iwt go ! Oh, you shall not 
go ! — I will not let you go.' 

I passed slowly by her upraised hand : 
then, turning, found her close beside me, 

* . . . My dear child • . . she is dying. 
I must go to her.' 

' I will not let you — go !' 

* Will not— let me— go ?' 

I stood, thinking of Bayne. 

* . . . Won't you say anything to me ?' 
she cried. * What does she want with you ? 
What right has she with you ? You are not 
hers ! — She wants to take you away from 
me. I know her. — But she shall not 1*^ 

Suddenly she stepped to me and caught 
me by the arm, crying : 



Leicester. 229 

* I won*t let you go to her 1 I will not ! 
you shall not go I I will not let you go !* 

* Hey ?' I said ; * what are you talking 
about ?' And looked at her. 

Bealizing her to be there, her, the tool 
Circumstance had chosen to undo me with, 
the plague of a mistake, her, the red rag 
flaunted in my face by Circumstance that 
thought I could not gore horse or man 
again, I concentrated unutterable hate in 
my looking at and into her. She shrank 
back. 

* Ah,' she whispered, shivering, * don't. 
Don't. Don't. I will let you go. Yes : 
really, truly, indeed, now, this very moment. 
Only don't look like that, or I shall shriek.' 

I turned away my face again, indifferent : 
and thought again. 

* . . . But you will come back ?' pleaded 
her tearful voice. 

* I have told you,' I said. * Yes.' 

*You have told me nothing. Promise 
me that you will come back. Swear to me 
that ' 



280 Leicester. 

I went to the paper-cupboard/ opened it, 
and stood looking for the time-table. She 
touched me on the arm. She had come 
after me. I turned to her and said : 

^I tell you that I will come back all 
right. Now, do not trouble me, Rosy. 
You see that I am — that I don't want to 
be troubled.' 

* But how long will you be ?' 

' I can't tell. But not more than a few 
days : if so much.' 

' Oh, what shall I do, what shall I do ? 
You will leave me ! And I shall never see 
you again ! You will never be the same to 
me again. — I hate her !' 

*My dear child,' I said, *she is dying. 
You won't have to hate her long.' 

* You love her !' 

* I do not.' 

* You do, you know you do ! ' She caught 
my hand in hers up to her lips. * I can't 
let you go !' she sobbed. 

I comforted her in a quiet way, stroking 
her hair back : 



Leicester. 281 

' Come/ I said, * don't be silly. Come, 
come/ And went on, till all at once it 
occurred to me that I oaght to have looked 
out the time the night mail went, and 
paused. The clock struck six. 

* By Jove,' I said, half to myself, * what 
a fool I am I' And turned and began rum- 
maging in the cupboard till I had found the 
time-table. I quickly opened and began 
to study it. 

A pause. 

'I am . • . very sorry,' said her soft 
voice by me. * I didn't mean to vex you. 
Will you forgive me ?' 

'Oh yes, I have nothing to forgive youfor.' 

* And may I pack your things ?' 
' You are kind.' 

^ Don't say that,' she pleaded. *Will 
you give me a kiss, and be friends again ?' 

I turned round and, with my arm about 
her back, gave her a kiss on the cheek. I 
was smiling at her child's wobegone fade. 
Then I plunged into my thoughts again 
and, leaving her, went to the window and 



232 Leicester. 

at last found out the time of the night- 
mail* Then I took to walking up and 
down the room in front of the chimney- 
piece and fire. 

* . . . Will you tell them, please,' I 
said, * to be quick with the dinner ? I have 
not much . . , Ah, she is gone/ 

I rang the bell and, having turned, 
saw the envelope of the letter with the 
papers on the floor at the foot of the easy- 
chair. I picked it up and considered it. 
A horrible thought came to me: Batjne 
might be dead ! 

I looked at the postmarks. The letter 
had taken four days to get to me. I cursed 
Mrs. Herbert. "Where was the letter ? 

I found it in my waistcoat pocket, put 
there I did not know when. 

Marie opened the door. I toU her to 
tell Am6lie to be as quick with dinner as 
possible, as I wanted to catch a train. 
Marie agreed and went back, closing the 
door. 

*I have found your small portman- 



Leicester. 283 

tean/ said Rosy, coming into the dining- 
room doorway with a noise of the curtain- 
rings. 'Will you come and choose the 
things you want, because I'm not sure ?' 

We went together. 

When we, or more particularly I, had 
finished packing the portmanteau, we went 
in to dinner. The portmanteau was to be 
taken down the back staircase. Neither 
Rosy nor I could eat much. I was think- 
ing of Rayne. 

After what must have been a rather long 
silence : 

' I forgot the flask,' she said. * Do you 
know where it is ? You'd like to take the 
flask with some brandy in it ? It's such a 
pretty flask, and you've never used it.' (She 
had given it me.) 

' Yes,' I said ; * oh, to be sure.' And 
told Marie to go and bring it. 

Marie brought it, and then came the 
question of the brandy. There was none 
in the house : which had not struck any of 
us before. I was for not minding about it. 



234 Leicester. 

till I saw that Rosy would be hart if her 
flask was not used : so Marie was sent out 
to get some brandy, while Rosy and I went 
into the study again, not caring for more 
dinner. There I sat down in the easy- 
chair, with full thought, and Rosy quietly 
brought a chair to by mine and sat down 
and took my hand from my knee to within 
hers on her lap. So we sat in silence. 

Then Marie returned with the flask filled, 
which Rosy took from me, and reaching, put 
on the table. It was not yet time to start. 
We sat in silence, as before ; till my thought 
was less full and I turned my head to look 
at her with large upward eyes whose gaze 
was far away somewhere. 

' Are you all right now ?' I asked. 

* Yes,' she said, * I am all right.' 

I was sorry for her : somehow as I had 
been sorry for her sitting on the hearth-rug 
in the fire-lit room waiting for me who 
stood at that small window there. I could 
not help thinking of the exceeding pity of 
it, that that mistake had been made^ to give 



^ 



Leicester. 235 

me to her — and her to me. I began to 
consider that, it could not always be an 
inevitably undecided position, Bosy's and 
my relations towards one another. Here 
we were : what were we to do ? 

I put my arm round her neck and drew 
her cheek to meet my lips : 

*Poor Uttle Bosebud/ I said. *Poor 
little Bosebud I' 

Then I felt the tears coming soft from her 
eyes : and the meiiiory of a scene rose be- 
fore me, when I said : 

* Why, httle Bosebud. You mustn't mind 
like that, you know. I'll come back again 
some day — quite soon.' 

Ah, I had come back again, and had 
brought her, not a bonnet with blue rib- 
bons and a flower that should look so real 
that the butterflies should settle on it, but 
what she WMited — myself : and what I had 
promised with myself, some grapes and 
bon-bons: and, what I had not promised 
with myself, some thorns and nettles. Alas, 
alas, alas I And it was alas, for she was 



236 Leicester. 

indeed alone in the world, quite alone, as 
if nobody else belonged to her. . . • 
* Good-nighty Rosebud. Good-night !' 

Well, there was no good in this. 

I said : 

* " The cocks they crew, and the horns blew. 
And the lions took the hill ; 
And Willie he gaed hame agaiu. 
To his hard task and till." 

— I must be off, my pippin, or I shall 
miss the train.' And got up and went 
across the room and turned, looking at 
her. 

She rose and, saying : * I will fetch your 
coat,' went out through the doorway, leav- 
ing me with my mental stretching and 
rubbing of limbs that had been asleep and 
wakened up to the feeling that their blood 
was sluggish. 

Presently she returned with my great- 
coat, which I took with thanks from her, 
and then I felt that she felt that the final 
embrace was coming. In a moment it was 
come. She was in my arms, pressing up 



Leicester. 237 

with a poor little tearfal face for the soft 
lips' kiss. None other kiss than that now, 
somehow : none other kiss than that now. 
Oh Rosebud, Rosebud, all thy poor pitiful 
little love is poured forth in it : oh Rosebud, 
Rosebud, wherefore not content to be still and 
let him pass from thee, rather than to drain 
the cup to the lees ? But so it was, and 
so I gave it. Then our beings, scarce met, 
parted again : and I had left her. 

I picked up my hat from the stand, and 
was pacing to the door, when the thought 
of the little window came to me. I stopped: 
bent : looked. She was standing as I had 
left her by the table, but her face was 
turned as towards the window. Large up- 
ward tearful eyes whose gaze was where ? 
with me in that place if somewhere far 
away ? • • • Should I go back to her ? . • . 

I lifted up my head and went on slowly 
to the door, with a foreboding in me. Of 
what ? I opened the door : was out : had 
half drawn it to, when the thought of 
Wasn't it all a dream ? hastened my draw- 



238 Leicester. 

ing to, and the noise of the met jambs took 
a deeper noise in the staircase. I was at 
the first step : my left foot on the second : 
my right on the third. I felt a pain there. 
My ankle had been hurt : true. 

I went down« 

As I got into the cab opposite the door, 
I looked up at our balcony half hoping to 
see her there. No. Nor at the window. 

Once more, as we drove away, I looked up 
at balcony and window. No. I was a fool. 

I thought much on our way to the Gare 
du Nord. 

When we arrived there I found that I 
had abundance of time. I began to walk 
up and down the hall, thinking profoundly. 
At last this thought came : ' The next 
evening I met the Professor at the Gare du 
Nord as we had arranged, and (he, at the end 

of our walk up and down in the hall 

There we turned, there he began to speak 
— commending Rosy to my care as a last 
sudden thought that • . .' 

Sudden thoughts came quickly. I 



Leicester. 239 



paced up and down more quickly. A 
porter with my portmanteau came to me 
to remind me that it was time to be getting 
^^y l^ggftg^ weighed and myself on to the 
platform. We went up the hall together. 
I looked at the clock. He was right. I 
gave one big step on, and suddenly stopped. 
He passed me, and stopped too, but not as 
I had done. 

' Thanks :' I said. ' I shall not go to- 
right.' 

* Good, sir,' he said. 

' If you will put that into a cab/ I said, 
* I will be back in a moment.' 

* Very well, sir,' he said. 

I went oflF to the telegraph office, where 
I wrote on a form : Lady Gicatkin^ 22, 
Balmoral Street , London^ and B. Leicester ^ 
Parisy and I cannot come. Then, when the 
clerk had shown me that he understood it 
aright, I returned to my porter and the 
portmanteau in the cab. I thought much 
on our way to the Avenue de Fontenoi. 
When we arrived there I, who had not, did 



240 Leiceskr. 

not look up at either balcony or window, 
got out with my portmanteau and, having 
paid the man, went slowly in. As the 
impulse to look up had been denied, so was 
that to ask at the concierge's if she had 
gone out. But the concierge came forth to 
proflTer carrying up the portmanteau : and I 
surrendered it to him. Up, then, I went 
slowly, deliberately, with mechanical limp- 
ing foot. At the second story some one 
came out, a man, and descended upon me : 
when, through the mutual choosing of first 
one side and then the other, there was 
a moment's delaying till I went straight 
on, but not before I had, in the gas-hght, 
caught a mechanical glimpse of a face that 
mechanically reminded me of some one. I 
cared not. Up I went again slowly, de- 
liberately, with mechanical limping foot ; 
till I reached our third story, and the door, 
and had unlocked it, and gone in, and 
drawn it to quietly. The passage in the 
red light of the hanging oil lamp's little 
floating redder core flame. No : not to 



Leicester. 241 

look in at the small window. — In here, into 
the study. Almost dark : no one here. 

Now into the salon. Almost dark too s 
no one here. Don't call for her, or your 
voice will unnerve you as a concession to 
the ghostly. 

In the morning-room. Almost dark : 
no one. 

In the bedroom : no one. 

Will you go into the bath-room ? Yes. 
No one. — Stand and think a little. 

Now go back through all those almost 
dark and empty rooms, restraining that cry 
that is in the top of your beating heart. 
And, going back, what an emptiness there is 
in the place I 

It is foolish to feel the presence of the 
ghostly or something seeably unseen here. 
The matches are on the mantlepiece behind 
the jar. Don't knock it over, you groper. — 
Light. No : darkness. These thin con- 
traband matches are better than the stinking 
sulphurs, but still « . . Oat again. 
Damn I 

VOL. II. 37 



242 Leicester. 

Now be careful this time. Light the 
candle. 

It is lit. 

What is the time ? A quarter to nine. 
Now . A letter on the table. 

She is gone I 

My mouth is dry : I swallow. Read 
the letter. Here :; — 

' Mr. Leicesteb. 

' I warned you of it. I see it all 
now. I told you I would go away when it 
came. The last thing I ask from you is 
for me never to see you again. You will 
find everything in the house. I have only 
taken the clothes I have on and £2 7s., 
which I had when I went with you. You 
are not to try to find me. If you do, you 
are a coward and no gentleman. I pray 
God will forgive me for my wickedness ; 
He knows I did not do it for gain, but for 
pure love for you ; that is the only comfort 
I have within . myself. I loved you, but 
what is love and how strong when through 



Leicester. 243 

suffering hate takes the place of that love. 
I hate yon and I always shall. 

I sat down and, with my elbows on my 
knees and my head between my hands, 
tried to think it oat. 



87—2 



CHAPTER IV. 

Despite every eflFort that was made to 
discover her, Eosy remained undiscovered. 
At the end of a week I made my arrange- 
ments in the matter and crossed over to 
London, where I felt sare I should ulti- 
mately have news of her. I had been 
informed by a chief of the Parisian police 
that either she had got off by the very 
train which I had intended to take, or else 
she was dead. I felt a strong conviction 
that neither had she got off by that train 
(how was it possible?), nor yet was she 
dead ; but at times a horrible idea came 
over me that she might be being detained 
in some infamous den. This chief of 
poUce had confidently assured me that it 
was not so : I had, myself, wandered 



Leicester. 245 

about in filthy back streets enough in the 
forlorn hope of finding her : had at last, 
thinking of Marina, visited infamous dens 
enough, places of hot air and bright light 
and tawdrily rich ornament, filled with 
fat and ghastly painted naked women who 
had at first almost terrified me, thinking of 
that awful breathless picture of Juvenal's 
Agrippina, and then made me sorrowful 
nigh to tears. And here in this London, 
where my own poor mother had oflfered her 
body for sale in the public way ; what a 
thought was it to think, that perhaps I had 
not persevered enough in that search ; 
perhaps if I had stayed another week, 
another day^ I might have found her! 
Thought of it and recollection of it mingled 
perpetually. I could do no steady work. 
As day followed day, and still no news 
either from Parisian or London police, I 
became so feverish at nights that I could 
not sleep. 

At last, one evening about a fortnight 
after she had left me, sitting in my easy- 



246 Leicester. 

chair in the study window, trying to 
read a book, I began to think about the 
little canary (up there asleep in his cage), 
singing snatches of song, while the sun 
was on our feet, and, realizing once more 
that all this was not done in a dream, but 
that she was indeed gone from me, might 
at this moment be in misery, might die 
without my ever seeing her again — ^the 
tears came, and then, bowing my head down 
between my hands, I sobbed and wept. 
These were the first tears I had shed. 
They were a relief to me. I began to 
think of it as I had not yet thought of it, 
quietly and fully. 

That night, for the first time since she 
had lefb me, I had a dreamless refreshing 
sleep. In the morning I went down the 
river to Greenwich again, and up onto the 
heath, thinking of Bayne, as I had so 
many times this last fortnight. The place 
seemed somewhat strange to me now: 
stranger than it had seemed before. I did 
not go to the school and the field where 



Leicester. 247 



Wallace and I had lain and played at 
* chuck/ looking out at times , over the 
dark, silver-twining Thames and duskily, 
far-reaching London. — I determined that I 
would find out about Eayne when I got 
back. 

I went to Balmoral Street, and, seeing no 
assuring sign in No. 22 of life or death, 
rang, and inquired of a maid who opened 
the door, if Lady Gwatkin was any better ? 
There was no surprise in her face. Bayne 
was not dead. My breath flowed out almost 
in a sigh. — ^Lady Gwatkin was a good deal 
better. She had gone with Sir James into 
the country. 

It was enough. Further words I did 
not hear. I went away almost joy- 
fully. 

A few days later, I saw Strachan, 
and spoke about the Expedition, Starkie, 
Clarkson and Brooke, again. Worked with 
a will at my classics, and at my spiritual 
classics as well : struggled against despon- 
dent and not-to-be-dismissed thoughts 



248 Leicester. 

abont Bosy* Once was almost setting ont 
for Paris, with a notion (illogical enongh) 
that she was there, but a little thought 
showed me that my arrangement of things 
was best. She was in London I was sure. 
She would probably write to me in Paris 
(perhaps not knowing my London address). 
My man would telegraph at once : I would 
be with her at once. But a sudden idea 
that my man might, after all, be negligent, 
unsettled me. 

It was the afternoon after this considera- 
tion of the matter in which the sudden idea 
of my man perhaps being negligent had 
occurred to me, that I spent in a long 
walk and debate. 

When I returned home, looking as usual 
on the hall table for the longed-for telegram, 
I saw one. (My heart started.) I picked 
it up, and came quietly into the study and, 
at the window, opened it. 

She was found. 

I threw up my face and laughed. Found ! 
found ! found ! Found at last. 



Leicestei\ 249 



A letter from her, (Address unnoticed 
yet.) This : 

*J cannot give you up. I am ill. Do 
come to vie. I am sorry for it. It was 
wrong of me. Will you forgive me and come ? 

* Forgive you ? Come ?' I said, laughing. 
* Oh, little Bosebud, I will forgive you for 
forgiving me I I will come to you, and 

keep you, and ' Ending in tearful 

laughter. 

To have found her again! To know 
that I had not . . . Nay, I knew nothing 
yet ! And she was ill. 

How long it took for that gold-incited 
hansom to get to the place! How long 
the Anglicized Italian woman took to tell 
me where she was! Upstairs I went at 
last : up, up, to the very top of the house, 
the dusty, dingy attic. She was there. 

I knocked softly at the door and, on her 
voice saying that I was to come in, went 



250 Le{ceste7\ 

in, and stood for a moment looking. I had 
but seen her pale worn face on the pillow 
before she had started up with a glad cry. 
And then I was holding her in my arms, 
and she me, silently. 

In a little I felt that my eyes were full of 
tears; bnt she squeezed me in her old 
dear child's way, so quietly, pulling me in 
to her : and the smiles came to my lips, 
and I bent back my head so as to look at 
her face. But she would not let me : 
turning round her head and pressing it to 
my neck, in her old dear child's way. It 
seemed a dream that we had ever been 
away from one another. And then all at 
once she kissed me on the lips, such a long 
kiss : and hid her face again, and sighed 
contentedly. And so we remained in one 
another's arms some time — silently. 

At last I began to think; but had no 
more than begun, when her breast heaved, 
all her body heaved, before the sound of 
the cough came as a relief to it. I feared 
that my holding her might increase the 



Leicester. 251 



effort, and made a little move to loosen 
from her, but she would not. Feared 
indeed : there was fear in me. 

^ Bosebnd/ I said, when I was sitting by 
her on the bed, stroking her hand, she 
lying back on the pillow looking at me, 
* you've got a very bad cold.' 

* Yes,' she said ; * I ' And went off 

into another fit of coughing, the third she 
had had since I came in. It was fear- 
inspiring to listen to her. 

* How did you get it ?' I asked. 

' Got it !' she said with a smile. 'Caught 
it!' 

* Well — — ' I began : and stopped. I 
was determining that she should be out of 
London before that night. 

And so she was. — We went down to- 
gether to Micklehurst, a place I had heard 
of as being sunny and with a deep blue 
sky. The child seemed very contented, 
quietly contented, dreamily contented, some- 
what contented as I did not quite like her 
to be. The patience with which she bore 



252 Leicester. 

her convulsive fits of conghing seemed \o 
me strange. Once I canght myself thinking 
of a dying monkey I had seen in Paris 
streets. 

Arrived in the hotel, albeit I hesitated 
a little, I determined that I would go and 
bring a doctor to see her. And, having 
made her comfortable in the window at a 
room that looked over the blue winding 
seay river, with its girdling darkened 
mountains, over which the sun was setting 
in mellow golden warmth, I went down 
and inquired the name and address of some 
doctor. I seemed to be drinking in the 
clear, pure air as I walked along. 

I found the doctor's house, and the 
doctor : and brought him to see her. He 
reported a bad cold, cautiously adding that 
he would come again and see her on 
Saturday. (This was Wednesday.) I ac- 
companied him down to the hotel door. 
I rather liked his face : he had a little gold 
light in his eyes somewhere, perhaps some- 
thing to do with the sun there. I asked 



Leicester. 253 

him one or two questions about her which 
he answered simply. She had caught a 
bad cold : that was clear. Perhaps it was 
nothing more: perhaps again it was, perhaps 
even it might develop into congestion. 
She seemed in rather a low state of health; 
but he would see her again in a few days, 
on Saturday, and then he should be able to 
tell me if there was anything. I said : 

* Thank you ; very well, be it so. My 
name is Leicester. We shall probably be 
staying here for some little time/ 

And so we parted. 

Rosy spent a bad night with the coughing. 
She did not care' to go out, although 
the day was delightfully sunnily warm, but 
stayed in an easy-chair by the open window 
looking over the blue winding seay river 
and the girdling mountains, all set in the 
deep blue enamelled firmament. I left her 
with a book for an hour in the morning 
and went down onto the shore : and again, 
late in the afternoon. Her cough grew 
worse towards evening, and at last it struck 



254 Leicester. 

me to go out and get her some sweets to 
suck to try and stop it. I brought in a 
large packet of divers sorts, which pleased 
her : and we sat by the fire, which she had 
wished should be lit, and talked quietly 
and happily about ourselves of the past. 
It seemed a dream that we had ever been 
away from one another ; but a sweet soft 
dream that had sweetened and softened all 
the time that we had been with one 
. another. 

This night was worse than the last, and 
the next day than that which preceded it : 
and so with the next night. Two or three 
times this night, after a long fit of convul- 
sive coughing, she brought up some sticky, 
rusty-coloured stuff, with thin streaks of 
blood in it, that I examined in the candle- 
light, and having examined, felt a renewal 
of that indefinable fear that had entered me 
when all her body heaved before the sound 
of the cough came as a relief to it. As I 
lay back, thinking about this, she all at once 
said : 



Leicester*. 25.5 

* I think I'm going to die,' 
I was startled. 

After a pause : 

'What makes yon think that?' I 
said. 

After another panse : 

* I wanted to die, I knew I was catch- 
ing it all the while, and I didn't care : I 
dida't stop it. That was because I wanted 
to die. But when I found how ... I 
think God is going to punish me for it.' 

I turned over, and smiling, gave her a 
kiss on the cheek. 

< Serious,' she said, moving her head a 
little and looking at me. * Serious.' 

' Quite serious,' said I, beginning to 

laugh. * Quite serious, you ' and 

chucked her under the chin. An unfortu- 
nate act ; for immediately succeeded a 
violent fit of coughing, and an unsuccessful 
attempt to get up some more of the 
sputa. 

That inspection of the handkerchief ulti- 
mately decided me at breakfast to go and 



256 Leicester. 



find the doctor again : which I did, bat he 
could not come till later. 

Bosy was informed that she would have 
to go to bed again, and perhaps have to 
stop there a little. I at once suspected 
congestion, whatever that precisely meant. 

As the doctor and I went down together 
I catechized him. He said that she had 
pneumonia. I inquired the precise meaning 
of pneumonia. 

^ Inflammation of the substance of the 
lungs/ 

' Was it dangerous V 

* Sometimes.' 

* Fatal r 

* Sometimes.' 

'How long did it last?' 

* Three or four days, in good cases ; 
more generally a fortnight or so.' 

I asked him a few more questions, and 
then he took up the word, and told me what 
would, what might be required to, be done. 
Then we parted. 

I came upstairs to Eosy again, with a 



Leiceste7\ 257 



feeling as if there was going to be a species 
of campaign undertaken. The first thing 
to do was to find oat if she minded leaving 
the hotel. She did not. Then I went oat 
to observe the house that the doctor had 
recommended to me. 

It was rather a cottage than a house. I 
liked it. It had a small garden, bright 
with flowers, in front of the dining-room, a 
long thin room with two door-windows 
opening on to a little lawn. I came back 
with a description of it, which, having 
pleased her, sent me off to take the place 
at once : and back to bring her to it. 

By lunch-time we, I and the landlady 
and the servant, had the dining-room turned 
into a bed-room — light, airy, and comfort- 
able. 

The doctor came in the afternoon again. 
Further directions were given, and he left 
us, saying that he would leave the prescrip- 
tions at the chemist's as he went home. By 
tea-time everything was ready. Rosy had 
throughout remained quiescent, except that, 

VOL. 11. 38 



258 Leicest€i\ 

as she was coming into the house, she had 
noticed some red daisies in the hed under 
the window, and plucked one, saying : 
' A pretty thing 1' and for a moment stood 
looking at it, while I stood looking at her. 
I had every thing to hand — inhaler, medi- 
cines, milk, beef-tea : and the kettle, with 
a long brown-paper spout to it, so as to 
keep the atmosphere moist with the steam, 
on the fire, from whose immediate heat, and 
light she was sheltered by the bed-curtain 
drawn out and tucked under the mattress. 
The idea of nursing her was, of course, 
pleasing to me. I felt no fear now. The 
sense of her lying there as she was, seemed 
jto admit of no feeling but calm tenderness. 
The cough was very troublesome : more 
violent, more as it were ineffectual. She 
was very thirsty, and complained of the 
warm milk and beef-tea. Orders had been 
left that it was to be warm, and so of 
course she would have to drink it warm. I 
had to coax her to it like a child. The 
same with the inhalation. At first she. 



Leicester. 259 



half sleepy, would not draw, but kept 
moaning, and turning her mouth away 
from the pipe, till I bantered her into 
taking twenty pulls to show she was not 
afraid of it, and then turned the twenty 
into thirty, and the thirty into fifty, and so 
on up to a hundred, and far over (I de- 
ceiving her by dropping back ten several 
times) : and so the requisite ten minutes 
inhaling were achieved. She could get no 
sleep. She kept up this low moaning alHhe 
while, occasionally sitting up with her chin 
on her knees, and the lower part of her 
hands in her eyes. Once she suddenly 
looked up at me and said : 

^ Don't you believe I got this as a punish- 
ment for wanting to die T 

* No ; I don't. I think you got it as the 
very natural result of catching a severe cold.' 

' But I did it —I did it on purpose.' 

* The cold wouldn't know anything about 
that. There now! Now you've asked 
what you wanted to ask, and you mustn't 
talk any more.' 

38—2 



260 Le{ce8te»\ 

She had a violent fit of coughing. When 
it was done she said : 

' I do wish yoa'd talk to me. I can- 
not get to sleep. I like to hear yon 
talking.' 

* Very well,' I said. * I'll tell you a story. 
Will that do ?' 

^ Yes/ she said. ' But lie down there. 
I don't like you sitting up.' 

I lay down on the extreme edge of the 
hed, with my head on the bolster, and 
began my story. It was the story of Un- 
dine. Often I had to stop on account of 
her coughing. Once the story was so 
broken into by a fit of coughing, that I 
hoped she would forget or not care to hear 
any more ; would try to go to sleep. Not 
so. She began to talk about what had 
happened to her in London, and would not 
brook interruption. At last, I let her say 
what she had to say. She told me of her 
life at Wiltshire Crescent. 

* I was glad when you came,' she said 
slowly, with pauses. * I had a most horrid 



Leicester. 261 

dream of you. I dreamed you were dead, 
and that I saw your coffin carried by 
men to the cemetery. I thought I was 
in such grief about parting with you in 
anger, that I would have given half my life 
to have parted with you friendly ... I 
know I have been very wicked in doing 
what I have, but I do believe God will 
forgive me. I did love you. I was also 
in trouble as to whether you were safe in 
heaven, and I thought I wept so bitterly, 
and my grief was so great that, while I was 
following to see where you were buried, I 
was obliged to kneel down to pray God to 
take you to heaven, and to forgive all, at 
the same time promising I would be good 
all the rest of my life, in hope to see you 
there : when I awoke and found it all a 
dream. I was very pleased, but it upset 
me for days, and at last I made up my 
mind to write to you, as I could not rest. 
Well, there ! it's all over now : and very 
likely it' I am going to die instead of 
you.' 



262 Leicester. 

Here she had another fit of coughing, and 
I got np to give her some milk. After that 
I felt she had forgotten the story, bat she 
requested its continuance, and so I con- 
tinued it, with the necessary breaks, till 
four in the morning, when she feH asleep. 
Not even the orders of the doctor, that is 
to say my duty, prevailed over my disin- 
clination to awakening her at five for her 
medicine. She herself awoke a little later : 
the medicine was given : and at her request 
the story continued ; but only for a little, 
for we could not get on with it ^ one little 
bit,' as she said, owing to the growing fre- 
quency of her fits of coughing. She was quite 
exhausted by the time the sun came into 
the room over the top of the hedge : about 
seven o'clock. I was tired, but not sleepy : 
and less tired when I had washed myself. 
Then she got a little sleep. 

The doctor came about eleven. He 
sanctioned her drinking her milk and beef 
tea cold if she really did not like to drink 
it warm : and Bosy's silence said that she 



Leicestei\ 263 

really did not like. I went with him to the 
door and into the garden, where I asked him 
if he could not give her some opiate. He 
shook his head. I said that she was being 
torn to pieces by the congh, and that I 
could not help thinking that it was danger- 
ous to let her get as exhausted as she had 
been a few hours ago, and was yet. He 
said : 

< I dare not give her anything.' 

The words and their tone settled the 
matter. I asked again if it was possible to 
give her any stimulants now ? He said : 

^ Ho ; best not. Go on just the same as 
yesterday with the inhaler and the poultices, 
and the milk and beef-tea. That is all.' 

I said that as fast as I gave it her, she 
brought it all up again: purposelessly. 
Then, after a proposal about a nurse, 
which I refused, he left me. I thought no 
more of him. 

At about five she would have me lie 
down on the edge of the bed and try to get 
some sleep : and, with the promise from 



264 Leicester. 

her that she would awaken me in an hour, 
when it would be time for her to inhale 
again, I closed my eyes. She deceived 
me. It was seven when I awoke: was 
awakened by what was, maybe, an unusually 
violent fit of coughing. I scolded her, 
dear little Bosebud, so thin-faced now, as I 
got the inhaler ready: she, between her 
coughings, smiling at me. 

After tea — I sitting by the bedside, 
holding her hand and thinking — she all at 
once, quite opened her eyes and looked at 
me: 

* Where do people go to when they die V 
she said. 

I looked at her dear child's eyes, but 
did not answer her. 

'Do tell me,' she said, in a child's 
aggrieved tone, rumpling her brow. * Don't 
tease me I Tell me true/ 

After a pause, in which memory dwelt 
lovingly on look and tone, and that sweet 
correlating gesture of the hidden face, I 
answered her : 



Leicester. 265 

' I believe that they go into the earth 
from which they came.' 

* Yes/ she said, * but that's not their 
spirits. What do their spirits do ?' 

* Their spirits, too, go into the earth.' 
She shook her head : 

* No,' she said ; * their spirits go up' — 
(looking np) — * up into heaven.' 

I lifted her hand, and bent my head, 
and kissed her hand softly. 

* But don't you think so too ?' she 
said. 

* No,' I said, still bent over her hand. 
' But ' (looking up at her and smiling), 
' what does it matter what I think, dear ?' 

She began to cough, and went on for a 
little. Then: 

'Don't you think,' she said, Hhat good 
people go to heaven when they die ?' 

'Now don't you talk any more in this 
wayl' I said, getting up and sitting on the 
bed by her, * or I shall — well, I shall have 
to stop you someway.' And I put my arm 
round her shoulders. 



266 Leicester. 

' Ah/ she said, drawing her head back so 
as to look at me, ' but dou't you ?' 

^Don't Iwhat?' 

Her brow rumpled. 

'Don't tease me 1' she said. * You must 
tell me/ 

* Very well,' I said, * I will tell you, then. 
I don't think anyone goes to heaven, how- 
ever good they are, for I don't believe there's 
any heaven to go to.' 

^ But what becomes of them, then?' 
' They go into the earth from whence they 
came/ 

* That's horrid !' she said. ' I don't ' 

and began to cough again. 

I put my arm round her shoulders, and 
leant my cheek to hers that was wet, while 
the lump gathered in my throat, and the 
tears in my eyes also. 

* What is it, dear ?' I said. * Why are 
you crying ?' 

In a little : 

^I was thinking,' she said, ^that God 
wouldn't let us see one another then, 



Leicester. 267 



perhaps, because we had been so sinfiU^ and 
because you — because you talked in that 
way. If you didn't talk in that way, 
perhaps He would, you know ; because I did 
love you so !' (She had turned and thrown 
her arms round my neck.) * Oh, I couldn't 
do without you ! I did try, I did try. But 
you were so . . .' Her trembling lips did 
not finish it. 

At last : 

* Oh, Kosy,' I said, with a low, choking 
voice, *what have I done to you? . . . 
Oh, my little Rosebud !' 

^Hush!' she said, *hush, dear; don't 
say that. I don't think God'U be so hard 
upon us ; I don't think He will. And it 
wasn't your fault, this. It was all ray 
fault ; I did it. I knew I did. But I don't 
mind now. Kiss me, dear; kiss me. It 
wasn't your fault.' 

I kissed her, and straightway the cough 
caught and shook her poor body through 
and through ; but she would not have me 
take my arms from round her. And as I 



268 Leicester. 



felt all this, the thought in me tamed to 
utter fierceness. 

We talked no more of these things, except 
that Bosy told me that last night she had 
dreamt of heing smothered hy wreaths of 
smoke, and could not wake me. We talked 
of the dear hours in the past, and of the 
dearer that were to he in the future — by 
snatches ; for her cough was almost cease- 
less, and, it seemed to me, more violent 
than last night. She had, apparently, for- 
gotten about the story, which was to have 
been continued to-night ; and I did not care 
to remind her of it while we were talking 
as we were of the dear hours in the past, 
and of the dearer that were to be in the 
future. 

But, as the night wore on, she became 
worse. I had great trouble to get her to 
take the inhalation. She kept up the low 
moaning all the time, as she had done on 
the first night ; occasionally, too, sitting op 
with her chin on her knees, and the lower 
part of her hands in her eyes. I did not 



Leicesie7\ 269 



leave the bed-side for a moment. Now and 
then she fell asleep, but the low moaning 
did not cease, except when she muttered 
incoherently. 

The slow hours passed.* I must have 
dozed. I awoke with a start. She was 
struggling violently. I saw that, and her 
swollen, livid face, and eyes strangely 
prominent with strange, clear brightness. 
Then I knew that she wanted me, and, in a 
moment, was across the bed, with one arm 
round her body and the other loosening her 
nightdress at the throat ; but she had caught 
it, as it were, by chance, and rent it down 
wide open, just as the button was coming 
undone. I held her steadily up, despite her 
violent, downward struggles. She knew I 
was holding her. She could not get breath ; 
she was suffocating. Her chest seemed 
rigid. I looked at her Uvid face again, with 
eyes of prominent, strange, clear brightness, 
her stretched nostrils. 

Then, before I scarcely knew what had 
happened, except a tightened effort of her 



270 Leicester. 

body in my arms, she had ceased struggling. 
I looked at her face : looked long ; at last, 
wildly. I shook her gently; lowered my 
arm to shake her again, when her head 
fell back with the upward, starmg eyes. 
I put up a hand over, and closed and held 
them down; and thought. She is dead, 
dead. What did that mean ? No. . . . 
No. . . . 

I gathered her close in my arms, kissing 
her warm, pure throat and talking to 
myself; and, at last, let both of us lie back 
in the soft pillows, I with my cheek on her 
warm, pure breast. Ah! better to sleep 
now without more words ; better to sleep. 
Think no more of that phantasy. I was 
given to such. Even as a boy, I could not 
quite tell sometimes whether I was in a 
dream or awake ; so now, I could not quite 
tell sometimes whether I had seen things 
in dreams or in the vital air : so now. But 
that was enough of speaking. Better to 
sleep now without more words; better to 



Leicester. 271 

* A bundle of mijnh is my welUheloved unto 
me; he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts. 
I charge youj ye daughters of Jerusalem^ by 
the roes and by the hinds of tlie field tliat ye 
stir not up nor awake my love till lie please.* 



THE END. 



BILLIKO AND SONS, FR1NTER8, OUILDFORD. 



Now ready at all the Libraries. 

THE VALLEY OF SOREK. 

A NOVEL. 2 vols., 21«. 
By GERTRUDE M. GEORGE; 



' There is In the book a high and pure moral and a diBtinot conception of 
character. . . . The draraati* pertona ... are in reality strongly indi- 
yidual, and surprise one with their inconsistencies Just as real human beings do. 
. . . There is something nowetful in the way in which the reader is made to 
feel both the reality and jjuie untrustworthiness of his [the hero's] religious 
fervonr, and the character of the atheist, Graham, Is not les^ strongly and 
definitely conceived. . . . It is a work that shows imagination and moral 
insight, and we shall look with much anticipation for another from the same 
hB.w.*—OonUmp<nrary Review. 

'The characters are clearly defined, the situations are strong, and the interest 
evoked by tbenf is considerable. The women. In particular, are admirably 
drawn.'— ^ thenceum. 

* Hemy Westgate, the hero, is a study of no slight p^chological interest. 
... It Is the development of this character for good and for evil, through the 
diversci influence of friends and oiroimistanoee . . . that Miss George has 
portrayed with singular vigour and skilful analysis. . . . It is impossible to 
read uiis story without wonderment at the maturity and self-restraint of its 
style, and at the rare beauty and pathoSf mingled with strength, which mark 
every page.' — UUrary World. 

'literary merit beyond the average. ... A young man arrested in a 
career of carelessness and extravagance by a reverse of fortune, reforms his life 
and becomes the subject of strong religious convictions. How these convictions 
are assailed, and how they are shaken, almost to overt^hrowing, is told in the 
story. . • , There is ability in the book, and promise for the future.' — 
^pceUUor, 

',Henry Westgate, the hero . , . is drawn with skill and power. His lapses 
from the right path, his weakness when he allows himself to bo drawn down by 
the wife wnom he loves, instead of raising her to his own spiritual level, are 
portraved in a forcible ana natural manner. Graham is also a clever, if unpleasing, 
character study* . . . The author . . . possesses no Inoonsiderable talent. 
Morning PosL 

'The x^resent novel stands out with bold and striking originality. For a 
first composition it is remarkable alike for its subtle analysis ox character and 
philosophic depths in probing the passions and mysteries of the human heart. 
... It is a story that captivates the imagination. . . . "The Valley of 
Sorek," as this sentence shows, is a tale with a high purpose, and it is told In an 
eloquent and most impressive manner.'— Dai^y Chronicle. 

' Evident signs of artistic ability in these volumes. Thus, she possesses in no 
slight degree the power of investing her characters with life ; Uiat she has con- 
siderable Insight into human nature is shown in the subtle analvsis of the phases 
through which the hero's mind passes during his courtship of Hebe. . . . Tbo 
strong situations which arise out of the conviction of the innocent Westgate servo 
to show that the author possesses some dramatic power. . . . The story is 
well and powerfully written.' — Globe. 

* Her power in depicting the fluctuations of character between good and evil 
influenoes (' betwixt Ormuzd and Ahriman,' to follow her Orientudism) i» bv no 
means small, nor does her choice of Sampson and Delilah, as implied types of her 
hero and heroine, seriously impair the natural character-drawing of thcso 
personages. . . . The work is praiseworthy and promising, and, if the author 
should advance as happily as she has begun, her name may yet be famous.'— 
Daily Telegraph. 

' An original— Indeed, perhaps it is not too much to say a unique— story. . • • 
Powerful, eloquent, and only too trno. . . . Marked by strong individuality.' 
— Socu:iy. 

'The story of Westgate's infatuation for the impetuous, beautiful, and 
pleasure-loving Hebe Mansfield is well toldi.'—MomAng Advirtiser. 

LONDON . 
GEORGE REDWAY, 15, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 



Price Seffen Shillings and Sixpence, 
In crown Svo., 384 pages, handsomely boand in cloth, gilt. 



THEOSOPHY, 

RELIGION AND OCCULT SCIENCE. 



HENRY S. OLCOTT, 

PRJSSIDXNT OF THB THBOSOPHICAL SOCIKTY. 



%* Among the mcUien treated in this important toork are : — 

Adepts— Axran Philosophy— Astral SeIf~Atma~The Ann— Madame 
Blayatsky — Boehmen — Brahminical Cnstoms — Lord Bnddha — Cosmic 
Matter— Charms and Spells — CheU — Christianity — dairro^moe — C<m- 
fncias— Crystal-Beading— Demoniac Agency— Dervishes — ^Divining Bods 
— The Dnalists— Ecstatics — ^Hierophants of Egypt— Electrid^—Esqtorio 
Buddhism— Eohemerization— Exorcism— Fire Worshin— Folk liore— Eree- 
masons — Gantama — God — Hebrew Cosmogony — Hermetic Doctrine — 
Hindnism — Blnmination— Immortality— Incantation— India— Initiates — 
Islam — Jesuits — Jesus — Jews — Jiv-atma, or Life-principle — ^Eabala — 
Kabedrac Mysteries — Koran-Krishna— Levitation— Loadstone— LnOy — 
Magic Magnetism— The Mahatmas—Mahomet — Materialism— Mediomism 
'—Mesmerism— Miracles— Moksha— Moses — Moslem Paradise — Maktatma 
or Soul Universalized—Mysticism— Neo-Platonists of Alexandria— Nirvana 
— Occult Sciences — Od, or Odyle— Odic Aura— Oriental Philosophy — 
Paliugenesis — Parabrahma— Paracebus — ^The Parsi— Plato— The Phono- 
graph — Plotinus — Porphyry — Prayer — Prognostication — Psychic Phe- 
nomena—Psychology — Psj^chometry — ^The Pundits — The Puranas — ^The 
Beformation— Reincarnationists — ^Beligion— The Bishis — Storyof a Sadhn 
— Salem Witchcraft Horrors— Sanskrit Literature— The Sastras- Science 
-Stances— Self— Sensuality— Somnambules — Sorcery — * Soul' — Herbert 
Spencer — Spirit Bapping — Ancient and Modem Spiritualists — Super- 
naturalism — Swedenoorg — Table-Moviug — Secret of Talismans —The 
Talmud— Theodidaktoi of Greece— Theosophical Society — Theosophy : 
Its proper definition — Theurgists— Thought-Beading — Transmissibility 
of Thought — Mystics of Til^t— Training in Occult Science — ^Trance — 
The Tripitikas— Universal Brotherhood — The Upanishads — Yatsavana 
— Vedantism— The Yedas — YedicPhilosophy — Yestal Mysteries — Yital 
Force— Witchcraft — Science of Yoga— Zoroastrian Beligion, etc 



LONDON : 
GEOBQE REDWAY, 15, YORK STREET, CO VENT GAKDEN, 



BOOKS PUBLISHED AND SOLD 



BY 



MR. GEORGE RED WAY. 



YOEK StEEIT, COTBITT GaBDEK, 

London, January, 1866. 



SSit, EetiUjap*« publications* 



In crown 8po, in French grey wrapper, uniform mth the Bihliograpliies of 

RusKiN, DiCESNB, Thacebsay, and Carlylb. Price Qa, 

Afevo copies on Large Paper. Price 10s, 6d. 

The Bibliography of Swinburne ; 

A BlBUOaBAPHICAL LiST, ABBAKGED IN ChBONOLOGICAL 

Obdbb, of the Published Wbitings in 
Vebsb and Pbosb 

OE 

ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE 
(1857-1884). 

This Bibliography commenceB with the brief -lived College HagaziDe, to which 
Mr. SwiNBtTBNB was one of the chief contributors when an nndcrgraduate at 
Oxford in 1857*68. Besides a careful enumeration and description of the first 
editions of all his separately published volumes and pamphlets in verse and prose, 
the original appearance is duly noted of every poem, prose article, or letter, 
contributed to any journal or magazine («^., Once-a-Week, The Spectator, 
The Comhill Magaxine, The Morning Star, The Fortnightly Review, The 
Sxaminer, The Dark Blue, The Academy, The Athenaum, The Tatler, 
JBelgravia, The Gentleman's Magazine, La RipuhUque des Lettres, Le 
Bappel, The Glasgow University Magazine, The Daily Telegraph, &c., &c.)i 
whether collected or uncollected. Among other entries will be found a 
remarkable novel, published in instalments and never issued in a separate 
form, and several productions in verse not generally known to be from 
Mr. Swinbubne's pen. The whole forms a copious and it is believed 
approximately complete record of a remarkable and brilliant literary career, 
extending already over a quarter of a century. 

%• Only 250 copies printed. 



With Portrait, Crown 8«o. 

Dickensiana. 

A Bibliography of the Literature relating to Chablbs Dickens and his 

Writiogs. 
Compiled by Pbed. G. Kixroy, author of " Phiz/' " John Leech/* 



MR. JIEDWAY'S PUBLICATIONS. 



A " Rosickttcian" Book. 
400 copies only. In demy Stfo, cloth. 

Phallicism: 

Celestial and Terrestrial, Heathen and Christian, its connection with the 
Rosicrucians and the Gnostics, and its foundation in Baddhism. With an 
Essay on Mystic Anatomy. By Habgbavs Jbnninoa, author of '*The 
Rosicrucians." 

" This book is written ad eUrum, and appeals to the scholar only, and 
not to the multitude. It is a masterly nnd ezhanstive account of tli&t 
worship of the creatiTe powers of nature which, under Tarious names, haa 
prevailed among all the nations of antiquity and of mediaeval timee, alike 
in Egypt and Cidia, in Italy and Oanl, among the Israelites of old, and 
among the primitive inhabitants of Great Britain and Ireland .... a 
moMt Taluabie auxiliary to all who care to pursue such a subject of inqniry. 
a subject for which Mr. Jennings is the better fitted on account of hia long 
and intimate ac9uaintance with the Boaicrucians, their tenets, and their 
practioes."— iltitiQuarian MagoMine and BibliograpKw, 

** Unpleasant as this subject is, we are quite prepared to agree that in 
its Bolenlaflc aspect, as a form of human worship, it has oonaidentble ijn- 

portance Mr. Jennings deals almost eiitirely with the subjectire 

]>art of his enquiry, and he hiUB evidently made a considerable amount of 
research int > the iiteratnre of early reliirlons. ... He has produced some- 
thing which is, at all events, worth the attention of the student of compa- 
rative psychology."— -inti^ttary. 

" This book ... is profoundly learned, and grives evidence on each page 
of deep thought, intense powers of research, clear and unmistakable reaaon« 
ing, and thorough mastership of the subject. The appendix also contains 
much very curious matter which wiU interest those who desire to study 
the subject under all its different aspects and bearings."— Beli^uary. 



A Nbw Novbl by a New Wbiteb. 
In erovm 800, 2 volt,, cloth. Price £1 1#. 

The VaUey of Sorek. 

By Gbbtbttdh M. OxoBas. With a Critical Introduction by Ricxabd 
Hebitx Shxphbbd. 

" There is in the book a hi^h and pure moral and a distinct oonoep- 
tiou of character . . . The dramatvB persona . . . are in reality strongly indivi- 
dual, and surprise one with their inconsistencies jxist as real human beings 
do . . . There is something powerful in the way in which the reader is 
made to feel both the reali^ and the nntrustworthiness of his [the hero's] 
religious fervour, and the character of the atheist, Graham, is not less 
strongly and definitely conceived ... It is a work that shows imagination 
and moral insight, and we shall look with much anticipation for another 
from the same hand." — Contemporary Bevitv). 

*' The characters are clearly defined, the situations are stroncr, and ih» 
interest evoked by them is considerable. The women in paraoular are 
admirably drawn."— -ith^noum. 

"Henry West gate, the hero, is a study of no slight psychological 
interest ... It is the development of this character for good and for evU, 
through the diversb influence of friends and circumstances . . . that Miss 
George has portrayed with singular vigour and skilful analysis . . . It is 
impossible to read this story without wonderment at the matiirity and 
Bolf restraint of its style, and at the rare beanty and pathos, mingled with 
strength, which mark every pa^'e," — Literary World. 



MR. REDWAY'S PUBLICATION'S. 



BioasAFHY OP **Thb Illustbatob op Dicibkb." 
In demy St^o, wrappered, uncut for binding, with JBxtra Portrait. Price 3«. 6rf. 

"Phiz" (Hablot Knight Browne): 

A Memoir; including a Selection from bis Correspondence and Notes on his 
Principal Works. By Fbbd. G. Kittok. With numerous Illustrations, 
comprising a Portrait of " Phiz** and Seven other full-page Engravings, 
printed on plate paper, besides many process Reproductions of Comic and 
Original Sketches with which the deceased artist was wont to embellish the 
exceedingly droll letters to his sous» now for the first time published. 

%• A few copies only remain, 

"This edition of the Memoir is not only interesting in itself, bntis 
sure to immediately become scoxoe. The first edition was exhausted in six 
weeks, and the present issue contains new and valuable family and 
biographical matter."— Prtntiny Timn, 



By the late Mr. B. H. Hobke, Author of "Orion." 
In large crown Svo, Price Ze, ^, 

Sithron, the Star Stricken. 

Translated (Ala hereket Allah) fit>m an ancient Arabic Manuscript. By 
Salbk Bbn Uzaib, of Bassdra. 

"This very remarkable book, 'Sithron' ... is a bold, pungent, 
audacious satire upon the ancient religious belief of the Jews ... No one 
can read the book without homage to the force, the tenderness, and the 
never-failing skiU of its writer."--St. Jamu't OoMtU, 



Rbdwat's SHiLLiira Sbbibs, Vol. III. 
Edition de Luxe in demy ISmo. 

Tobacco Talk and Smokers' Gossip. 

An Amusing Miscellany of Fact and Anecdote relating to "The Great 
Plant" in all its Forms and Uses, including a Selection from Nicotian 
Literature. 

'* One of the best books of gossip we have met for some time 

It is literally crammed full from beginning to end of its 148 paffes with weD- 
selected anecdotes, poems, and excerpts from tobacoo literature and 
history." — Onxphxo. 

** The smoker should be grateful to the compilers of this pretty little 

volume No smoker phould be without it. and anti-tobacooniats have 

only to turn over its leaves to be converted."— Pali M-oXi QmiU. 

" Something to please smokers ; and non-slhokers may be interested 
in tracing the effect of tobaoco^the fatal, flagrant herb^-on onr Utera* 
ture."— i*t«r«rv IfwW. 



MR. EBDWAY'S PUBLICATIONS. 



In 12mo, cloth {Suhtorihert onUf), 

Lord Byron and His Works. 

A Biography and Essay. Translated from the Italian of CBtAUB Cabtu. 
Edited, with Notes and Appendix, by A. Kikloch. Dedicated (I7 ] 
lion) to his Excellency the Marquis of Lornb, K.T. 

*«* Among the Subscribers are the MiaQins ef Bifon, tiie MABqulfe of 
LoKHK, the Eari. of Nobthbrook, F.M. Loan NAraa of Ma«dai.a, 
aud General Sir Wh. F. Wiiuakb, Bart. 



Jn crown 800, eloih. Price 5«, 

The Angelic Pilgrim, 

An Epical History of the Chaldee Empire. By W. H. Watsov. 

*' An epical poem of oonsiderable lenirtb and beauty ... an hlstorie 
narratiTe of the Cbaldee Empire, iu rise and ftdl, and the infloenoe it 
exercised on the preliiatorio world."~dri«tMm Vnw%. 



Bibliotheca Arcana, Sen Catalogus 
Librorum Penetralium, 

Bein^ Brief Notices of Books that have been Secretly Printed, Prohibited 
by Law, Seized, Anathematised, Burnt or Bowdleriaed, By SPBcrLATOE 
MOBUK. 

•ii* Subscribers only. Prospectus on application. 



Mental Magic; 

A RATIONALE OP THOUGHT READING, 

And its attendant Phenomena, and their application to the Discorery of 

New Medicines, Obscure Diseases, Correct Delineations of Character, 

Lost Persons and Property, Mines and Springs of Water, and 

All Hiddbk akd Sbcbbt Tniyas. 

By Thos. Wblton, F.P, V. To which is added the History and Mystery 
of the Ma^ic Mirror. Post 4to, cloth, 6<« 



MR. EEDWAT'S PUBLICATIONS. 



Bbfbivtsd reoK thb Uhiqttx Obiqivai, [Bosxoir, 1827]. 

Tamerlane and Other Poems. 

By Bdoah Allah Fob. Edited, with %n Introduction, by R. H. Shxf- 
HBBD. Printed in the best ftyle on Whatnuin paper at the ChUwick 
Press. 12mo, parchment. 

%• Tkr€B eopisi only. Price £1 It. 

'* Jl ?«TitabI« Viw a« I«M . . . thlB wiU be )ield dear to tke bibliophfle, 
whilst to the world at large the work poBBeeoea especial interest ae being 
I first published by Edoab JLllax Poa, in Boston, in 1827 ; and the 
imaa copy from which this was primted i» unique."— £h>oisty« 



I copy I 

Mr. Bwinbume has characterised this reprint ae "so beautifiil and 
▼aloable a little Tolnme, full of interest for the admirers of Foe's singular 
and ezquisito genius." 



In erovm Svo, parekment. Price 8«. 9d. 

The Anatomy of Tobacco ; 

OR SMOKING METHODISED, DIVIDED AND CONSIDERED 
AFTER A NEW FASHION. 

Br LsoLiirus Szlubieitsib. 

" A Tsrj derer and amusing parody of the metaphjsieBl treatises onee 
In fashion. Ereiy smoker will be pleased with this Tolume."— liTotM and 

" We hare here a most excellent piece of fooling, evidently from a 
University pen .... contains some very derer burlesaues ef classical 
modes of writing, and a delicious parody of scholastic logic."~Lti«rary 
WorU, 

" A. delightful mock essay on the exoteric philosophy of the pipe and 
tb» pipe bowl .... reminding one alternately of 'Melancholy' Burton 
and Herr Teufeladrdch, and unplying vast reading and out-of-the-waj 
ooJture on the part of the *XLtYkOT,—Boolc$eU0r, 



In demy Bvo, with Ilhutrative Platee, Price 1#. 

Chirognomancy ; 

OR INDICATIONS OP TEMPERAMENT AND APTITUDES MANL 

FESTBD BY THE FORM AND TEXTURE OP THE THUMB 

AND FINGERS. 

By Rosa BAuaHiir. 

"Miss Baughan has already established her fttme ae a writer upon 
oeoult subjects, and what she baa to say is so very dear and so easily 
Tsvifled tbat it comes with the weight of authority."— .^ody't |*ictonel^ 



MB- REDWAf S PUBLICATIONS. 



JFith Symbolical FrouHspieoe. In post 4io, wllum. Priet £1 U. 

The Divine Pjrmander 

OF HERMES MERCURIUS TRISME6ISTUS. 

Ik XVIL Books. 

Translated from the Arabic by Dr. Etz&abd, 1660. New Edition, with 
Introdoctory Essay by H^bgeayb Jiinrnras, author of "The Bosicractans." 

\^ Edition limited to 200 copies. 

"No more weloome book ooold faaTO been sent for oar review."— 

Tk«(Mophi«t. 

The Greeks applied the name and term of Hermes Trismegistus to the 
Egyptian That. He was believed to be the origin of everything formed or 
produced by the hmnan mind ; the inventor of all arts and sciences, and the 
contriver of the hieroglyphics. Jamblichus attributes to Hermes 1,100 hooka 
Eusebius saw but forty -two of these "in his time." That portion of the 
writings ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus which is best known, and which 
is most beyond dispute, forms the greater part of this translation. 



Edition de luxe, in demy ISmo. Price Is, 

Confessions of an English Hachish 

Eater. 

'* There is a sort of bixarre atbnction in thin fantastlo little book, wKh 
its weird, unhealthj imaginations." — WhitthaU Review. 

** Imafpnation or some other fscolty plsys marvellous freaks in this 
Uttle book."— Lloyd'f WnklyZ 

" A charmingly written and not less charmingly printed little volvme. 
The anonymoos anther describes his experiences in langnage which for 



pictureeqneness is worthy to rank with De Qoiocey'e celebrated sketch of 
the Enghah Opinm Eater."— LtncoItuh>6 ChnmcU. 

*' A. weird little book .... The author seems to have been delighted 
with his dreams, and . . . carefoUy explains how hachish may be made 
from the resin of the common hemp plant."— Daily Chronicle, 

" To be added to the literature of what is, after all, a very undesirable 
subject. Weak minds may generate a morbid curiosity if stimolated in this 
direction."— >Bra4rord Ob^rver. 

** The stories told bv our author have a decidely Oriental ilavonr, and 
we would not be surprised if some foolish individuals did endeavour to 
procure some of the drag, with a view to experience the sensation described 
by the writer of this clever brochi«r«."— Edinburgh CouranU 



Primitive Symbolism as illustrated in 
Phallic Worship. 

By HosBlB H. WiSTBOPP. With Dliutratioiu. Demy 8to, cloth. 

[/« prtparatiou. 



MR. REDWAY'S PUBLICATIOKS. 



Thb oitlt Published Biogbafht op Johh Leboh. 
An idUion de Uuoe in demy ISmo. Price Is, 

John Leech, Artist and Humourist: 

A Biographical Sketch. By Fbbd. G. EirrroN. New Edition, rerised. 

" In the abgenoe of a foller biography we cordially welcome Mr. Sltton's 
intereetinff little Bketch."— JTotM and QumM. 

"The multitadlnous admirera of the famona artiat will find thia 
toaohing monograph well worth careful reading and preaerTation."~D(uly 
Chronicle. 

"The rery model of what Buoh a memoir should be."— -OropKic. 

%* A few copies remain on hcmd of the original edition in octavo^ with 
Portrait and eight full-page Ungravings, Price 6«. 



In erown SvOf cloth. Price Se, 6d, 

Sandracoltus ; a Drama. 

By W. Theodobe Smith. 
"A imall bat Tcry wondrooa book."— uload«n»y. 



2 9ole., orown Soo. 

Leicester ; 

A NoreL By Fbavois William Adams. 



Third Edition, newUf revised, in demg ^o, with Illustrative Plates, 
Price Is. 

The Handbook of Palmistry, 

Including an Account of the Doctrines of the Eabbala. By R. Bavghak, 
Aathor of " Indications of Character in Handwriting." 

" It poesessee a certain literary interest, for Miss Baoghan shows the 
connection between palmistry and the doctrines of the Kabbala."— Graphic. 

"Miss Bosa Baughan, for many years known as one of the most expert 
proficients in this branch of science, has as much claim to consideration as 
any writer on the subject."— Suuw Doily Nwdb. 

" People who wish to believe in Palmistry, or the science of reading 
character from the marks of the hand," says tne Daily N»w§. In an article 
devoted to the discussion of this topic, " will be interested m a handbook 
of the subject by Miss Baughan, published by Mr. Sedway." 



10 MR. REDWAT'S PtTBLICATIONS. 

ThAOKBRAT XKJ> CBUIKSHAinL. 

The only '*Terbatim" reprint of the moet charming of Thackssat's mtieal 

Easayi. 

In demy 800, wrapped, uniform with "PhW and "Leech,'' Price 9e. Gd, 

A few large paper eopiee, with India proof poHraU, in iw^Mrial Seo, 

parchment. Price It, 6d. 

An Essay on the Genius of George 
Cruikshank, 

By "Theta" (William Makxpeaos Thacksbat). With all the Original 
Woodcut niustrationa, a New Portrait of Orujkshake, etched hy Pailthospb, 
and a Prefatory Note on Thaoks&at ab am Abt Cbitio, hy W. E. Chubch, 
Secretary of the Urhan Cluh. 

'* TbackerBj'fl 9umj * On the G«nias of George Omi^ihawlc,* reprinted 
from the ITMtmtiwtsr Rroitw, ia ajpi«oe of work wen odonlated to dzire a 
critio of these days to despair. How inimitable is ita touch ! At onee 
familiar and elegant, aerioaa and hnmorona, enthnaiaatioaUy appreciatiTe. 



•ad yet jut and olaar'Sighted ; bat above all, what the irench call _ 
fOMiM. It is not the imporaonnel reriewer who ia going through hia paoee 
.... it ia Thackeray talking to na aa few can talk— talking with apparent 
oareleaaneaa, eren ramblingly, but nerer losing the thread of hia diaoooxee 
or aaving a word too mnoh, nor erer misHing a point which may help to 

elucidate hia aubjeet or enhaaoe the charm of hia esaay Mr. w. B. 

Churdh'a prefatory note on ' Thaoken/ •• aa Art Critie' ia inteveetiiig and 
earafnUy compiled. '—Wutn^uimr £Mn#w, Jan. 15th. 

" The etcher has giren na Cmikahank leaa like Fagia than MadUae has 
made him."— -^iiMncan Bwjkmari. 

'* Aa the original copy of the VrMtmiiiatar la now esoeaaiTely rue, this 
re-iaaoe will, no doubt, be welcomed by oolleotora."— BirmMitfAaia i>Bily 
JCail. 

" Not only on account of the author, but of the object, we muat welcome 
moit cordially thia production. Ererr bookman knowa Thackacay, and 
will be glad to haTC Uiis production of hia which deala with art oiitidam— 
a aubject ao peculiarly Thackeraj'B own."— T^ ulntigtMiry. 

" Mr. Church, in hia rery pleasant esaay, chata a g r ee ably and graoef nlly 
about Thackeray in hia relationa to art, and haa oollected a oouaidembls 
amount of out-of the-way information touching some of the old Bohemian 
croniee of his author which ia full of interest .... bringing into prominence 
a phase of the author's character which has been to a great extent orer- 
looked."— HanqwtMd JBeprMs. 

" It was a pleasant and not untimely act to re-print this well-known 
delightfal essay . . . Uie artist could hare found no other comjnentator 
BO sympathetic and diacriminating . . . The new portrait of Cmikahank by 
F. W. Pailthorpe ia a clear, firm etching."— TIU .Artut, 



In crown 800, cloth, 6«. 

A Study in Social Physiology. 

Prostitution under the Regulation System. Translated from the French of 
M. YyJW GuTOT by B. B. Tbumak, M.D., F.C.S. With 25 Diagrama, 



MR. REDWAY'S PUBLICATIONS. 11 

JTii crown Svo., parchment binding. 

Hints to Collectors of original editions 

of the Works of 

William Makepeace Thackeray. 

By J. P. C. 

lodispensable alike to dealera and collectors. Of erery book an exact copy 
of the titlepage is given, besides a full collation of pages and illostrations, 
followed by notes of differences in editions and other matters to be attended 
to by ooUectors ; and the market Talue of the book is in every ease noted. 



In demy 8eo, elegantly printed on Dutch hand^made paper, and hound in 
parchment-paper cover. Price 1#. 

The Scope and Charm of Antiquarian 

Study. 

By John Battt, F.R.HifftS., Member of the Torkshire Archsologieal and 
Topographical Association. 

"It foras a usefnl and entertainizkff ^de to a beg:inner in historioal 
ressarchee."— 27otM and Q}wrin. 

" The aathor has laid it before the public Id a most inviting, intelligent, 
and intelligible form, and offers every inoentire to the study in every 
department, including Ancient Becords, Manorial Court- Bolls, Heraldry, 
Fainted Glass, Moral Paintings, Pottery. Chn^-ch Bells, Numismatics, Folk' 
Lore, &o., to each of which the attention of the student is directed. The 
pamphlet is printed on a beantifol modem antique paper, appropriate to 
the subject of the work."— Bri^T^ton Examinw. 

** Mr. Batty, who is one of those folks Mr. Dobson styles ' gleaners 
after time,' has dearly and conciseiy snmmed up, in the space of a few 
pagest all the 7^008 oljeots which may legitimately be considered to 
oome within the soope of antiquarian study." — AwiMmy, 



Ebenbzeb Jokes' Poems. 
In poet Svo, cloth, old etyle. Price 5«. 

Studies of Sensation and Event. 

Poems by Ebbnbzeb Jokes. Edited, Prefaced, and Annotated by Richabs 
Hbbne Shefhbbd. With Memorial Notices of the Author by Sumneb 
Jokes and W. J. Liktok. A new Edition. With Photographic Portrait of 
the Poet. 

" This remarkable poet affords nearly the most striking instance of 
neglected genius in our modem school of poetry. His poems are foil of 
TiTid disorderly power."— D, Q. BosiXTXx. 



12 MR. REDWArs PUBLICATIONS. 

In crown Svo, eloth. Price 7<> 6(2. 

Theosophy, Eeligion, and Occult 
Science* 

New Edition reriied and enlarged. By Hbkbt S. Olcott, President of the 
Theosophicid Society. 

*«* With Glossary of Indian terms and Index. 



In crown 800, wUh Engraved Frontispiece. Price 5ff. 

R. H. Home's Cosmo de' Medici: 

An Higtorical Tragedy, and other Poems. By Riceabd Hshgibt Hobkb, 
Author of " Orion." Foubth Editiok. 

" We hare been amoner the earliest readeis of Mr. Home— amoBff the 
moflt ardent admirers of his high genius— for a man of high, of tha 
highnt genius, he nnquestionably is."— Edoae Allav Fob. 

" I hare been dicing into his treasure hoose (Cosxo ]>■' Mxoxci) this 
morning, with keen delight and admiration."— AiAssirov Chaxubs Sww- 
BUBjrn. 

** This tragedy is the work of a poet and not of a playwright. Many of 
the scenes abound in rigour and tngic intensity. If the stractore of the 
drama challenges comparison with the masterpieces of the Elizabethan 
stage, it is at least not unworthy of the models which have inspired it." — 
Tifn«t. 



Specimen Number sent Post Free for Two ShilUnffs, 

The Theosophist. 

A Monthly Jonmal devoted to Oriental Philosophy, Art, Literatare and 
Occultism; embracinfir Mesmerism, Spiritualism and other Secret Sciences. 
Conducted by H. P. Blavatsky. 

Thb Thbosophist is issued monthly, and the subscription is £1 for twelve 
numbers of not less than 48 columns royal 4to of reading matter, or 576 
columns in all, including postage. 

With the issue of Octobbb (1884) was commenced the Sixth Yolujcb of 
this journal. 

Theosophy has suddenly risen to importance . . . The movement 
implied (>y the term Theosophy is one that cannot be adequately explained 
in a few words . . . those interested in the moTcment, inuch ia not to be 
confounded with spiritualism, will find means of gratifying their curiosity 
by procuring Uie back numbers of Th» Thtotophist vad a very remarkable 
book called l$i» UwoeUed^ by Madame Blavatsky.— Literary Wvrid, 



LoNDOW: GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 
lAppointed Jgint for the Theosophical Society's PubUcationsJ] 



MR. HARGBIVE JENNINGS' WORKS. 13 



Mr. HAB6RAVE JENNINGS' WORKS. 



In crown 800, cloth, 7#. 6<f* 
EviAsoxD Edition. 

The Rosicrucians. 

Their Rites and Mysteries, with chapters on the Ancient Fire and Serpent 
Worshippers and Explanations of the Mystic Symbols represented in the 
Monuments and Talismans of the Primeval Philosophers ; with upwards of 
300 engravings. 



In crown 800, cloth, 5«, 

Live Lights or Dead Lights (Altar or 
Table ? ) 

An explanation of the Symbolical meaning of the English Choreh, with 
folding plates, &c. 

*•* Altogether the contents of this work on mystio Chziatianltj may 
be said to be educed peatly from Jaaob Boehm, perhaps the most pene* 
tiatiiig and profound of Christian theosophic speoulaton. 



In crown Svo, cloth, 6r. 

One of the Thirty, 



A Strange History, now for the first time told; with illustrations. 

This remarkable work gires the leges 
pieoea of sUrer for which Jesus Christ was 



This remarkable work^ giresjthe legendaij history of on« 0/ ih« tfctrty 



LoHDOWi GEORGE RED WAY, YORK STREET, COTENT GARDEN. 



14 ISIS UNVEILBD. 



Fulluked at £2 2#. Kow offered at 35«. 
FirrH Thoitsand. With Po&tbait of thb Author. 



Isis Unveiled; 



A MiBTXB Kit to ths Mystsbtes ov Akcisnt avd Modbbk Scibkci 

AND ThBOLOOT, 

By H. F. Blayatbkt, Correnponding Secretary of the Thoosophical Society. 

2 volt,, Royal 8oo, ahoui 1,600 pa^e* cloth, 

"This momunental work . . . about ererTthing relatiog to magie, 
myatery, witchcraft, religion, apiritoaliam, whidi would be ralnable in an 
enoycIopsBdia."— UTortT^ Amerienn Bwiew. 

" It must be acknowledged that abe is a remarkable woman, who haa 
tead more, aeen more, and thought more than moat wise men. Her woiic 
ahonndfl in quotationa from a dosen different languairea, not for the purpoae 
of a Tain display of erudition, but to substantiate her peculiar Tiews, . . . 
her pafl«8 are gamiahed witti foot-notes eatablishing, as her authoritiea, 
■ome nf the profoundeet writers of the past. To a large daas of readera. 
this remarkable work will prove of absorbii^r intereivt. . . . Demands the 
earnest attention of thinkers, and merits an analytic reading." — Boaton 
Evening Tra«wcnpt. 

" The appearance of erudition is stupendous. Beferenoe to and quota- 
tions from the most unknown and obscure writera in all languages abound, 
iBterapersed with allusions to writers of the highest repute, which hare 
evidently been more than skimmed through." — Independent, 

"An extremely readable and exhaustiTe essay upon the paramount 
Importance of re-establishing the Hermetic Fhiloeophy in a world whick 
blindly believes that it haa outgrown it."— Ifortd. 

*' Most remarkable book of the aeason " — Com. i(d«ertts<r. 

"Headers who have never made themselves acquainted with the 
literature of mysticiam and alchemy, the volume will furnish the materiale 
for an interesting study— a mine of curious information."— fvemiig Post. 

*' They give evidence of much and multifarious research on the part of 
the author, and contain a vaat nxunber of iuterestlng s ories. Persons fond 
of ^e marvellous will find in them an abundance of entertainment.*'-^ 
JT. r. Sun. 

" A marvellous book both in matter and manner of treatment. Some 
idea may be formed of the rarity and extent of its contents when the index 
alone comprises fifty pagea, and we venture nothing in ssying that bu<^ aa 
index of subjects was never before compiled bv any human being. . . . But 
the book is a curious one, and will no doubt find its way into Hbrariee 
because of the unique subject matter it contains. . . . will certainly prove 
attractive to all who are interested in the history, theology, ana the 
aysteriea of the anoient world."— JDatly Gfraphio. 

" The present work is the fruit of her remarkable course of eduoatioii, 
and amply confirm her claims to the character of an adept in secret sdence. 
and even to the rank of a hierophant in the exposition of its mystic lore. 
—jr. r. Tribun*. 

" One who reads the book carefully through ought to know everythimr 
of the marvellous and mystical, except, perhaps, the passworda. ' Isis' wiU 
supplement the Axuusalypsis. Whoever loves to read GKxlfrev HigKina wHl 
be delighted with Mme. Blavataky. There is a great resemblance between 
their works. Both have tried hard to tell eveiything apocryphal and 
mpocalyptio. It is easy to forecast the reception of this book. With its 
striking peculiarities, its audacity, its versatility, and the prodigiona 
variety of sabjocts which it notices and handles, it i» one of the remarkaUe 
prodaotions of the oeatnxy."— 2f. r, KerolA, 



PHILOSOPHIC CHIROMANOT. ETO. 15 

Philosophic Chiromancy. 

Mjf teries of The Hand revealed and explained ; the art of determining 
from an inspection of the hands the person's Temperament, Appetites, JEHMsions, 
Impolses, Aspirations, Mental Endowments, Character, and Tendencies. Bj 
RoBSBT ALLUr Caxpbbll. With illoatrations. Small 8vo^ cloth, 6#. 



People from the Other World. 

Bj HiKBT S. Oloott. With Illnstrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 5«. 

The First Part is devoted to a detailed description of the strange things 
sees, heard, and felt hj the author at the Eddy Homestead, in the township 
of Chittenden, Vermont ; and the Second, to a report of a series of original 
investigations made hy him in the city of Philadelphia into the alleged 
materialisations of John and Katie King.nnder test conditions ; to an account 
of the Compton "transfiguration;*' and to a copious Bibliography of the 
Occult Sciences. 



Mr. Punch: 



His Origin and Career. With a Fae-simile of his original prospectus in the 
handwriting of Mark Lemon. 12mO| wrapper, Ir. 



R. H. Home's Bible Tragedies. 

John the Baptist; or. The Valour of the Soul. Bahman. The Apocrypha. 
Book of Job's Wife. Judas Iscariot. A Mystery. Crown Svo, doth, 2i, 6d, 



History of Duelling in all Countries. 

Translated from the French of M. Comstabd de Masbi, one of the French 
King's Bodyguard, with an Introduction and Concluding Chapter by Sib 
Lucius O'Tbiggeb. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2*. 

" One of the most realistic, yet romantic and sensational little books that 
ever issued from the press. My opinion of this History of Duelling is that 
a more brilliant, straight-forward, cut-and-thrust, sharp-shooting, yet, at the 
same time, honorable and admirable volume, could not possibly be produced ; 
and I most confidently recommend it to all true gentlemen who admire gallant 
fighting and fair-play,"— R. H. Hob»e (" Sir Lucius O'Trigger"). 



LONDON: aEORGE BEBWAT, YOEK STEEET, 
COVENT GARDEN. 



CATALOGUE OF BOOKS relating to Ancient Worships, 
Classical and Oriental Antiquities, Mythology, Occult 
Philosophy and Mysticism, Curious Physiological Treatises, 
Books of Prints, dc. 

*i^* Induding the works of ffBrien, Inmom^ Leane^ 
Godfrey Higgine^ Bryant, Dulawre^ D^HanearmUe^ Hyde^ 
Payne Knight^ Kircher^ Bartoli, JahUmski, PignoriuB, Meibo^ 
mius, Comeliw Agrippa^ ParaceUw, Hdmont, Vaughan, 
Behmen, Flvdd^ Ashmole. 

\QraiU. 



<. 



