MERRY ENGLAND. 



MERRY ENGLAND: 



NOBLES AND SEKFS. 



BY 



WILLIAM HARRISON AINSWORTH, 

AUTHOR OP 
"THE TOWER OP LONDON," " BOSCOBEL," ETC. 



"In order that gentlemen and others may take example and correct wicked 
rebels, I will most amply detail how this business was conducted." 

Fboibsabt. 



IN THKEE VOLUMES. 
VOL. II. 



LONDON : 
TINSLEY BROTHEES, 8, CATHEEINE STEEET, STRAND. 

1874. 

[Right cf Trantlation reuned by the Author."] 



L01TD0V : 

SATILl, BDWABD8 AKD CO., PBI1T1BBS, CHAKTJOJ 8TB11T, 

COTBITI OABDB2f. 



CONTENTS 

OP 

THE SECOND VOLUME. 



BOOK I. — continued. 
THE INSURRECTION. 

PAQB 
XXXV. HOW SAINT THOMAS'S SHRINE WAS DEFENDED 

BY FRIAR NOSROCK 3 

XXXVI. CONRAD BASSET AND CATHERINE DE COURCY 12 

XXXVII. FRIDESWIDE 22 

XXXVIII. THE DEPARTURE OF THE REBELS FROM 

CANTERBURY 26 

BOOK II. 

THE YOUNG KING. 

I. EDITHA IS APPOINTED ONE OF THE PRIN- 
CESS'S ATTENDANTS 35 

II. ELTHAM PALACE 42 

III. RICHARD OF BORDEAUX 52 

IV. THE MEETING BETWEEN THE YOUNG KING 

AND EDITHA 64 

V. SIR EUSTACE DE VALLETORT OBTAINS SOME 

INFORMATION FROM THE PRINCESS . . 68 

VI. SIR SIMON BURLEY 76 

VII. SIR WILLIAM WALWORTH AND SIR JOHN 

PHILPOT .86 

viii. the archbishop of canterbury and the 

lord of st. John's 95 



VI CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

ix. the baron de vertain and sir john 

philpot propose to attack the rebels 107 

x. the lieutenant of the tower. . . .115 

xi. sir eustace de valletort makes a dis- 
closure to editha 124 

xii. how sir john holland returned from 

the expedition 136 

xiii. sir john Holland's narrative .... 145 

xiv. conrad basset demands that sip. john 

holland shall be delivered up . .152 

xt. the subterranean passage 160 

xvi. how the princess arrived at the tower 173 

xvii. now sir simon burlet, the baron de 
gommegines, and the lord mayor set 
out to succour the besieged at 
eltham palace 1 

xviii. what befel sir osbert montacute on his 
return through the subterranean 

PASSAGE 192 

XIX. HOW ELTHAM PALACE WAS VALIANTLY 

DEFENDED BY SIR JOHN PHILPOT . . . 200 

XX. HOW THE PALACE WAS DELIVERED . . .211 



BOOK III. 

BLACKHEATH. 

I. THE SIEGE OF ROCHESTER CASTLE . . .221 
II. WAT TYLER REVISITS DARTFORD .... 231 

III. THE HERMIT'S WARNING 241 

IV. THE OUTLAW ACCEPTS THE COMMAND CF THE 

ESSEX BATTALION 247 



BOOK I. — continued. 



THE INSURRECTION. 



/y / VOL. II. 



MERRY ENGLAND; 



OK, 



NOBLES AND SEBFS. 




XXXV. 

how saint Thomas's shrine was defended 
by eriar nosrock. 

j]HILE most of the household con- 
cealed themselves in the crypts of 
the cathedral, Sir John Holland 
and the young nobles, by the advice of the 
unfortunate seneschal, proceeded to Trinity 
Chapel, where they found Eriar Nosrock, 
who took them to the watching-chamber. 

There they remained during the rest of 
the day, fully expecting that the rebels 

1—2 



MERRY ENGLAND. 



would come in quest of them ; but, to their 
surprise, they were undisturbed. As yet, 
they were ignorant of Siward's fate. 

When night came on, they resolved to quit 
their asylum, though Friar Nosrock repre- 
sented to them that they would run the 
greatest risk in venturing forth into the city. 

" Should you fall into the hands of the 
rebels, you will certainly be put to death," 
he said ; " and you will find it almost im- 
possible to leave the city, since the gates are 
guarded, and all other outlets stopped. The 
Abbot of St. Vincent will give you an 
asylum, if he can, and so will the Prior of 
St. Augustine's ; but should you be driven 
to extremity, and compelled to return 
hither, come back in the guise of pilgrims. 
I myself will be on the watch, and will take 
care you shall be admitted by the south 
porch." 

He then led them out by a postern, and 



THE INSURRECTION. 



returned to Trinity Chapel, where he found 
the Archbishop's household assembled. As 
these persons had been all this time in the 
crypts, they had not heard what had befallen 
Siward; but they augured ill since he had 
not reappeared. 

After some consultation, it was decided 
that half a dozen of the men should remain 
with Friar Nosrock to keep watch throughout 
the night; the rest, including the female 
servants, quitted the cathedral by the 
postern. 

We have already stated that certain of 
the Dartford insurgents had secured the 
large dormitory at the "Chequers," and 
had, moreover, ordered a good supper to be 
provided for a hundred persons. 

At the appointed hour a plentiful repast 
was set before these unwelcome guests, and 
while they were discussing it, it occurred to 
Mark Cleaver, Liripipe, and some others, 



6 MERRY ENGLAND. 

that they might contrive to possess them- 
selves of the treasures of Becket's shrine. 

Communicated in an undertone to the 
whole party, the plan met with general 
approval, and it was resolved that the 
attempt should be made that very night. 
Should it succeed, they would all be en- 
riched. But it would be necessary to enter 
the cathedral by stratagem, since Wat 
Tyler had prohibited any attempt to break 
into it by force for purposes of plunder, on 
pain of death. 

After some deliberation, they resolved to 
seek admittance as pilgrims, the notion 
being suggested to them by the fact that 
there were a great number of devotees 
staying at the " Chequers," who desired to 
offer prayers at the shrine at night. 

Accordingly, having arrayed themselves 
as they best could, in imitation of these 
pilgrims, the whole party, having previously 



THE INSURRECTION. 



assembled in the courtyard of the inn, set 
out without noise, and on reaching the 
south porch of the cathedral, knocked 
against the great door. 

Now it chanced that Friar Nosrock, who 
fully expected the return of Sir John 
Holland and the young nobles, was waiting 
near the door at the time, and when he 
heard that those who knocked were pilgrims, 
he imprudently opened the wicket. 

Very few had entered before he discovered 
his mistake, but it was then too late. 

Breaking from the foremost, who tried 
to seize him, he ran as swiftly as he could 
along the aisle, and through the south tran- 
sept of St. Thomas's Chapel, where he sud- 
denly disappeared from his pursuers, who 
were close at his heels. 

In another minute, all the plunderers, 
with the exception of two or three, who had 
been left at the south porch to keep watch, 



8 MERRY ENGLAND. 

arrived at the foot of the steps leading to- 
the shrine. 

A lamp burning above the altar dimly- 
illumined the chapel, but afforded sufficient 
light for their sacrilegious purpose. 

Several clambered over the gilt rails sur- 
rounding the sacred spot, and proceeded to 
lift up the heavy wooden canopy covering 
the shrine. 

While thus employed, they were suddenly 
interrupted in their task by an occurrence 
that seemed as if Saint Thomas himself had 
interfered to prevent the threatened desecra- 
tion of his shrine. 

A fierce growling was heard, and then 
came the fearful rush of a number of savage- 
hounds towards those collected on the steps. 

Terrible outcries followed from those who 
imagined they were attacked by demons in 
shape of dogs, and now fled, yelling, in every 
direction. 



THE INSURRECTION. 9 

These suffered severely from the sharp 
fangs of their pursuers, but those near 
the shrine fared the worst. 

Caught as in a trap by their ferocious 
assailants, who leaped over the rails and 
sprang at their throats, bearing them to the 
ground, they had to fight for their lives, 
and the vaulted roof of the chapel rang with 
their cries. 

A witness of this frightful scene, Friar 
Nosrock felt little compassion for the mise- 
rable wretches. 

On the contrary, he called out to them, in 
a mocking voice — 

" Soh ! you would plunder the shrine of 
holy St. Thomas, eh ? You thought it an 
easy task, doubtless — but you now find we 
can prevent your villany !" 

" Save us !" cried Mark Cleaver, who was 
lying prostrate on the pavement, with a 
huge hound standing over him. " Save us I 



10 MERRY ENGLAND. 

or we shall be torn in pieces by these in- 
fernal hounds — if indeed they be hounds, 
and not fiends !" 

" Have pity upon us, good brother, and 
call them off!" implored Liripipe, who had 
shrunk into a corner, and was endeavouring 
to keep one of his fierce assailants at bay. 
" Let us out of this cage, and we will de- 
part at once !" 

"You deserve the worst punishment that 
can befall you !" cried Friar Nosrock. 

" Holy St. Thomas, have mercy upon 
us !" cried Curthose, who was in as sore 
distress as the others. "We heartily re- 
pent what we have done ! Instead of rob- 
bing the shrine, we will add to its riches." 

" Have mercy upon us, holy St. Thomas !" 
cried all the sufferers. 

"Since you call upon the good saint for aid, 
it will not be refused you," said the friar, 
somewhat relenting. 



THE INSURRECTION. 11 

And as he spoke, he opened a gate in the 
rails, and called off the hounds. 

" Depart instantly !" he said. " If any 
of you be found in the cathedral five minutes 
hence, no further pity shall be shown you !" 

Glad to escape on such terms, the villains 
came forth ; and though they were all in a 
most deplorable condition, they contrived in 
a short time to reach the south porch. 

Friar Nosrock was close at their heels 
with his hounds, and carefully barred the 
door as the last of them went out. 

Shortly afterwards, the friar was joined 
by such of the Archbishop's household as 
had remained in the cathedral. 

Assisted by them, and attended by his 
hounds, he made a strict investigation of the 
aisles, the nave, the transepts, and the choir. 

No one was found. 

Nevertheless, watch was kept by the party 
throughout the night. 




XXXVI. 

CONRAD BASSET AND CATHERINE DE COURCY. 

IHAT night, Canterbury was com- 
pletely in the power of the insur- 
gents. 

The six gates were strictly guarded, so 
that no one could leave the city, or enter it, 
without permission from the rebel leaders. 

Every precaution was taken to prevent the 
escape of Sir John Holland and the young 
nobles, and Wat Tyler persuaded himself he 
should have them in his hands on the 
morrow ; in which case he had fully resolved 
to put Sir John to death. 

But he was baulked in his vindictive 
design. After quitting the cathedral, Sir 
John and his companions had repaired to the 



THE INSURRECTION. 13 

Monastery of St. Augustine ; where they 
were well received by the Abbot, and care- 
fully concealed by him. Though strict 
search was made for them, their retreat was 
not discovered. 

The three insurgent leaders fixed their 
quarters in the Palace, and remained there 
during their stay in the city. 

Their time was chiefly spent in the great 
hall, where they held a sort of Court. 

Ordering the Mayor and aldermen to 
appear before them, they compelled them, 
on pain of death, to take the oath of fidelity 
to the league. 

Since their arrival at Canterbury, the force 
under the command of the rebel leaders had 
enormously increased, and it now seemed 
certain that five hundred of the citizens 
would march with them to London. 

Under these circumstances, it became 
necessary to appoint officers; and the 



14 MERRY ENGLAND. 

appointments were made by Wat Tyler and 
the Outlaw, who selected those whom they 
thought could be best depended upon. 

A fierce wild set they were, most of them 
belonging to the lowest orders of the people. 
Among the few of a higher class, was 
Conrad Basset, the brewer's son. 

This young man had recommended him- 
self to the rebel leaders by a hatred of the 
nobles, almost equalling their own in 
intensity. 

This animosity, however, did not arise 
from sympathy with the oppressed peasantry, 
but from the ignominious manner in which 
he had been treated by Sir Lionel de Courcy, 
of whose beautiful daughter, Catherine, he 
had become passionately enamoured. 

Conrad Basset, who was handsomer than 
many of the high-born youths she had seen, 
had attracted the fair Catherine de Courcy 's 
attention ; and after a few words had been 



THE INSURRECTION. 15 

exchanged between them at the cathedral 
and elsewhere, they met one night in the 
garden of her father's mansion in Canter- 
bury. 

This secret interview was their first and 
last. They were surprised by Sir Lionel, 
who came suddenly upon them with a party 
of servants, and having sent Catherine into 
the house, turned to her lover, who had 
been seized by a couple of servants, and after 
applying to him every scornful epithet that 
fury could suggest, he said — 

"Thy father, Richard Basset, was my 
vassal; and when I set him free, I little 
thought his son would have the presumption 
to address my daughter in language of love. 
But I will punish thee as I would a dis- 
obedient serf." 

"With this he took a staff from one of his 
valets, and struck the young man several 
hard blows with it, calling out — 



16 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" This will teach thee, thou low-born 
knave, to aspire to the daughter of a 
noble !" 

Held fast by two powerful men, Conrad 
could offer no resistance to this usage, and 
he was cast out at the gate. 

From that moment he thought only of 
revenge. 

He still loved Catherine de Courcy pas- 
sionately as ever, but he could not forgive 
her father for the degrading outrage he had 
inflicted upon him. 

Nay, more ; his vindictive feeling towards 
the one proud noble who had injured him 
extended to all his class, and when he heard 
of the insurrectionary league of the peasants, 
the object of which was to exterminate their 
lordly oppressors, he immediately joined it. 

At length a full revenge seemed in his 
grasp. 

When the insurgents entered Canter- 



THE INSURRECTION. 17 

bury, Sir Lionel de Courcy — unfortunately 
for himself — chanced to be at home. But 
as he resided in a large and strongly -built 
mansion, and had a great number of armed 
retainers, he did not deem himself in danger. 

But Conrad had determined to attack his 
house, and make him prisoner, and men- 
tioned his design to the two rebel leaders, 
who approved of it. 

It was fixed that the assault should take 
place on the morrow, and some preparations 
were made for it, under Conrad's personal 
direction. 

That night two damsels, whose features 
were concealed by their hoods, sought a 
private interview with the young rebel 
captain. 

It was granted; and when the damsels 
had removed their disguise, one of them 
proved to be Catherine de Courcy, and the 
other her handmaiden, Gertrude. 

VOL. II. 2 



13 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Catherine had never appeared so beautiful 
before, and Conrad's passion revived as he 
gazed at her. 

" You must have expected me here to- 
night, Conrad," she said; "and you will 
guess that my errand is to beg my father's 
life. I know that if he should fall into 
your hands you will slay him " 

" Your father can expect no mercy from 
me," interrupted Conrad, fiercely. 

" I will not believe you can be so cruel, 
Conrad," she rejoined. "If you kill my 
father, you will kill me." 

" He has dishonoured me. Nothing but 
his blood can wash out the disgrace. Sir 
Lionel has made me what I am ; and all 
the crimes I may commit will lie at his 
door." 

" Oh, Conrad !" she exclaimed ; " it is not 
too late to turn back. You are not meant 
to be the associate of rebels ; your nature 



THE INSURRECTION. 19 

is loyal and true. Eeturn to your alle- 
giance to the King, and all will yet be 
well." 

" I have joined this league, and am 
hound hy oath to be faithful to it," he 
replied. 

" You can easily be absolved from such 
an oath," she said. " Save my father, and 
I will answer for his gratitude." 

"As well might you seek to wrest his 
prey from the tiger, as ask me to part with 
mine !" cried Conrad. 

" Then farewell for ever !" she said- 
" You will rue your conduct when you see 
me stretched lifeless at your feet !" 

A brief pause ensued, during which it 
was evident that a great struggle was going 
on in Conrad's breast. 

In the hope of a change in his determina- 
tion, Catherine stayed. 

" You have conquered," he said at length. 

2—2 



20 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" For your sake, Catherine, L will spare your 
father." 

"Now I recognise you as a Conrad I 
loved !" she cried, springing towards him. 
" You will fly with us ?" she added, gazing- 
anxiously into his face ; " you will abandon 
these dreadful rebels ?" 

" I cannot," he rejoined, firmly. " Not 
even you, Catherine, can induce me to break 
my plighted word." 

She forbore to urge him further, and they 
parted. 

Next morning Sir Lionel de Courcy's 
mansion, which was situated on the eastern 
side of the city, between the priories of St. 
John and St. Gregory, was attacked by a 
large body of the insurgents, and speedily 
taken, since no defence was made. 

Sir Lionel, his daughter, and his entire 
household were gone. 

Their flight had been secretly aided by 
Conrad and his followers. 



THE INSURRECTION. 21 

The insurgents were greatly disappointed, 
for they meant to behead the knight ; but 
they consoled themselves by plundering his 
mansion. 





XXXVII. 

FEIDESWIDE. 

i|HE insurgents' last day in Canter- 
bury was spent in feasting and 
carousing, and in plundering the 
Abbey of St. Vincent, and two or three 
smaller religious houses; but no further 
attempt was made upon the treasures of the 
cathedral. 

The leaders continued to occupy the 
Archbishop's palace, where they held their 
councils and issued their decrees. 

By this time such numbers had flocked 
to their standard that the city was quite full, 
and the monasteries and religious houses 
were invaded. 

Eive hundred citizens of Canterbury had 



THE INSURUECTION. 23 

enrolled themselves in the revolutionary 
army, and signified their intention of accom- 
panying them in their march to London. 

To the command of this division, which 
was far better accoutred than the others, 
Conrad Basset was appointed. 

When the grand muster of the army was 
made before Wat Tyler and the Outlaw, a 
young woman, of gigantic size, and strongly 
proportioned, presented herself, and desired 
to accompany the host. 

The two leaders regarded her with wonder. 
Though her frame was large, it was well- 
proportioned, and her features, though mas- 
culine, were not coarse in expression ; nor 
could she be termed ill-looking. 

She gave her name as Frideswide, and de- 
scribed herself as the daughter of Maurice 
Balsam, the miller of Fordwich. 

In age, Frideswide was not more than 
three-and-twenty. 



24 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Though the two rebel leaders had resolved 
to allow no woman to accompany the host, 
they were so much struck by this Amazon's 
appearance that they felt inclined to make 
an exception in her favour. 

While they were conferring together, 
Prideswide said, "I do not care to boast, 
but there is no man in Kent, be he whom 
he may, who can draw a stronger bow than 
I can, or lift heavier weight. Give me a 
quarter-staff, and you shall see what I can 
do!" 

And, her request being complied with, 
she added, " Now let any man strike me, if 
he can !" 

On this there was a general laugh among 
the assemblage, but no . one accepted the 
challenge. 

However, when she told them they were 
afraid of her, a sturdy fellow stepped for- 
ward, brandishing a staff, and bade her look 
to herself. 



THE INSURRECTION. 25 

"Whether he was in jest or earnest matters 
not, but he quickly got a hard crack on 
the pate that stretched him on the ground, 
amid the laughter and cheers of the 
beholders. 

" Now let another come on !" exclaimed 
Frideswide ; "lam ready for twenty more !" 

But no one ventured to attack her. 

After this proof of her strength and 
skill, the insurgent leaders decided that 
Frideswide should be allowed to accompany 
the army, and she was placed with the 
Canterbury men, under the command of 
Conrad Basset. 



XXXVIII. 



THE DEPARTURE OP THE REBELS PROM 
CANTERBURY. 




HEN the host issued forth from 
the west gate it really presented 
an extraordinary spectacle, and 
such as had never before been witnessed in 
England. 

Five hundred citizens of Canterbury, as 
we have already stated, had volunteered to 
accompany the march to London ; but still 
the majority of the host was composed of 
peasantry supplied by the different Kentish 
villages. 

Armed for the most part with pikes, 
scythes, and flails, and wearing their ordi- 



THE INSURRECTION. 27 

nary habiliments, they presented a singu- 
larly wild appearance. 

An attempt was made to keep them 
together, and compel them to march in com- 
panies, but this was found impracticable. 

The citizens of Canterbury were far better 
armed and accoutred, and carried a banner 
and pennons. 

Trumpets were sounded, and drums 
beaten, as the leaders rode forth from the 
west gate, followed by this strange and 
disorderly host ; and so vast were the num- 
bers, that much delay occurred before all 
came forth. 

The leaders, however, would not proceed 
on the march till the entire force was col- 
lected on the plain outside the city. 

When all the stragglers had come up, 
John Ball took his mule to the top of a 
mound, and from his elevated position 
preached a sermon to the vast assemblage^ 



28 MERRY ENGLAND. 

taking for his text this couplet of his own 
composition : — 

" When Adam delved and Eve span, 
Who was then the gentleman ?" 

" Who, indeed ?" he demanded in a loud, 

mocking voice. "Not the father of the 

human race. I tell you, my brethren," he 

continued, increasing in fervour as he went 

■on, "that by nature all men were born 

equal, and that there ought to be no ranks, 

no distinctions. By nature all men are 

free, and bondage and servitude, which 

were never designed by heaven, but have 

been invented by our wicked oppressors, 

■ought to be abolished. Heaven has, at last, 

given you the means of recovering your 

liberty, and of regaining your rightful place 

in the social scale, and if you neglect it, the 

blame will rest with yourselves. Strike the 

blow now, and you will all be free, all 

■equally rich, all equally noble, and all be 

possessed of equal authority !" 



THE INSUKRECTIOtf. 29 

At this juncture the whole scene pre- 
sented a very singular and striking pic- 
ture. 

Stationed on the top of the mound which 
rose from the flat plain was the friar, seated 
on his mule, with his cowl thrown back on 
his shoulders, and his features inflamed by 
excitement. 

Immediately beneath him were the two 
insurgent leaders, with CoDrad Basset, 
Hothbrand, and several others, all on 
horseback. 

Not far from them stood Frideswide, 
accoutred in breast-plate and casque, and 
bearing a two-handed sword on her broad 
shoulders. 

Near the Amazon, and completely dwarfed 
by her, were Liripipe, Grouthead, Curthose, 
and the rest of the Dartford men. 

Bound and about stood the vast, dis- 
orderly host, with their wild, fierce visages 
turned towards the friar. 



30 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Those nearest him listened to his discourse, 
but those at a distance shouted loudly. 

The background of the picture was 
formed by the walls of the ancient city and 
the lofty spire of the majestic cathedral. 

When the friar descended from the mound, 
Wat Tyler rode up to his place, and drawing 
his sword, cried out, in a voice that was 
heard by all, " To Eochester Castle !" 

A tremendous shout answered him, and 
immediately afterwards the whole host set 
off. 

During their march to Eochester, which 
occupied the whole of the day, they con- 
ducted themselves as if they were in an 
enemy's country, plundering several large 
mansions, and two or three convents, and 
slaying all who resisted them. 

Nor did their leaders attempt to check 
ferocity and licence. 

Of course the hamlets, consisting only of 



THE INSURRECTION. 31 

cottages of the peasantry, were respected, 
but all larger habitations were pillaged. 

Thus, like a swarm of locusts, did the in- 
surgents sweep on, devouring all before them, 
and spreading terror and confusion through- 
out the country. 

They did not enter Faversham, but passed, 
through Chartham and Chilham, and along 
the foot of the hills, and somewhat late in 
the evening reached. Rochester, where they 
were warmly welcomed by the inhabitants. 

Sir John de Newtoun, constable of the 
castle, was at once summoned to surrender, 
but as he hanged the messenger sent to 
him, preparations were made for the assault 
on the morrow. 



END OF BOOK THE FIRST. 



BOOK II. 



THE YOUNG KING. 



VOL. II. 



" »» " '■ " ■» " 



'■ " '* '*- 



" u . ■■ " " " " " ■■ " a 



EDITHA IS APPOINTED ONE OF THE PRINCESS S 
ATTENDANTS. 




FTEE her encounter with the 
insurgents outside the walls of 
Canterbury, the Princess of Wales 
continued her journey with the utmost ex- 
pedition, and made no halt till she reached 
Dartford. 

On arriving there, she alighted at St. 
Edmond's chantry, and, entering the little 
fane without any of her attendants, knelt 
down at the altar, and offered up heartfelt 
thanks for her deliverance from the rebels, 
concluding with an earnest prayer that their 
evil design might be defeated. 

As she subsequently rode through the 

3 — 2 



36 MERRY ENGLAND. 

village, on her way to the priory, where she 
intended to pass an hour with Lady Isabel, 
the few inhabitants left behind treated her 
with the utmost respect. Her ladies only 
accompanied her to the nunnery ; all her 
male attendants, including Chaucer and 
Messer Benedetto, were sent to the hostel. 

The Prioress was greatly rejoiced to see 
her, and heartily congratulated her on her 
escape. After partaking of some refresh- 
ment, the Princess had a private interview 
with the Lady Isabel in the locutory. Her 
first inquiries were concerning Editha, and 
she was not surprised to hear that the 
young damsel had sought an asylum in the 
priory. 

" When I offered, on a former occasion, to 
take her into my household," she said, " you 
seemed opposed to the plan. Are you still 
of the same opinion ?" 

" No," replied the Prioress. " Were your 



THE YOUNG KING. 37 

JC 

Highness to renew your gracious proposal, I 
would gladly accept it." 

" I think you judge wisely," said the 
Princess. "With me she will be out of 
this daring rebel's power, should he attempt 
to regain possession of her. Since you 
agree to my proposal, I will take her with 
me now." 

" It will be hard to part with her," sighed 
the Prioress ; " but I will not allow my 
feelings to influence me. She shall go with 

you." 

So saying, she struck the bell, and the 
summons was instantly answered by Sister 
Eudoxia. 

" Bid Editha come hither?" she said. 

When the young damsel appeared, and 
had made an obeisance to the Princess, who 
received her as graciously as before, she told 
her what had been arranged. 

" Must I then leave you, holy mother ?" 



38 MERRY ENGLAND. 



cried Editha, unable to repress her tears. 
" Think me not ungrateful, gracious madam, 
if I seem loth to go," she added, to the 
Princess, " but I have been so happy here. 
I have never desired to stray beyond these 
walls ; and now, less than ever." 

" "lis best you should go, child," said the 
Lady Isabel, controlling her emotion. " In 
the troublous times that are likely to occur, 
you will be safer with the Princess than 
with me. I gladly, therefore, commit you 
to her care." 

"But may I not return to you again?" 
cried Editha. 

" Certainly," said the Princess. " I shall 
not detain you 'against your inclinations." 

" When you are accustomed to Court life, 
child," said the Prioress, gravely, yet kindly, 
" you will not desire to return to me." 

To prevent further remonstrance, she 
added, quickly — 



THE YOUNG KING. 39 

" But time presses. You must prepare 
for your journey." 

" An instant !" cried Editha. Then, ad- 
dressing the Princess, she said, " Perchance 
your Highness may not have heard what 
has happened since your departure ?" 

" Yes, I have told her all," remarked the 
Lady Isabel. 

" Pear nothing," said the Princess. 
" Henceforth you will be under my protec- 
tion." 

Editha, however, still clung to the Prioress, 
and would gladly have remained with her ; 
but finding this impossible, she bade her 
farewell. 

" Farewell, my beloved child !" cried the 
Lady Isabel, embracing her affectionately. 
"I shall not forget you in my prayers. 
May all good saints watch over you !" 

With a heart too full for utterance, 
Editha then left the room. 



40 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Rest easy, Isabel," said the Princess, 
who was much touched by the scene. " I 
will be a mother to her." 

It was an additional distress to Editha 
that she could not take leave of her mother, 
for it chanced that Dame Tyler was not at 
the priory on that day, and there was not 
time enough to send for her. However, 
Sister Eudoxia undertook to convey to her 
her daughter's tenderest adieux. 

Editha did not see the Prioress again 
before her departure. Calm as she seemed, 
the Lady Isabel would not trust herself to 
another interview ; but sent a message to 
the young damsel by Sister Eudoxia. It 
was simply this : — 

" Come back when you will. Your cell 
shall always be kept for you." 

As to Sister Eudoxia, she managed to put 
some constraint upon herself till Editha was 



THE YOUNG KING. 41 

gone ; but when she had seen the last of her 
she burst into a flood of tears. All the 
sisters, indeed, were grieved to lose the 
young damsel, who was a general favourite ; 
and many a wistful eye followed her as she 
rode off with the Princess's train. 

Since other arrangements could not be 
made, she was placed on a pillion behind 
one of the grooms. 



II. 



ELTHAM PALACE. 




sad was the young damsel, that 
for more than an hour she 
scarcely noticed any object; but 
at length she became aware that they were 
mounting a beautifully wooded hill, and on 
reaching its summit, a magnificent prospect 
burst upon her. 

From the lofty eminence gained by the 
cavalcade she looked down upon a dark, 
heathy plain, stretching far and wide, and, 
even then, known as Blackheath. 

On the right, this plain was bounded by 
the royal park and domain of Greenwich. 
But her eye rested not long on heath or 
park, but followed the course of the 
Thames, now illuminated by the setting 



THE YOUNG KING. 43 

sun, to London, which she beheld for the 
first time. 

Struck with wonder at the sight, she 
could scarcely believe it real. Yes ; there 
was the great city of which she had heard 
so much. There was the grim old Tower, 
with its strong walls and battlements, and 
its frowning keep, with the royal standard 
floating above it. There was the ancient 
bridge, with its many narrow, pointed 
arches, its fortified gates at either end, and 
picturesque old habitations closely packed 
between the gates. There was old St. Paul's, 
with its massive roof and its lofty spire 
shooting to the sky. Beyond was the Savoy, 
the palatial residence of John of Gaunt, the 
proud Duke of Lancaster. Other noble 
mansions, monastic buildings and churches, 
there were on either side of the river, but 
nothing that charmed the young damsel so 
much as the distant Abbey of Westminster. 



44 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Seeing how interested she was with the 
view, Chaucer, who was riding a little in ad- 
vance, drew in the rein, and pointed out to 
her all the principal structures. But she 
needed not the poet's information, for she 
had recognised them at once. 

While they were conversing, a large cas- 
tellated mansion, hitherto screened by trees, 
suddenly came in sight ; and as she glanced 
at Chaucer to inquire its designation, he 
told her it was the Palace of Eltham. 

" The palace was built more than a hun- 
dred years ago," he said, " and ever since its 
■completion it has been a royal residence. 
Henry the Third kept his Christmas here in 
1269; and some fifteen years ago our late 
redoubted sovereign, Edward the Third, en- 
tertained here the captive, John of Trance. 
A magnificent entertainment it was, and 
worthy of the great monarch. We had a 
tournament, at which the King himself, with 



THE YOUNG KING. 45« 

the Prince of "Wales and all the royal dukes, 
jousted ; and a ball, at which all the fairest 
dames of the Court were present. Never 
before, or since, have I beheld so many 
lovely women as on that occasion. There 
was one surpassingly beautiful person pre- 
sent, who is now buried in a convent." 

Editha did not notice the latter obser- 
vation, but said, " Does the Princess make 
Eltham Palace her chief residence ?" 

" Generally, she is with the Court, wher- 
ever it may be — at Windsor, Shene, "West- 
minster, or the Tower — but she is often here. 
One reason why she is so much attached to 
the place is, that she spent many happy 
hours here with her valiant consort, the 
Black Prince." 

" I do not wonder at it," said Editha. 
" Ah, I should have liked to see that brave 
Prince." 

" You may see one who is equally brave, 



46 MERRY ENGLAND. 

though he has not earned such distinction — 
his brother, the Duke of Lancaster. Be- 
sides, you will see his son, the King." 

" Does the King resemble his noble sire ?" 
asked Edith. 

" Not much," replied Chaucer. " He is 
more like the Princess, his mother." 
" Then he must be very handsome." 
" I doubt not you will think so, fair 
damsel," observed Chaucer, with a smile. 

By this time they were close upon the 
palace, and a trumpet was blown to announce 
the Princess's approach. 

It was a vast and stately edifice, compre- 
hending four quadrangles, entirely sur- 
rounded by high walls, and an unusually 
broad and deep moat. Access was given 
to the palace, at the north and south, by a 
stone bridge with three arches, each bridge 
being protected by an embattled and 
turreted gateway. 



THE YOUNG KING. 47 

Besides a noble banqueting-hall, the 
palace contained a chapel and a magnificent 
suite of state apartments. 

A fair pleasance and a large tilt-yard were 
attached to the mansion, and the royal 
demesnes comprehended no less than three 
parks, each well timbered and well stocked 
with deer. 

Passing through the gate, which was 
thrown wide open by the halberdiers 
stationed at it, and crossing the bridge, the 
Princess rode into the principal court, 
where a crowd of servants, in the royal 
liveries, with a chamberlain at their head, 
having a gold chain round his neck, and 
bearing a white wand, were waiting to 
receive her. 

Already tidings had been received at the 
palace of the rising at Dartford, and the 
march of the rebels to Rochester ; and much 
anxiety being felt for the royal lady, her 



48 MERKY ENGLAND. 

safe arrival was hailed with the greatest 
satisfaction. 

These sentiments were conveyed to her 
by the chamberlain in a lengthened address, 
which, perhaps, the occasion might warrant, 
but which proved somewhat tedious. 

Before dismounting, the Princess de- 
spatched a mounted messenger to the King, 
her son, who was then at the Tower, to 
inform him of her safe return to Eltham, 
and begging him to come to her early on 
the morrow, as she had matter of the 
utmost import to communicate to him. 

After expressing their deep obligations to 
the Princess, Chaucer and Benedetto would 
now have taken leave of her Highness ; but 
she desired them to stay, that they might 
recount their adventures with the rebels to 
the King. 

" Having been eye-witnesses of the pro- 
ceedings of these lawless men, you are the 



THE YOUNG KING. 49 

fittest persons to give his Majesty a descrip- 
tion of them," she said. " Remain with me 
till to-morrow, I pray you." 

These arrangements made, the Princess 
alighted, and entered the palace with her 
ladies. 

The delay that had occurred afforded 
Editha an opportunity of looking round the 
quadrangle, and she was greatly struck by 
its magnitude and beauty ; while she could 
easily perceive, through open archways, that 
there were other courts beyond, proving the 
great extent of the palace. 

That it was splendidly kept up was shown 
by the number of retainers. But the young 
damsel was positively enraptured when she 
beheld the grand banqueting-hall, with its 
richly carved screen, its gallery for min- 
. strels, its magnificent open timber roof, and 
unequalled bay windows. 

So overpowered was she when she fol- 
VOL. II. 4 



50 MERRY ENGLAND. 

lowed the Princess and her ladies into this 
matchless' hall that she could scarcely draw 
breath. Some idea of its size, though not 
of its beauty, may be formed, when we 
mention that it was upwards of a hundred feet 
long, proportionately wide, and nearly fifty 
feet in height ; the enormous rafters being 
of chestnut. 

After partaking of some refreshments, the 
Princess passed into the state apartments, 
and thence to her private rooms. She had 
treated Editha with marked kindness and 
consideration, and she now assigned her a 
small chamber communicating with her own 
rooms, and gave orders that she should 
be provided with suitable attire. 

Patigued with her journey, and exhausted 
by the anxiety she had undergone, the 
Princess retired early to rest, but not before 
she had attended complines in the chapel. 

When Editha appeared next morning, 



THE YOUNG KING. 51 

arrayed in the attire provided for her, every 
one was astonished by her beauty. 

She no longer looked like a simple 
country maiden. Her slender figure was 
charmingly displayed by a tight-fitting cote 
hardie of green velvet ; a gold girdle, from 
which hung a long chain of the same metal, 
loosely encircled her waist ; and round her 
fair tresses was bound a snowy covrechef, 
that imparted additional softness to her 
features. 

Ever accustomed to early devotional 
exercises at the Priory, she attended matins 
in the chapel, and then, finding that the 
Princess was with her confessor in the 
oratory, she went forth into the pleasance. 





III. 

RICHARD OF BORDEAUX. 

EMPTED to extend her walk by 
the extreme beauty of the morn- 
ing, she crossed the north bridge, 
passed the barbacan, and entered the park. 

She had not proceeded far, when the 
splendid panorama she had previously con- 
templated opened before her. 

Once more her eyes ranged over Black- 
heath, traced the course of the river, and 
settled upon the distant city. 

Once more she was gazing upon the 
Tower, and the ancient bridge adjoining it, 
when her attention was suddenly called to 
a small party of horsemen, who had just 
entered the avenue and were coming quickly 
along it. 



THE YOUNG KING. 53 

At the head of the party rode a noble- 
looking youth, so splendidly arrayed, and 
mounted on a charger so richly trapped, 
that Editha could not doubt it was the 
young King. 

Uncertain whether to proceed or return, 
she stood still; and, during that interval, 
the princely horseman, who was coming 
swiftly on, drew near. 

She could now clearly discern that his 
blue velvet mantle, lined with ermine, was 
embroidered all over, and fastened at the 
neck with a diamond clasp ; that his tunic 
was of cloth of silver; his girdle studded 
with jewels, as was the hilt of his 
poniard; and his velvet cap richly orna- 
mented with precious stones. 

The trappings of his charger were of blue 
velvet, decorated with the royal badge of 
the white hart, with the letter |1 worked in 
silver, proving, beyond doubt, that it was 
the King. 



54 MERRY ENGLAND. 

So finely cut and delicate were the youth- 
ful monarch's features, so smooth and 
blooming his cheeks, so long the brown 
locks that fell down upon his shoulders, so 
slight his figure, that he almost looked a 
damsel in male attire, especially when con- 
trasted with the three nobles who followed 
him, all of whom were strongly made, and 
had manly visages. 

These knightly personages were the 
Baron de Vertain, Sir Simon Burley, and 
Sir Eustace de Valletort. The latter has 
already been described as the lord to whom 
Wat Tyler was vassal, and from whom he 
received his freedom. 

Sir Eustace had been a great favourite 
with the Black Prince, and was one of those 
to whom the hero, when dying, committed 
the care of his son. Sir Eustace had dis-, 
charged the trust as faithfully as he could. 

Though the valiant knight had seen hard 



THE YOUNG KING. 55 

service in France, Brittany, and Castile, and 
had now reached the middle term of life, he 
was still fall of vigour, and exceedingly 
handsome. His attire was not so extrava- 
gant as that of De Vertain, who glittered 
in diamonds and rich stuffs, and wore parti- 
coloured hose and cracowes, like a Court 
popinjay as he was, but he could not com- 
pare with De Valletort. 

Sir Simon Burley was somewhat older 
than De Valletort, but a noble -looking per- 
sonage. 

Behind rode three esquires, and as many 
* pages, all extremely well mounted, and ap- 
parelled in the royal livery. 

The young King was not yet sixteen. 
Born on the Feast of the Epiphany, in 1367, 
he was surnamed, from the place of his 
birth, Richard of Bordeaux. He was bap- 
tized by the Archbishop of Bordeaux, in the 
Church of St. Andrew, in that fair city ; the 



56 MERUY ENGLAND. 

Bishop of Agen and the King of Minorca 
being his godfathers. 

Singularly beautiful as a child, and full 
of quickness and intelligence, Richard gave 
early promise of high and noble qualities ; 
but he had the misfortune to lose his illus- 
trious father, the Lord Edward of England, 
before his character was fully formed ; and, 
indeed, the long and painful illness, some- 
times attributed to poison, from which the 
Black Prince suffered, prevented him from 
bestowing sufficient care on his son. But 
he telt the deepest anxiety on his account, 
knowing the dangers he would be exposed 
to from the designs of his ambitious uncles, 
and his last thoughts were of Richard. 

On the day after the death of his grand- 
sire, Edward III., Richard, then in hi& 
eleventh year, rode, in solemn state, from 
the Palace of Westminster to the City of 
London. The superb procession was pre- 



THE YOUNG KING. 57 

ceded by trumpeters, who made the streets 
ring- with the bruit of their clarions. 

Before the youthful King rode his uncle, 
the Duke of Lancaster and the Duke of 
Northumberland. The sword of state was 
borne by Sir Simon Burley ; and the royal 
charger, trapped in cloth of gold, and having 
a splendid plume of feathers on its head, was 
led by Sir Nicholas Bond. Eichly arrayed 
pages walked on either side. 

Clad in white velvet, the youthful monarch 
charmed all the beholders by his grace and 
beauty of feature. His retinue was com- 
posed of a vast number of nobles, knights, 
and esquires, all richly apparelled. 

On his entrance into the City, Eichard 
was met by the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs, 
and the Aldermen, in their robes, accom- 
panied by a great body of citizens on horse- 
back, and making a very goodly show. 

After being warmly welcomed by the 



58 MERRY ENGLAND. 

civic authorities, the young King rode slowly- 
through the streets, amid the ceaseless accla- 
mations of the assembled multitude. The 
conduits flowed with wine ; temples and tri- 
umphal arches were everywhere reared ; the 
houses were hung with tapestry and cloth 
•of arras ; and nothing was heard but joyous 
shouts, mingled with strains of music and 
the loud braying of trumpets. 

The grandest pageant was at Cheapside, 
where a mimic castle of great size was 
erected, on the four turrets of which stood 
beautiful damsels, all of the same age as the 
young King, and arrayed in vestments of 
white. 

On the arrival of the royal procession, 
these lovely young damsels showered leaves 
of gold upon the young King and those with 
him ; and then, descending from their ele- 
vated [position, served them with wine in 
•cups of gold. 



THE YOUNG KING. ' 59 

But this was not all. By means of some 
ingenious mechanism, which we pretend not 
to describe, an angel flew down from the 
summit of the castle, and placed a circle of 
gold on the young King's brow. 

Everywhere received with demonstrations 
of loyalty and affection, Eichard quitted the 
City, highly gratified by his visit. 

As soon as the late King's obsequies were 
finished, Eichard was crowned with extra- 
ordinary splendour at Westminster Abbey, 
the ceremony being performed by Simon de 
Sudbury, Archbishop of Canterbury, in 
the presence of the King's three uncles, the 
Duke of Lancaster, the Earls of Cambridge 
and Buckingham, the barons, all the great 
officers of the Crown, abbots, and prelates. 

No previous coronation had been so splen- 
did, and it was hoped that it portended a 
prosperous and brilliant reign. 

But the King, being a minor, many years 



60 MERRY ENGLAND. 

must needs elapse before he himself could 
assume the reins of government ; and these 
years were fraught with peril. 

A Council of Kegency was appointed, of 
which his uncles were members, the Duke 
of Lancaster being the real head. 

Serious events soon occurred. Hostilities 
were renewed with France and Spain, and 
the truce with Scotland was broken. The 
new wars occasioned enormous expenditure. 
Large subsidies had to be raised, and the 
burdens of the people were increased by the 
intolerable imposts. To make matters worse, 
the wars were not successful. 

For the first few years of the young King's 
reign, ample grants were obtained ; but the 
demands were so incessant that loud com- 
plaints were made, and petitions sent to 
Parliament, praying for the dismissal of the 
Ministers. 

Despite all efforts to remove them, they 



THE YOUNG KING. 61 

remained in power, and continued their 
exactions. Fresh taxes were levied, ren- 
dered especially obnoxious by the mode of 
their collection ; and these led to the rising 
we have described. 

Eichard's education was purposely neg- 
lected by his uncles. Sir Simon Burley, 
who was beloved by his father and trusted 
by his grandfather, had been appointed his 
tutor. But he had not sufficient authority 
to control his royal pupil. His counsels 
were disregarded, his reproofs derided. 

However, the young King was well 
versed in all manly exercises — in tilting, 
archery, wrestling, and delighted in field 
sports, in which he was allowed freely to 
indulge. Moreover, he was a perfect 
horseman. 

Though endowed with excellent qualities, 
and possessing a generous disposition, 
Bichard was wayward and self-willed, and, 



62 MERRY ENGLAND. 

even at that early age, addicted to pleasure- 
able pursuits. Inclined to be a great cox- 
comb, lie was extravagantly fond of dress, 
and loaded himself with jewellery. For one 
robe of cloth of gold, adorned with precious 
stones, he gave thirty thousand marks. 

He was surrounded by flatterers some- 
what older than himself, who encouraged 
his frivolous and extravagant tastes, and 
counterbalanced the wholesome advice of 
his mother. 

Still, though grievously disappointed, the 
Princess did not despair, but persuaded her- 
self that her son's nobler qualities would be 
developed as he grew older, and that he 
would eventually become worthy of the 
great name he bore. 

Sir Simon Burley and Sir Eustace de 
Valletort were with the young King at the 
Tower when he received his mother's 
message, praying him to come to her at 



THE YOUNG KING. 6$ 

Eltham on the morrow, and they urged him 
to obey the summons. 

Though the thoughtless young monarch 
was not so much alarmed as his attendants 
by the reports he had heard of the insurrec- 
tion, he was curious to hear some account of 
it from his mother's lips. 

He therefore resolved to go to her, and 
ordered Sir Simon and Sir Eustace to attend 
him. He also decided upon taking with 
him the Baron de Vertain, who was an 
especial favourite. 

The royal party set out from the Tower 
betimes, and reached Eltham much earlier 
than was expected. 




IV. 




THE MEETING BETWEEN THE YOUNG KING 
AND EDITH A. 

FTER a momentary indecision, as 
we have described, Editha thought 
it best to turn back, but was pre- 
sently overtaken by the young King, who 
graciously returned the obeisance she made 
him ; and, being much, struck by her appear- 
ance, drew in the rein, and addressed her. 

" Give you good morrow, fair damsel !" he 
cried, in a blithe voice. " I marvel not you 
have come forth early, seeing the morning 
is so enchanting. I have much enjoyed my 
ride across the heath. I had no idea it was 
so pleasant" 



THE YOUNG KING. 65 

" It looks delightful, my liege," observed 
Editha, timidly. 

" You are one of the Princess's atten- 
dants, I suppose, and have just returned with 
her from Canterbury ?" remarked the King. 
" Only from Dartford, my liege," she re- 
plied. 

" Prom Dartford !" exclaimed Richard. 
" That was where the insurrection com- 
menced. You must have witnessed it. Were 
you not greatly frightened ?" 

" I saw very little of it, my liege. I took 
refuge in the prior}*, and the rebels quitted 
the village immediately, and marched on to 
Rochester. " 

" 'Tis well our mother did not encounter 
them !" cried the King. 

" Indeed, my liege, her Grace did 
encounter them yesterday, near Canterbury," 
replied Editha. 

VOL. II. 5 



66 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Ha I Did they offer her any rudeness ?" 
exclaimed Bichard, quickly. 

"No; they treated her with great re- 
spect," she replied. 

" Then they are not such graceless villains 
as we deemed them !" cried the King, laugh- 
ing. "You hear what this damsel says, my 
lords?" he added, turning to his atten- 
dants who were close behind him. 

" We do, my liege, and are rejoiced to 
learn that her Grace sustained no injury," 
observed the Baron de Vertain. "Had it 
been otherwise, we would have hanged them 
all." 

" Then you must have hanged some thou- 
sands," observed Sir Simon Burley. " 'Tis 
most fortunate her Grace escaped so well." 

" Neither she nor her ladies were in any 
way molested," remarked Editha. 

"While this colloquy took place, Sir 
Eustace de Valletort had been earnestly 



THE YOUNG KING. 67 

regarding Editha, and he now addressed 
her. 

" The leader of the Dartford rebels is a 
smith, named Wat Tyler, is he not ?" he in- 
quired, looking at her fixedly. 

" There are several leaders," she replied. 
" More than half the village joined the in- 
surgents." 

" I will not ask you how the insurrection 
originated," said Sir Simon. "We know 
that a tax-collector was slain." 

" He deserved his fate, if all we have 
heard be true," interposed Sir Eustace. 
" The damsel has already told us that she 
sought refuge in the priory." 

"'Twas the safest place to choose," said 
the King. 




5—3 



V. 




SIR EUSTACE DE VALLETORT OBTAINS SOME 
INFORMATION PROM THE PRINCESS. 

jiOT expecting the King at such an 
early hour, the Princess was at 
mass at the time of his arrival ; 
but as soon as her devotions were finished 
she repaired with her ladies to the great hall, 
where she found him at breakfast with his 
attendants. 

Eichard immediately arose from the table, 
and flying to meet her, bent the knee and 
kissed her hand. This act of filial respect 
performed, his mother tenderly embraced 

him. 

After she had received the congratulations 
of Sir Simon Burley and the others on her 
escape from the rebels, she was ceremoniously 



THE YOUNG KINO. 69 

conducted by her sod to the table, which was 
on a dais at the upper end of the hall. 

The Princess sat on the King's right, and, 
next to her, on the other side, was Sir 
Eustace de Valletort. All her ladies occu- 
pied seats at the upper table. 

On the King's left were De Vertain and 
Sir Simon Burley. Chaucer and Benedetto 
were placed at the lower table. As yet they 
had no opportunity of conferring with the 
King. By her Grace's express orders, 
Editha was stationed behind the Princess's 
chair. 

The Princess's account of her meeting 
with the insurgents was listened to with the 
greatest interest, and with evident uneasi- 
ness, by Sir Simon Burley and De Valletort ; 
but Eichard, who seemed surprised and 
rather amused that Sir John Holland and the 
young nobles should return to Canterbury, 
did not attach much importance to the in- 



70 MERRY ENGLAND. 

surrection, and expressed an opinion that it 
would very soon be quelled. 

" What can these wretched peasants do ?" 
Tie cried. " Sir John and his little band 
ought to have scattered them like sheep !" 

" Sir John thought differently," remarked 
the Princess, gravely. " The insurgents are 
stubborn and resolute, and better armed 
than your Majesty seems to suppose. It 
will be prudent and proper to make terms 
with them." 

" Make terms with rebels ! That we shall 
never do !" exclaimed Richard, scornfully. 

"I mean that the grievances of which 
they justly complain must be redressed," 
said his mother. 

"I did not know that they had any 
grievances," cried Eichard, with a careless 
laugh. " I fancied they were rather too 
well treated by their lords." 

"So they are, my liege," observed De 



THE YOUNG KING. 71 

Vertain. " They are far better treated than 
they deserve." 

"Not so, my lord," said the Princess. 
" They do not complain without reason. 
They are much oppressed, and the King 
will be badly advised if he does not listen 
to their prayers." 

" They must address their prayers to the 
Oouncil, not to me, madam," said Eichard. 
£: I do not tax them." 

" But they say your Majesty will ruin the 
kingdom by your extravagance," remarked 
De Vftrtain. 

" Ha ! say they so ? Then — by my father's 
head ! — I will grant none of their petitions ! 
Am I to be checked in my expenditure by 
these sordid scoundrels ?" 

" Certainly not, my liege," observed De 
Vertain. " That were a rare jest " 

" Yet it may happen in right earnest," 
said Sir Simon Burley. 



72 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" It mil happen, if you continue to turn 
a deaf ear to the complaints of your sub- 
jects !" said the Princess. " This young 
damsel," she added, signing to Editha to- 
come forward, " whom I have brought with 
me from Dartford, will tell you how much 
discontent prevails among the peasantry." 

"She can have had no opportunity for 
observation," remarked the King. 

" Pardon me, my liege ; I have had every 
opportunity," said Editha. " I have seen 
and heard much ; and I venture to affirm,, 
in your royal presence, that the people have- 
just cause for complaint. This wicked and 
treasonable rising would never have occurred, 
had their prayers been listened to." 

" Our mother has taught you this lesson 1" 
laughed Eichard, incredulously. 

" No ; 'tis from her I have learnt it," said 
the Princess. 

•' You surprise me !" said the King. " 1 



THE YOUNG KING. 73 

should not have supposed she would trouble 
herself with such matters. Pray, who is 
this fair damsel who has contrived to obtain 
so much important information ?" 

" She is the daughter of the chief leader 
of the insurrection," replied the Princess. 

Every one now looked astonished, and the 
King most of all. 

"Wat Tyler's daughter!" he exclaimed. 
" By St. Edward, I cannot believe it !" 

" It must be a jest, my liege !" muttered 
De Vertain. 

" I am not in a mood for jesting," said 
the Princess, who had overheard the remark. 
"As I have stated, Editha is the rebel 
leader's daughter. But let me add, that 
when the outbreak occurred, she sought an 
asylum with the Prioress of St. Mary, by 
whom she was yesterday committed to my 
care." 

" I trust she does not share her father's. 



74 MERRY ENGLAND. 

sentiments," observed Richard. " Nay ; I am 
certain she is no rebel," he added quickly, 
perceiving that the young damsel looked 
much pained by the observation. 

" Your Majesty has not a more loyal sub- 
ject than myself," cried Editha, earnestly. 

" Enough !" said Eichard. " Had you 
been otherwise than loyal, I should have 
distrusted my own skill in physiognomy. 
Never, I am sure, could a treasonable thought 
be harboured in that gentle breast !" 

"You only do her justice, my son," ob- 
served the Princess 

" May I ask your Grace a question ?" said 
Sir Eustace de Valletort, in a low voice, to 
the Princess. " You say this fair damsel is 
Wat Tyler's daughter ?" 

" She passes for his daughter," replied the 
Princess, in an under tone, and with a certain 
significance. " But no one can look at her 
and doubt that she is of gentle birth. She 



THE YOUNG KING. 75 

has been brought up in a cottage, and as the 
offspring of those who have had the care of 
her." 

" But you mentioned the Prioress of St. 
Mary," remarked Sir Eustace, with tremu- 
lous eagerness. " Does she take an interest 
in Editha — as I think this damsel is named ?" 

" She has been as a mother to her !" re- 
plied the Princess. 

Sir Eustace said no more, and avoided the 
look fixed upon him. 

Shortly afterwards, silver ewers filled with 
rose-water, and napkins, were brought by the 
attendants. On rising from the table, the 
Princess was conducted by her royal son to 
the state apartments. 




VI. 



SIR SIMON BURLED. 




AS SING- through a gallery, oc- 
cupying one side of the great 
quadrangle, and in which stood a 
vast number of richly-clad retainers, the 
Princess and her royal son, followed by all 
the company, entered a stately apartment, 
more than a hundi'ed feet in length, and 
adorned with tapestry from the finest 
Flemish looms, representing boar hunts, 
wolf hunts, and scenes of hawking. 

At the upper end of this magnificent 
apartment was an estrade, surmounted by a 
crimson velvet canopy, embroidered in gold 
with roses, and the royal cognizance of the 
White Hart. 



THE YOUNG KING. 77 

On the estrade were two royal seats, de- 
signed for the King and his mother, when a 
council should be held, or some important 
personage be received by them in state. 

But the Princess did not now proceed 
beyond the centre of the chamber, where 
the company assembled. 

Desirous of having a private conference 
with her son, she took him and Sir Simon 
Burley into the recess of a deep bay- 
window ; and as soon as they were out of 
hearing, begged the old knight to state his 
opinion frankly as to the insurrection. 

" Madam," replied Sir Simon, gravely, " I 
have already given my opinion to the King. 
I believe it to be the most dangerous out- 
break that has ever menaced the State ! 
Nor do I see how it can be quelled. For 
the present it is confined to two counties — 
Kent and Essex ; but I fear it will spread 
throughout the whole kingdom. A circum- 



78 MERRY ENGLAND. 

stance has just happened to me, which I 
will relate to you, as it shows the extreme 
audacity of the insurgents. A burgher of 
Gravesend, named Thurstan, who is a bond- 
man of mine, solicited his freedom from me. 
I demanded four hundred marks ; and as he 
refused to pay the money, I sent him a 
prisoner to Rochester Castle. When taken 
there, he told the Constable, Sir John de 
Newtoun, that he would soon be set free. 
And it is certain he must have found some 
means of communicating with the rebels ; 
for when they came to Rochester, they sent 
a message to the Constable, demanding 
Thurstan's immediate release ; adding, that 
if he were not given up to them, they would 
storm the castle and take him." 

" And I much fear they will try to exe- 
cute the threat," remarked the Princess. 

" Sir John de Newtoun will laugh at 
them," said the King. "I hope he will 



THE YOUNG KING. 79 

hang Thurstan from the walls of the castle, 
and bid the rebels take hiui down, if they 
want him." 

" That would only enrage them the more, 
and cause them to proceed to dire extre- 
mities," said the Princess. 

" You are right, madam," rejoined Sir 
Simon. 

" Rochester is one of our strongest castles, 
and can hold out against a legion of badly 
armed peasants," cried the King. 

" But it may be taken by treachery, and 
that is what is to be apprehended," said 
Burley. 

" Methinks you greatly overrate the 
danger, Sir Simon," said Bichard. " What 
can the people do against the nobles and 
knights ?" 

" That question will have to be answered 
at the point of the sword, sire," replied 
Burley. " Unluckily, we have no army to 
oppose them." 



■80 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" What !" cried Richard, in astonishment. 
" Is an army required to quell an outbreak 
of peasants ?" 

" Sire," replied Sir Simon, " we know not 
whom to trust. As yet, we cannot tell who 
are loyal, and who traitors. This con- 
spiracy — for a conspiracy it is — has been so 
well contrived, and kept so secret, that it 
cannot have been the work of a common 
hand. Some important personage must 
have been concerned in it. I scarcely dare 
breathe my suspicions, but I think " 

And he hesitated. 

" Speak out !" cried the King. " You 
suspect one of our uncles ? It cannot be the 
Duke of Lancaster. He is at Roxburgh." 

" I suspect the Earl of Buckingham, my 
liege," replied Sir Simon. " He is thought 
to be in Wales; but some one much re- 
sembling him has been seen in Essex since 
this rebellion broke out." 



THE YOUNG KING. 81 

"You never hinted this to me before," 
said the King. 

" I only received the information late last 
night, my liege, and meant not to repeat it 
till it should be confirmed. But I think it 
best not to keep it back, that your Majesty 
may be aware of the magnitude of the 
danger." 

" If our uncle of Buckingham is conspir- 
ing against us, the danger is, indeed, great," 
said the King. " But I cannot think it." 

"I have already warned you against 
him," said the Princess. 

For a moment a shade came over Richard's 
countenance, but it quickly disappeared. 

His mother and Sir Simon watched him 
anxiously. 

" A council ought to be held without 
delay," observed the Princess. " Would it 
could be held here !" 

" I have anticipated your wishes, madam," 

VOL. II. 6 



82 MEKRY ENGLAND. 

replied Burley. " Before quitting the Tower 
this morning, I despatched messengers to 
the Archbishop of Canterbury at Lambeth 
Palace, and to the Lord Treasurer at his 
manor of Highbury, acquainting them both 
with the perilous state of things, and telling 
them they would find his Majesty at Eltham, 
with your Grace." 

" You did well, Sir Simon," said the Prin- 
cess, approvingly. " The Chancellor of the 
realm and the Lord Treasurer are best able 
to advise at such critical conjuncture." 

" I have taken another step, of which I 
hope his Majesty will approve," pursued 
Burley. " Having heard that some of the 
citizens are disaffected, I have summoned 
Sir William Walworth, the Lord Mayor, 
and Sir John Philpot, to attend, in order 
that his Majesty may learn the exact truth. 
Both are thoroughly loyal and trustworthy, 
and can be relied on in this emergency." 



THE YOUNG KING. 83 

" I know it," replied Richard ; " I have 
perfect faith in them. But I will not dis- 
trust the good citizens of London. When- 
ever I have gone among them they have 
received me with demonstrations of loyalty 
and regard. You cannot fail to remember 
my first visit to the City, Sir Simon, and 
the welcome given me on that occasion?" 

" I remember it well, my liege," replied 
Burley. " But things have changed since 
then. However, we shall hear what the 
Mayor has to say." 

Just then an usher, bearing a white 
wand, made his appearance, and, bowing 
profoundly, informed the King that the 
Lord Mayor and Sir John Philpot had just 
arrived at the palace. 

" They are heartily welcome," cried 
Eichard. "Bring them to our presence 
forthwith, and take care that their atten- 
dants are well entertained." 

6—2 



84 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" They have obeyed the summons 
quickly," observed the Princess. 

Scarcely was the usher gone, when the 
chamberlain appeared, and announced the 
arrival of the Archbishop of Canterbury 
and the Lord High Treasurer, Sir Eobert 
Hales. 

" Our council will be complete," said the 
King, repeating the order he had just given 
to the usher. " Come, madam, let us take 
our seats," he added to the Princess. 

" Before holding the council," she re- 
joined, "had you not better confer with 
Master Geoffrey Chaucer and Messer Bene- 
detto? Both have been captives of the 
rebels, and have much to relate, which it is 
needful your Majesty should hear." 

" Let them relate it to the council," said 
Eichard. " Bid them follow us," he added, 
to Sir Simon. 

Leading the Princess to the estrade, he 



THE YOUNG KING. 85 

placed her on one of the royal chairs, and 
seated himself beside her. 

The Baron de Vertain and Sir Eustace de 
Valletort stationed themselves on the right 
of the King, while Sir Simon Burley, with 
Chaucer and Benedetto, stood on the 
left. 

The general company did not move from 
the centre of the apartment, and between 
them and the royal seats were grouped a 
number of richly clad attendants. 




VII. 




SIR WILLIAM WALWORTH AND SIR JOHN 
PHILPOT. 

RESENTLY a stir was heard at 
the lower end of the room, and 
two striking-looking personages, 
preceded by an usher, could be seen making 
their way through the assemblage. 
The foremost was the Lord Mayor. 
Above the ordinary height, strongly 
built, but extremely well-proportioned, Sir 
"William Walworth had features of the true 
Saxon type. His locks were of light 
brown ; his beard of the same colour. IJis 
eyes were of a clear grey, quick and pene- 
trating. ' 
The habitual expression of his counte- 



THE YOUNG KING. 87 

nance was frank, good-humoured, and 
cordial; but lie could look stern enough 
•when severity was needed. His frame 
showed that he possessed great personal 
strength, and he was a proficient in, all 
martial exercises. Though a merchant, Sir 
"William was half a soldier, and had a con- 
siderable body of armed men under him. 
Indeed, a strong escort had attended him to 
the palace. 

The Lord Mayor wore a dark blue velvet 
gown, bordered with fur, and his cote- 
hardie was of the same stuff. Bound his 
neck was the collar of SS, and from his 
girdle hung a dagger, destined to become 
historical. 

Sir "William Walworth was a wealthy 
London merchant, and much esteemed by 
his fellow-citizens for his high character. 
He was a member of the Fishmongers' 
Company, and when he was advanced to 



88 MERRY ENGLAND. 

the mayoralty, a pageant of extraordinary 
splendour was exhibited by them in his 
honour. At a subsequent date his statue 
was placed in the [great hall of the Com- 
pany, within a niche behind the chair of 
the Prime Warden. 

Sir John Philpot was another renowned 
and wealthy London merchant. About 
three years prior to the date of our story, 
he performed a singularly daring action, 
to which some allusion has already been 
made. 

When the war broke out again in Scot- 
land, a bold pirate, named Mercer, who had 
several armed vessels under his command, 
carried off a fleet of merchantmen from 
Scarborough. No effort being made by the 
Council to capture this pirate, who continued 
to scour the North Sea with impunity, Sir 
John Philpot armed a small squadron at his 
own cost, and went in quest of him. 



THE YOUNG KING. 89 

Captain Mercer was easily found, and quite 
ready to give battle to the brave citizen, 
who at once attacked him, and capturing 
him and all his vessels, brought them into 
the port of London. 

For this gallant and patriotic act he was 
reprimanded by the Council, who forbade 
him to wage war on his own account ; but 
he little recked the reproof, feeling he had 
earned the gratitude of his fellow-citizens. 

Quite as tall as Sir William Walworth, 
and quite as powerfully made, the brave 
knight, though plain of feature, had an 
open, manly countenance, characterized by 
great firmness of expression. 

His locks were grizzled, and his cheeks 
bronzed by exposure to the weather. His 
costume was devoid of ornament. He wore 
a furred gown, beneath which could be seen 
a velvet tunic. From his girdle hung a 
purse and a badelaire, or short broadsword. 



90 MERRY ENGLAND. 

As the Lord Mayor and his companion 
were ushered into the royal presence, and 
each had made a profound obeisance, Eichard 
rose from his seat, and, descending a single 
step of the estrade, but no more, received 
them with great dignity of manner. 

" Welcome, my good Lord Mayor !" he 
cried. " "Welcome, also, my brave and 
faithful Sir John Philpot ! Eight glad are 
we to see you both at a moment when our 
throne is threatened by rebels ! You bring 
us, we trust, good tidings, and can give us 
the assurance that all your fellow-citizens 
continue as loyal and well affected as they 
have ever heretofore shown themselves 
towards us. Is it so ?" 

Having said thus much, he resumed his 
seat. ' 

" Sire," replied the Lord Mayor, in a firm 
voice, " I cannot answer the question you 
have deigned to put to me as satisfactorily 



THE YOUNG KING. 91 

as I could desire ; but I will not attempt 
to disguise the truth, however unpalatable 
it may be to your Majesty. The bulk of 
the citizens of London are as loyal and 
devoted as ever ; but I grieve to say there 
are many disaffected persons among them, 
who seek to incite the others to rise in 
opposition to your authority." 

Richard uttered an exclamation of anger. 

"How say you, Sir John Philpot?" he 
cried. " Do you confirm the Lord Mayor's 
statement ? Do you believe the citizens of 
London — some few of them, I mean — are 
factious and seditious ?" 

" My liege, 'tis even so," replied Philpot. 
" Some evil influence hath been at work 
among them of late, and many loyal burghers 
have been turned from their duty." 

" By whose agency have they been thus 
perverted, Sir John ?" demanded the King,, 
sharply. 



•92 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" 'Twere dangerous to speak too plainly, 
my liege," he replied. " My suspicions 
must be for your Majesty's private ear." 

" You hint not at a member of the 
Council, eh?" 

" I hint at no one, my liege." 

" Then speak plainly." 

" Sir John has spoken as plainly as he 
can," remarked the Princess, in a low tone, 
to the King. " He dares not name your 
uncle, the Earl of Buckingham. You must 
question him in private." 

" Thus much I will boldly declare to your 
Majesty," said Philpot ; " and I will take 
the consequences on my own head. Some 
of those who have fomented this rebellion 
are not far to seek/' 

And as he spoke, he directed a glance at 
Chaucer, who was stationed near the King, 
as previously mentioned. 

" If that false and calumnious charge is 



THE YOUNG KING. 93- 

made against me, Sir John, I can easily re- 
lieve myself from it," said the poet. " Mes- 
ser Benedetto and myself have both been 
made prisoners by the rebels, and owe our 
deliverance from them solely to her High- 
ness the Princess of Wales." 

" You were at Dartford at the time of the 
outbreak," said Sir John, still looking fixedly 
at him. " You were seen in converse with 
the rebel leader." 

" Nay, good Sir John, that proves no- 
thing," interposed Benedetto. " I also was 
at Dartford at the time of the outbreak, and 
I likewise conversed with Wat Tyler. More- 
over, I was made prisoner by another rebel 
leader, and should be in captivity now, and 
in peril of my life, had not the Princess 
graciously undertaken that I should pay a 
heavy ransom, which I shall do, of course, 
albeit the men are rebels." 

" But you are not, like Master Geoffrey 



94 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Chaucer, a partisan of the Duke of Lan- 
caster," observed Philpot. 

" You have not forgiven the Duke, Sir 
John, because he reprimanded you for 
making war on your own account, in the 
case of the Scottish pirate, Mercer," observed 
Chaucer. "His Grace has no more to do 
with this insurrection than I have." 

" Then he is greatly misrepresented, and 
so is the Earl of Buckingham, for the citi- 
zens make free with both their names," said 
Philpot. " Some are for John of Gaunt, 
some for Buckingham." 

" But none for the King ?" cried the 
Princess. 

" Yes, madam," replied Philpot ; " I spoke 
only of the disaffected. Beyond doubt, the 
majority of the citizens are still loyal." 

An interruption was here offered by the 
chamberlain, who announced the Archbishop 
of Canterbury and the Lord Treasurer. 



VIII. 




the archbishop oe canterbury and the 
lord of st. John's. 

IMON DE SUDBUKY, Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury and Chan- 
cellor of England, was a very 
stately personage, his imposing appearance 
being heightened by the splendour of his 
vestments. His cope and dalmatic were 
covered with the richest embroidery and 
white silk; all being flowered with gold. 
His shoes and gloves were likewise richly 
embroidered, the latter being adorned at the 
back with jewels. A silk coif covered his 
head. 

The Archbishop's person was lofty, his 



96 MERRY ENGLAND. 

expression proud, and his deportment ex- 
tremely dignified. 

A man of a very high order of intellect, 
and of admirable judgment on all matters,, 
ecclesiastical or secular, Simon de Sudbury 
had exercised great influence in the state 
councils during the latter part of the 
previous reign, and was much regarded by 
Edward III. 

Appointed Chancellor on the accession of 
Richard II., he had discharged the duties 
of his onerous office with the greatest ability 
and rectitude, though unfounded imputa- 
tions were cast upon him by his enemies. 

Since his elevation to the archiepiscopal 
throne, in 1374, Simon de Sudbury had 
conferred great benefits on Canterbury — 
had improved the internal condition of the 
cathedral, enlarged his palace, repaired the 
ruinous city walls, and built a new gate, 
which still remains to attest his worth. 



THE YOUNG KING. 97 

Sir Eobert Hales, Grand Master of St. 
John's Hospital, and Lord Treasurer, who 
accompanied the Archbishop, had a very 
austere countenance. Karelv, it would seem, 
did a smile light up his sharp features. 
An aquiline nose, eyes black and piercing, 
complexion sallow, cheeks scrupulously 
shaven, and dark locks closely shorn — such 
was his personal appearance. 

Eound his neck he wore a broad jewelled 
collar. 

A long robe of black velvet, with loose 
sleeves, and bordered with sable, formed his 
costume. His cap was of black velvet, 
without ornament. 

As the Archbishop and the Lord of St. 
John's approached, with slow and stately 
step, the Lord Mayor and Sir John Philpot 
drew on one side, while Richard descended 
from the estrade. 

Bending reverently, the King did not rise 

VOL. II. 7 



98 MERRY ENGLAND. 

till the Archbishop had pronounced a bene- 
diction over him. He then thanked his 
Grace and the Lord Treasurer for so 
promptly attending to his summons. 

" Never had we greater need of your wise 
and prudent counsel than now," he said. 

" I have long dreaded this outbreak, my 
liege," rejoined the Archbishop; "but it 
has come upon us suddenly at the last. We 
ought to have been better prepared ; we 
have had plenty of warnings." 

"That is true, your Grace," said the 
King ; " but the warnings have been dis- 
regarded. The question now before us is — 
how the rebellion can best be crushed. 
Come forward, I pray you, my Lord Mayor ; 
and you, Sir John Philpot. We must have 
the advantage of your counsel. Sir Simon 
Burley, and Sir Eustace de Valletort, you 
must likewise lend us aid." 

So saying, the King returned to his seat, 



THE YOUNG KING. 99 

and the Archbishop stationed himself on 
his right hand. The others gathered round 
the foot of the estrade. 

"Tour Majesty has asked how this re- 
bellion can best be crushed," said Sir Simon 
Burley. " "Tis a question, I fear, that none 
of us can answer satisfactorily. The moment 
for the outbreak has been so well chosen, 
that it finds us wholly unprepared. Our 
armies are in Brittany and Spain. To re- 
move the forces from the North would 
expose us to an immediate invasion from 
Scotland. "We have scarce men-at-arms 
enow for the defence of London. How, 
then, are we to attack the rebel host ?" 

" Two thousand men can be raised within 
the City of London," said Sir John Philpot; 
" and if his Majesty will give me the com- 
mand of them, I will march at once against 
the rebels. If I disperse not the knaves, I 
will consent to lose my head !" 

7—2 



100 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"Your proposition likes us well, Sir 
John," observed Richard. " How say you, 
my Lord Mayor, can you spare two thou- 
sand men ? " 

"No, my liege," replied Sir William 
Walworth. " Not half the number — not a 
third. As I have already intimated to 
your Majesty, there are many disaffected 
citizens, and these ill-disposed persons would 
assuredly rise in revolt were an opportunity 
afforded them, as it would be by the 
removal of the soldiery, who now keep them 
in restraint." 

"You are right," observed Sir Simon 
Burley. 

" Would that the Duke of Lancaster were 
here !" exclaimed Sir Eobert Hales. 

" He is better at Roxburgh," cried Phil- 
pot. "Were he here, he would be more 
likely to lead the rebels than to aid in rout- 
ing them !" 



THE YOUNG KING. 10 L 

" You malign his Grace !" cried the Lord 
Treasurer, indignantly. " Were he present 
you would not dare to make such a charge 
against him !" 

" I will stand by my words !" said Philpot, 
boldly. 

" The charge is false !" cried Chaucer, 
stepping forward ; " as false as the accusa- 
tion thou hast just brought against me of 
conspiring with the rebels at Dartford !" 

" I have proof of what I have stated, that 
on the evening before the outbreak you had 
a private conference with the chief of the 
insurgents," rejoined Philpot. "I counsel 
his Majesty to keep you a close prisoner in 
the Tower till the rebellion be put down." 

" I shall be content to remain a prisoner 
if his Majesty entertains any doubt of my 
loyalty." 

" You are a known partisan of our uncle, 
good Master Chaucer," observed Eichard. 



102 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" We shall be glacl to have you with us at 
the Tower — not as a prisoner, but as a guest. 
You will, therefore, return with us." 

Chaucer bowed, and retired. But he cast 
a menacing glance at Sir John Philpot. 

" I would this poll-tax had never been 
imposed," observed the King. " It has led 
to most unfortunate results." 

" 'Tis not the tax that has caused the 
outbreak, my liege, though it may seem to 
have done so," rejoined the Archbishop. 
" The peasantry have long been discon- 
tented." 

" And they have real grievances to com- 
plain of," remarked the Princess. " Since, 
as it now appears, his Majesty cannot find 
soldiery to put them down, will it not be 
best to treat with them, and grant their 
requests — provided they are not immode- 
rate ?" 

"You say well, madam," rejoined the 



THE YOUNG KING. 103 

Archbishop. " 'Twill be advisable to listen 
to their complaints. At all events, time 
will be gained." 

" But they must not be deluded with false 
hopes, or they will become yet more em- 
bittered against us," said the Princess. 

" Before his Majesty can make any pro- 
mises to the insurgents, he must know what 
they ask — or, rather, demand," observed the 
Treasurer. 

" True," replied the Princess. " But I 
would have him meet them in a conciliatory 
spirit." 

"In his negotiations with the rebels, his 
Majesty must be entirely governed by their 
conduct towards him," said the Archbishop. 
" A favourable hearing may be granted to 
petitions and entreaties, but he cannot yield 
to threats." 

" Never !" cried KicharcL " I would die 
sooner !" 



104 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" I like not the notion of treating with 
rebels," observed Sir Simon Barley. " But 
it appears to me that we have no option." 

" Nay ; it is certain we must either fight 
them or treat with them !" cried Sir Eustace 
de Valletort. " For my own part, I would 
rather fight them !" 

" Where are they now ?" demanded the 
Lord Mayor. 

" They were at Canterbury yesterday,"" 
replied Sir Simon. " And, doubtless, they 
are there still, unless the inhabitants have 
expelled them." 

"The inhabitants, I fear, will take part 
with them," said the Archbishop. " Many 
of them are as disaffected as the citizens of 
London have been described to be by the 
Lord Mayor." 

" I am sorry to hear your Grace say so," 
observed the Princess. " I fancied the city 
was as loyal as any in England. Should it 



THE YOUNG KING. 105 

be as your Grace represents, I fear my son, 
Sir John Holland, and the young nobles 
with him, may be in some danger." 

"Did you leave them there, madam?" 
inquired the Archbishop. 

" They were compelled to take refuge in 
the city, in order to avoid the insurgents," 
she replied. 

" And' you have had no tidings of them 
since r 

" None, your Grace." 

" You need have no uneasiness on their 
account, madam," remarked the King. 
" Sir John Holland has just made his 
appearance. You may see him, with some 
of his attendants, at the lower end of the 
room. He will bring us the last news of 
the rebels." 

" I am right glad to see him. I own I 
felt much uneasiness on his account," said 
the Princess. 



106 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Next moment Sir John Holland ap- 
proached the royal circle. 

It was evident, from the state of his 

attire, that he had ridden fast and far, and 

his appearance excited a strong feeling of 

.anxiety among the persons around the 

King. 

He was followed by Sir Osbert Monta- 
•cute, looking equally exhausted. 





IX. 

THE BARON DE VERTAIN AND SIR JOHN PHILPOT 
PROPOSE TO ATTACK THE REBELS. 

ICHABD immediately arose, and, 
embracing his half-brother, con- 
gratulated him heartily on his 
escape from the rebels. 

" Our escape has been accomplished with 
the greatest difficulty, my liege," replied Sir 
John Holland. " We owe our preservation 
to the Abbot of St. Augustine, who got us 
safely out of the city, and provided us with 
horses. Canterbury is in the hands of the 
rebels, and had we been captured we should 
have been put to death without mercy." 

As he thus spoke, the Princess could not 
repress her agitation, and those near the 
King looked at each other in dismay. 



108 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Ha ! by St. George ! do the villains dare 
to proceed to these extremities ?" exclaimed 
Richard. 

" My liege, they are fiends let loose," said 
Sir John. " Already they have done incal- 
culable mischief. Your Grace's palace has 
been besieged and plundered." 

" I care not for my own losses," replied 
the Archbishop, "provided my household 
and retainers are uninjured." 

"The wretches have displayed a most 
vindictive spirit," said Sir John. And he 
hesitated to proceed. 

" "What have they done?" cried the Arch- 
bishop. " Fear not to tell me." 

" They have put to death your seneschal, 
Siward, because he bravely refused to deliver 
up the palace to them," replied Sir John. 

" Heaven's vengeance will light upon 
them for the bloody deed !" ejaculated the 
Archbishop. 



THE YOUNG KING. 109 

" Had your Grace been there, I doubt 
not you would have fallen a victim to their 
vengeful rage," continued Sir John. 

" They shall be terribly requited !" cried 
Richard, fiercely. " We will march upon 
them at once, with all the force we can 
muster." 

" The enterprise is too perilous to be at- 
tempted, my gracious liege," replied Sir 
John Holland, gravely. " So numerous are 
the rebels, that they would overpower any 
force you could bring against them. Can- 
terbury, as I have just stated, is in revolt. 
The insurgents have compelled the Mayor 
and aldermen to swear fidelity to their 
cause ; and if any of the burghers continue 
loyal, they dare not declare themselves. 
Many gentlemen have taken refuge in the 
monasteries and religious houses ; but even 
there they are scarcely safe from these 
vile and bloodthirsty miscreants. If your 



110 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Majesty seeks to punish, them, you must 
needs besiege the city, for they will hold 
out against you." 

"Alas! that it should be so!" exclaimed 
the Archbishop. " 'Tis woful that those 
whom I have nourished as children, should 
act thus." 

"The city will be speedily recovered," 
said Sir Simon Burley. " But no rash at- 
tempt must be made against it, or the result 
will be disastrous." 

" That is certain," observed Sir John. 
" As yet, I have only spoken of Canterbury; 
but every town in Kent, every village, is in 
a state of revolt. Our journey hither has 
been attended with the greatest risk. Do 
I exaggerate, Sir Osbert ?" 

" Not in the least, my good lord !" replied 
the knight appealed to. " I can add my 
testimony to your own. We were com- 
pelled to avoid Eochester and all the large 



THE YOUNG KING. Ill 

towns on our way, and even the inhabitants 
of the little villages tried to stop us. Had 
we not travelled by night, we should not 
have arrived here safely." 

" You give a fearful picture, but I doubt 
not a truthful one," said the Archbishop. 
" This insurrection seems to have spread 
with the rapidity of a devouring flame." 

" No wonder, since the combustibles have 
been everywhere prepared," observed Sir 
Simon. "Who are the leaders of the 
rebellion ?" he added, to Sir John Hol- 
land. 

" The ostensible leaders are Wat Tyler, 
the smith of Dartford ; an outlaw, who calls 
himself Jack Straw ; and a friar named John 
Ball, whom it would have been well if his 
Grace of Canterbury had hanged. 'Tis sus- 
pected there are some great persons, by 
whom the outbreak has been contrived, and 
who secretly direct the rebels." 



112 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Have those great persons been named ?" 
asked the King. 

" My liege, it is said — falsely, no doubt — 
that your uncles are concerned in the plot," 
replied Sir John Holland. 

" We have already heard as much, but are 
loth to believe it," replied Eichard. 

"I grieve to say that the rumour that the 
Duke of Lancaster hath had a hand in the 
plot is generally credited by the insurgents 
themselves." 

" Then Sir John Philpot was right !" cried 
the King. "'Tis clear our uncle's name 
supports the rebel cause." 

" Believe it not, my liege," cried Chaucer. 

" How ! is my word doubted ?" exclaimed 
Sir John Holland. 

" No, my lord," replied Chaucer. " But 
you have been misinformed." 

" I crave a moment's hearing, my liege," 
said the Baron de Vertain, who had hitherto 



THE YOUNG KING. 113 

taken no part in the discussion. " Before 
your Majesty comes to a decision as to the 
course to be pursued at this crisis, I beseech 
you to weigh well the consequences of allow- 
ing the rebels to march towards London 
unchecked. For all the excesses they may 
commit, your Majesty and your Ministers 
will be held responsible — and justly so, in 
my opinion. At all hazards, the rebellious 
rout ought to be stopped, and a heavy blow- 
inflicted upon them." 

" How is it to be inflicted, and by whom ?" 
asked Richard. 

" Sir John Philpot has asked for two thou- 
sand men," replied the Baron. " Give me 
two hundred, and I will make the attempt. 
But no time must be lost." 

" On my return to the Tower, I will ascer- 
tain the number of the garrison, and if I can 
spare two hundred men, you shall have 
them, my liege," observed Sir John Burley. 

VOL. II. 8 



114 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" I will not be outdone, Baron !" cried 
Sir John Philpot. " I will find two hundred 
hardy companions, and will go with you." 

" You will both be slain," remarked Sir 
Simon. 

" What matter, if we check this rabble ?" 
cried Philpot. " We shall die in a good 
cause, and our example will animate others." 

Though some further discussion ensued, 
no change was made in the arrangements 
proposed by Sir Simon Burley, which were 
approved by the rest of the Council, and by 
the Princess. 

It was therefore decided that the King 
should keep his Court, for the present, at 
the Tower. The Princess, however, deter- 
mined to remain at Eltham till further 
tidings should be received of the rebels. 

The royal party then adjourned to the 
banqueting-hall, where a sumptuous repast 
awaited them. 



X. 



THE LIEUTENANT OF THE TOWER. 




FTER taking leave of his mother, 
Bichard set out for the Tower 
with a large retinue. He was ac- 
companied by the Archbishop of Canterbury, 
the Lord of St. John's, Sir Simon Burley, 
Baron de Vertain, the Lord Mayor, Sir John 
Philpot, Chaucer, and Messer Benedetto. 

Sir Eustace de Valletort remained with 
the Princess, to act for her in case of any 
sudden emergency. 

It has been mentioned that the Lord 
Mayor had brought with him a numerous 
escort. These men-at-arms served as a guard 
to the King — part of them riding in front 
of the royal cortege, and part in the rear. 

8~2 



116 MERRY ENGLAND. 

As Richard crossed London Bridge, trum- 
pets were blown at the gates, and many- 
persons came forth to look at the proces- 
sion; but no shouts were uttered, and the 
people generally appeared sullen and dis- 
contented. 

Nor did his Majesty meet with a better 
reception as he rode along Thames Street,, 
though he proceeded at a slow pace, and 
bowed graciously to the concourse. 

Much mortified, Eichard made some obser- 
vations on the moody looks of the people to 
the Archbishop, who replied — 

" Their demeanour proves they are as dis- 
affected as we have been told, my liege. 
The affections of your people have been 
alienated from you by those who have de- 
signs upon your throne. The spirit of rebel- 
lion is abroad, and must be extinguished." 

Highly indignant at the insolent and un- 
becoming deportment of the populace, the 



THE YOUNG KING. 117 

Lord Mayor escorted the King to the Bul- 
wark Gate of the Tower, and there quitted 
him with the strongest expressions of loyalty 
and devotion. 

" I shall alwa} T s he close at hand," he 
said ; " always ready to fly to your Majesty, 
in case of need." 

" Enough !" cried Richard. " I never 
doubted Sir William Walworth's loyalty. 
If all others fail me, he will not." 

Messer Benedetto departed at the same 
time, and, in taking leave of the King, said 
that if his Majesty should require money, 
all his own funds and those of his partners 
should be at his disposal. 

Richard thanked him heartily, but trusted 
he should not need a loan. 

"Nay, my liege," replied the Lombard 
merchant; "'tis not as a loan that I offer 
the money, but as a subsidy." 

" By our Lady ! you are a true man, 



118 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Messer Benedetto!" exclaimed the King, 
well pleased. " We trust we shall not have 
to apply to you ; but be sure we shall not 
forget your noble offer." 

Sir John Philpot entered the Tower with 
the King, to await his Majesty's decision as- 
to the proposed attack on the rebels. 

A feeling of dejection, caused by the cold 
reception he had met with, had taken posses- 
sion of the young monarch ; but this was 
quickly dispelled as he crossed the moat and 
rode through the wide arch of the By- ward 
Tower, amid the bruit of clarions and the 
beating of drums. 

The outer ward was lined with archers,, 
arbalestriers, and piquiers, in their full ac- 
coutrements, and making a goodly show. 

The sight of these hardy men, who re- 
garded him with loyal looks, raised 
Eichard's confidence, and he felt assured 
that while they and their comrades con- 



THE YOUNG KING. 119 

tinued faithful, his crown could not be 
wrested from him. 

At that time the Tower contained within 
its limits a royal palace of considerable 
size, situated at the south of the White 
Tower, and occupying the whole of the 
space between that majestic structure and 
the inner walls. 

The palace was approached by a gateway 
flanked by towers, leading into a small 
court, and here Eichard and his attendants 
alighted. 

His Majesty was received by Sir Nicholas 
Bonde, the Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir 
Eobert de Namurj the Baron de Gom- 
megines, Sir Henry de Sauselles, and some 
others. 

"While the Archbishop of Canterbury, the 
Lord of St. John's, and Chaucer entered the 
palace, the King addressed himself at once 
to the Lieutenant, and said — 



120 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Sir Nicholas, we desire to send a small 
party of men against the rebels." 

"Under whose command, my liege ?" in- 
quired the Lieutenant, bowing. 

" Under the joint command of the Baron 
de Vertain and Sir John Philpot," replied 
Eichard. "Can they have two hundred 
archers ?" 

" No, nty liege ; but if they could, what 
would such a trifling force as that avail 
against the rebel host ?" 

" Leave that to us, Sir Nicholas," inter- 
posed Philpot. " Give us a hundred archers 
and we will bring back Wat Tyler's head." 

" If you will engage to do that, you shall 
have them and welcome, Sir John," rejoined 
the Lieutenant, with a grim smile. 

" If I do not you shall have my own, Sir 
Nicholas," cried Philpot. 

" Nay, by my troth ! I want it not," said 
the Lieutenant. " But I suppose your re- 



THE YOUNG KING. 121 

quest must be granted, though the fortress 
will be denuded of a third of the gar- 
rison." 

" Heed not that, Sir Nicholas," observed 
the King. "Let the men be got ready- 
forthwith." 

" A hundred, sire — not one more," said 
the Lieutenant. 

" But you have promised to bring another 
hundred, Sir John ?" observed De Vertain. 

" And I will keep my word," rejoined 
Philpot. " Two hours hence, five score 
hardy companions, completely armed and 
well mounted, shall be on Tower Hill." 

" And I will answer that the Baron de 
Vertain shall not keep you waiting," said 
Bichard, glancing at the Lieutenant, who 
bowed in assent. 

" When next I appear before your 
Majesty, I trust to bring you good news," 
said Philpot. 



122 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"Would I could go with you!" cried 
the King. "But it seems that must not 
be." 

" Nay, my gracious liege ; you are best 
here," said Sir John Philpot. 

And, with a profound obeisance, he de- 
parted. 

At the appointed hour, ten score armed 
horsemen appeared on Tower Hill. 

Their leader, mounted on a powerful war- 
horse, protected by a chanfron andflanchieres, 
wore a suit of ringed mail, closely fitting 
his limbs, and a hood of chain mail, that 
only left his face visible. 

Over his armour he had a white surcoat, 
worked with his crest. The troop had a 
banner and pennons. 

Almost at the same moment a company 
of well-mounted archers, numbering likewise 
two hundred, and commanded by a noble 
knight, sheathed in complete mail, and 
riding a richly-caparisoned charger, crossed 



THE YOUNG KING. 123 

the moat, with a broad banner borne before 
them and pennons flying. 

A loud shout was raised by the party on 
the Hill, which was responded to by the 
archers. 

The two companies then formed a junction, 
and rode off at a quick pace towards London 
Bridge, causing much wonderment and 
speculation among the citizens as they pro- 
ceeded. 

From the eastern battlements of the 
Tower Eichard witnessed their departure. 

As they disappeared, he heaved a sigh. 

His Majesty was attended by the Lieute- 
nant, Sir Simon Burlev, and the Baron de 
Gommegines, none of whom seemed hopeful. 

" 'Tis the maddest expedition ever 
planned," observed Sir Simon. " We shall 
see none of them again. Worst of all, your 
Majesty will lose two hundred archers and 
ten score stout men-of-arms, of whom you 
are sorely in need." 




XI. 

SIR EUSTACE DE VALLETORT MAKES A DIS- 
CLOSURE TO EDITHA. 

HOUGH not free from alarm, the 

Princess of Wales deemed herself 

safe at Eltham under the care of 

•a commander so vigilant and experienced as 

Sir Eustace de Valletort, and if an attack 

upon the palace should be threatened, she 

knew she could easily retreat to the 

Tower. 

Delighted with her new position, Editha 
had felt quite happy until the arrival of Sir 
John Holland at the palace ; but his pre- 
sence, though disagreeable, gave her little 
uneasiness, because she could rely upon the 
Princess's protection. 



THE YOUNG KING. 125 

Sir John was greatly surprised to find 
the young damsel among his mother's at- 
tendants, but he asked no questions, and 
gave no sign that he even recognised her. 
That he had abandoned his designs cannot 
be asserted, but he masked them under an 
air of haughtiness and indifference. 

But there was a person at the palace who 
excited a very different feeling in Editha's 
bosom from that she experienced towards- 
the young noble. 

From the first moment she beheld Sir 
Eustace de Valletort, she had felt an 
interest in him for which she could in no 
wise account. She was attracted towards 
him as if by a spell. 

A similar sympathetic feeling — though 
perhaps even stronger — had been ex- 
perienced by Sir Eustace. Mingled 
emotions agitated his breast when he gazed 
upon her, and carefully perused her fea- 



126 MERRY ENGLAND. 

tures. He had arrived at a certain con- 
clusion respecting her, even before his sur- 
mises were confirmed by his discourse with 
the Princess. 

No opportunity of addressing her in 
private occurred until after the departure of 
the young King and his retinue for the 
Tower. The facility for the interview he 
so ardently desired was afforded by the 
Princess, who sent Editha with a message 
to him. 

He was in the garden at the time, alone, 
pacing to and fro on the terrace, musing 
sadly on the past. 

When the young damsel came forth, he 
advanced to meet her, showing by his 
manner how pleased he was to see her. 

After she had delivered her message, 
which was of little import, and did not 
require an answer, she was about to retire, 
but Sir Eustace detained her. 



THE YOUNG KING. 127 

"Stay, fair damsel," he said; "I would 
fain have a word with you." 

Predisposed towards him, as we have 
described her, Editha very willingly com- 
plied. 

" You will not wonder at the interest I 
take in you when I tell you that you re- 
semble one who was very dear to me, and is 
now lost to me for ever." 

Having said thus much in accents that 
betrayed deep emotion, he paused. 

Editha did not venture to make an ob- 
servation. 

Presently he continued — 
"Yes, you are very like her — so much 
so, that I could almost have declared you 
are her daughter." 

" But the Princess has acquainted you 
with my story, noble sir," cried Editha, 

trembling. " You know that I am " 

" I know that you are not the daughter 



128 MERRY ENGLAND. 

of those who have brought you up," said 
Sir Eustace. 

Editha gazed at him in astonishment, 
scarcely able to believe she had heard 
aright. 

" You look too good — too kind to trifle 
with me, noble sir," she cried. " Is this 
true ? Speak — in pity, speak !" 

And she clasped his hand in her agita- 
tion. 

" It is true ! I swear it before heaven !'" 
he rejoined, solemnly. 

Editha had become pale as death, but 
she maintained her self-possession by a 
powerful effort. 

" I will open my heart to you, noble sir," 
she said, in low, tremulous tones, " as I 
would to my confessor. At times, this 
conviction has forced itself upon me, but I 
have always dismissed it, and blamed my- 
self for indulging it." 



THE YOUNG KING. 129 

After a momentary pause, she added, ear- 
nestly, " "Pis an inexpressible relief to find 
I am not Wat Tyler's daughter. Though I 
am beholden to him for much kindness, and 
he has ever treated me as a father, I cannot 
love him as I once did." 

" I do not wonder at it," said Sir Eustace. 
" 'Tis proper, therefore, this disclosure 
should be made to you. Think of him no 
more." 

" Nay, I must needs think of him," she 
said, " unless the past can be obliterated. 
But you have more to tell me." 

" Be content with what you have already 
learnt," replied Sir Eustace, gravely. " I 
have no authority to make any further dis- 
closure." 

" Do you lack authority ?" she cried. 
"Yes," he rejoined. "There are secrets 
that cannot be revealed save by dying lips — 
perchance not even then. Question me no 

VOL. II. 9 



130 MERRY ENGLAND. 

more. You cannot doubt that I am deeply 
interested in you ?" 

" No, no ! Your looks proclaim your 
sincerity !" she cried. 

" I will prove it to you," he said, in 
accents that vibrated to her heart. " Since 
I cannot name your father — since you may 
never behold him — I will take his place. I 
will be a father to you !" 

"With a look of indescribable gratitude, 
she seized his hand and pressed it to her 
lips. At the same time she made an effort 
to kneel, but he prevented her. 

"Control yourself, my child," he said, 
with a look of tenderest affection; "we 
may be observed." 

The apprehension was justified. The 
terrace on which they stood faced the state 
apartments; and from an open window in 
the great gallery Sir John Holland and Sir 
Osbert Montacute witnessed the interview 
just described. 



THE YOUNG KING. 131 

Entirely misconstruing the nature of the 
meeting, and influenced by jealousy, the 
young noble vowed revenge. 

" This coy damsel is a good specimen of 
her fickle sex !" observed Sir John. " She 
regards me with aversion, and flies from 
me, yet she rushes into the arms of a man 
old enough to be her father ! "lis intoler- 
able ! Sir Eustace may plume himself on 
his conquest ; but he shall not boast long, 
for, by St. Paul ! I will rob him of his 
prize ! But see, they separate ; though she 
seems as if she could scarcely tear herself 
away, and casts a tender look back at him 
Let us intercept her !" 

With this he hastily quitted the window, 
and, followed by Sir Osbert, hurried to the 
entrance-hall, through which he thought it 
likely Editha would pass. 

And so it turned out, for, just as they 
reached it, the young damsel came in, 

9— a 



132 MERRY ENGLAND. 

On seeing Sir John, she tried to avoid 
him, but he stopped her. 

" Why so cold and distant to me, 
fair damsel?" he said. "You can be- 
stow sweet smiles and soft words on 
others." 

" Let me pass, I pray you, my lord," she 
said. " I am going to the Princess." 

But he detained her while he said, in a 
low voice — 

" Assume this manner, if you choose, to 
others, but it will not impose on me. I saw 
what took place on the terrace not many 
minutes ago. You were not reserved with 
Sir Eustace de Valletort. Ah! I have 
called a blush to your cheeks." 

" Sir Eustace will know how to answer 
you, my lord !" she rejoined, proudly. 

"I shall not trouble myself with him," 
he returned. "Had you not better purchase 
my silence with the Princess ?" 



THE YOUNG KING. 133 

"How, my lord? Do you dare to in- 
sinuate " 

" Nay ; I shall insinuate nothing. I 
shall merely mention to her Grace what Sir 
Oshert and myself beheld from the gallery 
window. Ha ! you tremble now and turn 
pale !" 

" This conduct is unworthy of you, my 
lord," she cried; "but I am well assured 
Sir Eustace will resent the imputation you 
have cast upon him ! Let me go !" 

Sir John, however, might have persisted 
in the annoyance, had not an interruption 
occurred that compelled him to release her. 

From the door communicating with the 
court, two knights entered the hall. 

They were the Baron de Vertain and Sir 
John Philpot, who had called at the palace 
in the hope of inducing Sir John Holland 
and some of his attendants to accompany 
them on their expedition. 



134 MERRY ENGLAND. 

On beholding them, the young noble 
quickly released Editha; and hurrying 
away, she ascended the great staircase, and 
proceeded to the Princess's private apart- 
ments. 

"I did not expect to see you back so 
soon," cried Sir John, addressing the new- 
comers. 

De Vertain then explained their errand ; 
and, after a brief consultation with Sir 
Osbert, the young noble agreed to go with 
them. 

"If we can slay their leaders, we shall 
strike terror into the host," he said. " We 
must dash upon them like falcons on their 
prey, and, having struck down those we 
aim atj beat a hasty retreat. Where are 
your men ?" 

" In the park," replied De Vertain. 
"Will you return with us?" 

" In half an hour I shall be ready with 



THE YOUNG KING. 135 

my followers," replied Sir John. " Will 
you wait so long ?" 

" Gladly," replied the two knights. 

How they passed the interval it boots not 
to relate. They did not see the Princess, 
but had some converse with Sir Eustace de 
Valletort, who came into the hall. 

In less time than he had mentioned, Sir 
John Holland had donned his armour and 
mounted his charger. A dozen young 
nobles, as many knights and esquires, and a 
score of armed men, were likewise ready to 
attend him. 

He then rode forth from the palace, with 
De Vertain and Sir John Philpot, who 
complimented him upon his extraordinary 
promptitude. 

They found the two companies waiting 
for them in the avenue ; and the whole party 
set off in good spirits for Eochester, where 
they expected to encounter the insurgents. 



XII. 

HOW SIR JOHN HOLLAND RETURNED FROM 
THE EXPEDITION. 




OE two days no tidings were heard 
of the expedition, either at the 
Tower or at Eltham. Nor was 
any reliable intelligence received of the pro- 
ceedings of the rebels. It was rumoured 
that the latter had quitted Canterbury, that 
their numbers had enormously increased, 
and that they were marching on Rochester, 
committing terrible excesses on the way; 
but nothing certain was known. 

Great anxiety was felt by the Princess 
for her son, Sir John Holland. He did not 
take leave of her before he set out, well 
knowing she would oppose his departure ; 



THE YOUNG KING. 137 

but he left a message for her, saying he 
should soon be back. But he came not, 
and she had little expectation of seeing him 
again. 

That his absence was not regretted by 
Editha need scarcely be said ; and her chief 
fear was that he would speedily return. 

Apprehensions of a very different kind 
were felt by Sir Eustace de Valletort. He 
did not anticipate that the expedition would 
be successful, and had not encouraged it. 
Well knowing Sir John Holland's ob- 
stinacy of character, he did not remonstrate 
with him at taking away so many armed 
men, but he was much vexed to lose them. 

Though the force now at Sir Eustace's 
command was insufficient for the defence of 
the palace, he made every possible prepara- 
tion for the attack he had reason to appre- 
hend, and neglected no precaution against 
a sudden surprise. Both drawbridges were 



138 MERRY ENGLAND. 



kept constantly raised; the gates were 
strongly guarded, and sentinels stationed 
in the turrets of the battlemented walls. 

But for two days, as we have said, all re- 
mained tranquil, and no tidings were re- 
ceived either of friends or enemies. 

During this interval, no word in private 
had been exchanged between Sir Eustace 
and Editha, and they had only met when 
she was in attendance in the banqueting- 
hall or elsewhere. 

Evidently, the knight put great con- 
straint uoon himself: but he could not 
hide — at least, not from the quick eye of 
the Princess — the deep interest he felt in 
the young damsel. 

As to Editha, ever since the interview on 
the terrace, an extraordinary change had 
taken place in her breast. With the in- 
tuitive perception of her sex, and by putting 
many circumstances together, she had been 



THE YOUNG KING. 139 

able to penetrate the mystery that had sur- 
rounded her. 

Nothing doubting that Sir Eustace was 
her father, she had already begun to feel for 
him the affection of a daughter. Happily, 
she could indulge these feelings without 
being distracted by the presence of Sir John 
Holland. 

The Princess sought for no explanation. 
She divined the truth. But, despite her 
anxieties for the King, for Sir John 
Holland, and even for herself, her thoughts 
were much occupied about the young 
damsel. 

It was, indeed, a most anxious period, for 
no one could tell what the next few days 
might bring forth. 

Gloom settled upon the palace. All its 
inmates, even the youngest and most light- 
hearted, seemed oppressed by forebodings of 
ill. Mirth and festivity were completely 



140 MERRY ENGLAND. 

banished — even from the great kitchen 
where the household were wont to assemble, 
and where laughter had always heretofore 
resounded over the cups of strong ale and 
mead at supper. 

Extremely devout, as we have shown, the 
Princess passed much of her time in prayer, 
and was much more frequently in the 
ehapel, attending the performance of 
religious rites, than in the hall. 

On these occasions, Editha was always 
with her — and indeed, so were her ladies. 

Thus the time passed at the palace. 

Late in the afternoon of the third day, 
the guard on the summit of the northern 
gateway descried a small party of horsemen 
coming along the avenue. 

Steeds and riders looked wearied and 
distressed, and the former seemed ready to 
drop with fatigue. To reach the palace 
would be as much as they could achieve. 



THE YOUNG KING. 141 

No doubt this little troop was the remnant 
of the companies that had set forth so 
valiantly to check the rebels. 

Word being sent to Sir Eustace of the 
approach of the party, he ordered the draw- 
bridge to be instantly lowered, and went 
forth to meet them. 

Sir John Holland could now be plainly 
distinguished, with his armour battered and 
blood-stained ; but neither Sir John Philpot 
nor the Baron de Yertain were to be seen. 

When the young noble dismounted, his 
steed shook as if it would have fallen, and 
he himself could scarcely stand. 

" I am sorry to see you thus, my lord," 
said Sir Eustace, supporting him. " I trust 
you are not badly hurt ?" 

"No," replied Sir John, with a ghastly 
smile, and in a hoarse voice. " I got a few 
scratches in the encounter with the rebels — 
but nothing to signify." 



142 MERRY ENGLAND. 

• "That is well," rejoined Sir Eustace. 
" But I do not see De Vertain and Philpot. 
What of them?" he added, in an anxious 
tone. 

" If they have escaped with life as I have 
done, 'tis the best that has befallen them !" 
replied Sir John. " But I have seen 
nothing of them since the fight. We were 
worsted by the rabble. But we have done 
some execution upon them," he added, with 
a grim smile. 

He then became exceedingly faint, and 
Sir Eustace besought him to enter the 
palace, and fortify himself with a cordial. 

" While T am able to speak," said the 
young noble, faintly, " let me state that I 
am pursued by a large party of rebels. We 
owe our escape from them entirely to the 
swiftness of our horses." 

"Are they far off?" demanded Sir 
Eustace, anxiously. 



THE YOUNG KING. 143 

" Some five or six miles, it may be," 
replied Sir John Holland. " The troop, 
which numbers several hundred men, is led 
by the outlaw styling himself Jack Straw — 
a desperate and daring villain, who has 
conceived a deadly animosity against me. 
"With him is a certain Conrad Basset — a 
young man of courage and enterprise, with 
whom I have had a personal conflict, and I 
should have slain him if it had not been for 
the Outlaw." 

" Then you believe this rebel leader is in 
pursuit of you, my lord?" observed Sir 
Eustace. 

"I am sure of it," replied Sir John. 
" And I am also sure he will attack the 
palace when he finds I am here. He has 
vowed to capture me, or slay me, and he 
will try to keep his word." 

" Then tarry here no longer, but come 
within," cried Sir Eustace. 



144 MERRY ENGLAND. 

As they moved slowly towards the palace, 
they were followed by the men-at-arms, 
who looked quite as much exhausted as 
their leader. 

When all had crossed the drawbridge, 
Sir Eustace gave orders that it should be 
raised, the gates shut, and a sharp look-out 
kept by the sentinels. 




XIII. 



SIR JOHN HOLLAND S NARRATIVE. 




OT without difficulty did Sir John 

Holland reach the banqueting- 

hall ; but, after emptying a goblet 

of wine, he felt much revived, and was 

able to converse with the Princess, who 

<on hearing of his return, had flown to meet 

him, full of maternal solicitude. 

In reply to her inquiries, Sir John said 
that the expedition he had joined proceeded 
to the hills above Eochester, which they 
found occupied by the rebels. 

" They are in great force," he continued ; 
" and we ascertained that they now number 
.sixty thousand men — perhaps more. They 
are besieging Eochester Castle, and I much 

VOL. II. 10 



146 MERRY ENGLAND. 

fear will take it. Since nothing could be 
done against such a numerous host, we 
waited on the hills till this morning, when 
we perceived a large troop of horse come 
forth from the city. They were in marching 
order, and must have numbered six hundred 
at the least. Their leaders were the Outlaw 
and Conrad Basset. Though our force was 
so disproportionate, we did not hesitate to 
attack them. Dashing upon them suddenly, 
we caused great slaughter, killing them in 
heaps. We had hoped to rout them, but 
they held their ground, and, in the conflict 
that ensued, being overpowered by numbers, 
nearly all our men were slain. My aim 
was to kill the two leaders ; but while I was 
engaged with Conrad Basset, the Outlaw 
joined him, and I was forced to fly, bringing 
with me only a dozen men. As you may 
well believe, we had to ride hard, or we 
should have been captured. For some miles 



THE YOUNG KING. • 147 

the Outlaw was close behind us, but though 
he was well mounted, his men were not, 
and he could not come on alone. So we 
soon left them at a distance. But they 
have not abandoned the pursuit. "We shall 
have them here anon." 

Just as Sir John had brought his narra- 
tive to an end, and his mother, who had 
listened to it with breathless interest, was 
beginning to question him as to his com- 
panions-in-arms, a great noise was heard 
without, followed by joyful shouts, with 
which the names of De Vertain, Philpot, 
and Sir Osbert Montacute were mingled. 

" Ha ! by St. Paul ! they are safe — they 
are here !" cried the young noble, starting 
to his feet. 

Next moment Sir Eustace de Valletort 
entered the hall, bringing with him the 
three valiant personages in question. 

They looked greatly fatigued, and had 

10—2 



14S MERRY ENGLAND. 

all suffered more or less in the encounter 
with the rebels. 

Such greetings passed between them and 
Sir John Holland as can only be exchanged 
under similar circumstances. 

Very few words sufficed to explain the 
manner of their escape. 

All three had been unhorsed — or rather, 
their horses had been killed by the rebels ; 
but each had caught a fresh steed, and had 
managed to extricate himself from the 
hostile throng by hewing down or trampling 
upon all who sought to stay him. 

Once free, they had joined together; 
when, learning from the shouts that Sir 
John Holland had escaped, they had 
followed him as fast as they could, but 
must have taken a different route to Eltham. 

" Heaven be thanked, you are safe !" 
exclaimed the Princess. 

" "We have accomplished nothing," said 



THE YOUNG KING. 149 

Sir John Philpot ; " for though we have 
slain many rebels, we have lost nearly all 
our meri, and have failed in our chief design. 
But your Grace must not remain here. 
The rebels are at our heels, and most 
assuredly will attack the palace." 

" The Princess need be under no appre- 
hension," said Sir Eustace de Valletort. 
"An underground passage leads from the 
palace to the hunting-tower above Green- 
wich, by which she can safely depart at any 
time with her ladies and an escort. As 
you know, there is always a royal barge at 
Greenwich." 

" I have heard of such a subterranean 
passage as you describe, but have never 
seen it," said the Princess. 

" The entrance to the passage is secret, 
madam, but I am acquainted with it," 
replied Sir Eustace, " and will conduct you 
to it whenever you desire." 



150 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" I will wait to see what happens," said 
the Princess. 

"You had best not wait too, long, 
madam," observed Sir John Holland. 

At this juncture an esquire entered the 
hall. 

"Methinks we shall learn something now 
that may influence your Grace's decision," 
said Sir Eustace. " Hast thou aught to 
say to me ?" he added, to the esquire. 

"A large body of horsemen have just 
appeared," was the reply. " As far as I 
can guess, they are about six hundred 
strong — half being archers, and half cross- 
bowmen. They have halted at the further 
end of the avenue. I must not omit to 
mention that they have a banner of St. 
George with them, and half a dozen 
pennons." 

" Ha ! the insolent villains !" exclaimed 
Sir Eustace. 



THE YOUNG KING. 151 

Just then, a second esquire entered the 
hall, and stated that a herald, attended by a 
trumpeter, was riding slowly towards the 
palace gate. 

"A herald! Ha!" ejaculated Sir Eustace. 
M I will hear what he has to say." 

" I will go with you, Sir Eustace," said 
the Princess. " I shall be guided as to my 
departure by what takes place." 

" We will all go !" cried Sir John 
Holland. " Lend me your arm, Baron," 
he added, to De Vertain. 

The Princess was then conducted by Sir 
Eustace to the battlemented walls adjoining 
the gate. 




XIV. 




CONRAD BASSET DEMANDS THAT SIR JOHN 
HOLLAND SHALL BE DELIVERED UP. 

N gaining this position, they saw 
the herald, preceded by a trum- 
peter, arrayed in a tabard, riding 
slowly along the avenue. 

He was well mounted, and well armed;, 
and, as he drew nearer, the Princess was 
struck by his proud looks and deport- 
ment. 

" That man cannot be a peasant," she re- 
marked. 

" 'Tis Conrad Basset," replied Sir Joha 
Holland. 

When he got within fifty yards of the^ 
gateway, the herald halted, and the trum- 



THE YOUNG KING. 153 

peter, who was a little in advance, sounded 
his horn thrice. 

As the ringing notes died away, an 
officer, stationed with a guard of archers, on 
the summit of the barbacan, called out, in a 
loud voice — 

"What wouldst thou?" 

"Without betraying the slightest fear, or 
abating the haughtiness of his deportment, 
the herald rode towards the barbacan, and 
spoke thus, in a clear voice, and with great 
deliberation : — 

" Say to the noble, or knight, who may 
be in command of the palace, that we, the 
commons of Kent, having been out- 
rageously treated by Sir John Holland, 
half-brother to the King, who hath en- 
deavoured to carry off a damsel by force 
from her father, and well knowing that we 
shall not obtain justice in any other 
manner, demand the delivery up to us of 



154 MERRY ENGLAND. 

the said knight, in order that he may be 
punished summarily for his offence." 

Astounded by the demand, Sir John 
Holland's pallid cheek flushed darkly, and 
he would have instantly and furiously re- 
sponded if the Princess had not checked 
him. 

The rejoinder, however, was given in a 
stern, determined tone by Sir Eustace. 

"Tell those who have sent thee," said 
the commander, "that I, Sir Eustace de 
Valletort, now in charge of this palace, and 
representing her Highness the Princess of 
Wales, treat their insolent demand with 
scorn. Nor, were it e'ven couched in be- 
fitting language, would I vouchsafe to 
listen to it. I will not treat with rebels, 
nor have I any authority for what I am 
about to say ; yet, having some pity for thy 
misguided companions, I would have thee 
repeat my words to them. If they desire 



THE YOUNG KING. 155 

to obtain certain liberties and privileges, 
they must at once lay down their arms, and 
return to their allegiance to their sovereign 
lord, the King." 

To this address the herald returned a 
contemptuous laugh. 

" Since you refuse to deliver up Sir John 
Holland," he said, in the same haughty and 
defiant tone as before, " we will take him, 
and behead him !" 

So wroth was the young noble at this 
audacious announcement, that he would 
have ordered the archers to bend their bows 
upon the speaker, if Sir Eustace had not in- 
terposed. 

" Hold !" he exclaimed, authoritatively. 
"No harm must be done him." 

The herald seemed to feel secure, for after 
calmly surveying the battlements, he turned 
his horse's head, and rode slowly back. 

Ere long he was joined by a horseman, 



156 MERRY ENGLAND. 



who galloped from the rebel host to meet 
him, and was recognised by several of the 
lookers-on as the Outlaw Chief. 

After a few words had passed between 
the pair, the Outlaw turned partly round, 
and shook his hand menacingly at the 
barbacan. 

Having witnessed this ominous meeting, 
the Princess quitted the battlements, and 
returned to the banqueting-hall, where a 
conference took place, at which Sir Eustace 
and the rest of the knights assisted. 

All were of opinion that she should set 
forth for the Tower without delay. 

" A few hours hence," urged Sir Eustace, 
" flight may be impossible. Now it can be 
safely accomplished." 

" Say no more, Sir Eustace," she rejoined. 
" I will prepare for my departure at once. 
You must escort me, my lord," she added, 
to Sir John Holland. 



THE YOUNG KING. 157 

" Were I to quit the palace at this 
juncture, madam," he replied, " the rebels 
would say I feared them. "They shall 
both see me and feel the weight of my 
arm. 

" Beware how you fall into their hands, 
my son," she remarked, anxiously. " They 
will not spare you. You had better come 
with me." 

" Sir Osbert Montacute will escort you, 
madam — / cannot," said Sir John. 

On this intimation, Sir Osbert instantly 
proffered his services, which were graciously 
accepted by the Princess, though she cast a 
reproachful look at her son. 

" By the time your preparations are 
made, madam, all shall be ready for 
you," said Sir Eustace. " I counsel you 
to take your jewels and valuables with 
you." 

The Princess then withdrew to her own 



158 MERRY ENGLAND. 

apartment, from which, in less than half an 
hour, she reappeared with her ladies, each 
of whom hacl a casket in her hand. 

Amongst them was Editha. 

Meanwhile, bj Sir Eustace's orders, all 
the Princess's personal attendants, pages 
and others, had assembled in the hall. 
With them were her confessor, her almoner, 
and her physician. Besides these, there 
were half a dozen armed attendants. 

Sir Eustace and Sir Osbert were waiting 
for her, but she did not see her son or Sir 
John Philpot. 

" Sir John Holland is on the ramparts, 
madam," observed De Vertain. " He 
charged me to say that he hoped soon to 
join you at the Tower." 

" Has the assault commenced ?" inquired 
the Princess, alarmed by the sounds that 
reached her ear. 



THE YOUNG KING. 159 

" It has, madam," replied Sir Eustace. 
" Will it please you to come with me ? 
The entrance to the subterranean passage 
is on the other side of the court. All is 
ready for your departure." 




XV. 




THE SUBTERRANEAN PASSAGE. 

S the party traversed the court, 
shouts and other noises could be 
distinctly heard ; and as Sir 
Eustace's looks plainly showed that he 
longed to be at his post, the Princess 
quickened her pace. 

In another moment they reached a tower 
at the lower end of the quadrangle, and, 
passing through an arched doorway guarded 
by a couple of halberdiers, entered a circular 
chamber on the ground-floor. 

In the centre of this chamber, which had 
an arched and groined roof, and was lighted 
by narrow loopholed windows, was a trap- 
door, now lying open. 



THE YOUNG KING. 161 

The trap-door was of unusual size, and 
communicated with an underground 
chamber, from which ran the subterranean 
passage about to be tracked by the fugi- 
tives. 

The vault was illumined by torches borne 
by men-at-arms. 

" Having brought your Grace thus far," 
said Sir Eustace, " I will now commit you 
to the care of Sir Osbert Montacute, who 
has full instructions. I trust your Grace 
will arrive safely at the Tower." 

With a valedictory look, full of tender- 
ness, at Editha, he then hurried off to the 
ramparts. 

The underground chamber to which the 
fugitives descended was of considerable size, 
and solidly constructed of stone. 

In a few minutes all had come down, and 
the trap-door was closed and fastened. , 

Before proceeding, the Princess called 
vol. n. 11 



162 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Editha to her, and bade her keep by her 
side. 

The word being given by Sir Osbert 
Montacute, who marched a little in advance 
of the Princess, the whole party entered the 
subterranean passage, which was sufficiently 
wide and lofty, well built with brick, and 
arched throughout. 

At first, it was perfectly dry, though 
further on, as they passed under the moat, 
the atmosphere became humid. 

The torch-bearers moved on in front, 
and, seen by this light, the procession 
formed a very striking picture. 

Some of the Court damsels manifested 
alarm, but the greater part of them talked 
and laughed lightly, as did the pages. The 
confessor, who was close behind the 
Princess, said never a word, and Editha 
remained silent. 

By-and-by they came to a strong iron 



THE YOUNG KING. 163 

gate, which had to be unlocked, and some 
forty yards further on there was another 
gate. 

The party were now under the moat, and 
the great dullness caused a general shiver- 
ing among the damsels ; but after they had 
passed through the second gate the damp- 
ness ceased. 

Infinite care had been bestowed upon the 
construction of this remarkable subter- 
ranean passage, some portion of which still 
exists. Not only were the walls strongly 
built, as described, but air was admitted by 
singularly contrived shafts. There were 
also branch passages, stairs, and decoys, 
intended to lure a hostile party to pitfalls. 

These avenues to destruction were pointed 
out to the Princess, and their purposes ex- 
plained to her by Sir Osbert Montacute ; 
and she shuddered as she gazed into the 
dark passages. 

11—2 



164 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"We cannot miss our way in thi& 
mysterious labyrinth ?" she inquired, in an 
anxious whisper, of Sir Osbert. 

" Impossible !" he rejoined. " Our guide,. 
Baldwin, is familiar with the place." 

Other passages were next pointed out. 
connected with sally-ports, and Sir Osbert 
thought these might possibly now be used 
in an attack upon the besiegers. 

That Editha was without alarm, we will 
not venture to assert ; but she exhibited no 
sign of trepidation, and surprised the 
Princess by her firmness. However, her 
courage was put to a much more severe test 
anon. 

The party had proceeded without hin- 
drance of any kind, and with tolerable 
expedition, for about a quarter of a 
mile, when Baldwin, the torch bearer, 
who acted as guide, and was a little in 
advance of the others, suddenly stopped, 



THE YOUNG KING. 165 

and held up his hand in a warning 
manner. 

At this signal, those who followed stopped 
likewise. 

" In heaven's name ! what is the matter?" 
<;ried the Princess, in great alarm, which 
was shared by all those near her. 

" The enemy is in the passage, madam," 
rejoined Sir Osbert, with forced calmness. 
"Hear you not those sounds?" 

And as he spoke, sounds of an approaching 
party were heard in the distance. 

"They appear to be numerous," he con- 
tinued. "'Tis well for us they have be- 
trayed themselves. Had they come on 
•cautiously, we must have fallen into their 
hands. Extinguish the torches," he added 
to the men in advance. 

The order was instantly obeyed, and the 
passage plunged in profound darkness. 

Half-stifled cries arose from the terrified 



166 MERRY ENGLAND. 

damsels; but thej quickly became quiet, 
conscious that their safety depended on 
silence. 

By this time Sir Osbert had been joined 
by Baldwin. 

" We must instantly turn back, my lord," 
said the man. "We shall not be able to 
reach the gates ; but I will take you to a 
retreat where her Grace and her ladies may 
be concealed." 

"You hear what he says, madam," re- 
marked Sir Osbert. " Will you trust 
him ?" 

" I will," she replied ; " I do not doubt 
his fidelity." 

"Come with me, then, madam," cried 
Baldwin, making his way through the 
throng, while the Princess followed, grasping 
Editha's hand. 

Close behind them came the rest of the 
party, whose movements were quickened by 



THE YOUNG KING. 167 

sounds proclaiming that the enemy was 
drawing nearer. 

A side passage, however, was soon 
reached, and the whole party being safely 
bestowed within it, Sir Osbert, with Bald- 
win and the armed men, stationed them- 
selves near the entrance. 

They were less apprenhensive of discovery, 
since it was certain that the rebels, who 
were now close at hand, had not got 
torches. 

Nor did the villanous intruders appear 
to be aware that they had accidentally inter- 
fered with the Princess's flight. Their 
object seemed to be to obtain access to 
the palace by means of the subterranean 
passage, the existence of which had doubt- 
less been revealed to them by some traitor. 

As they were passing along in the 
darkness, one of them chanced to put out 
his hand, and detected the side passage 



168 MERRY ENGLAND. 



wherein the fugitives had taken refuge, and 
immediately called out to his comrades — 

" Hold ! you are going wrong." 

" How knowst thou that, Elias Liripipe ? 
for I guess 'tis thou by thy voice, though 
I cannot see thee," rejoined the leader. 

"Yes, 'tis I, Captain Hothbrand," 
replied Liripipe. " This is the right way." 

"Methinks thou art mistaken," said 
Hothbrand. "But, prithee, examine the 
passage as well as thou canst." 

" I will proceed along it to a short dis- 
tance," replied Liripipe. 

He had _not gone far, however, when he 
roared out suddenly, "Help! help!" and 
rushed back as quickly as he could. 

" What is the matter ?" demanded Hoth- 
brand. 

" I have received a blow on the head that 
well-nigh stunned me," replied Liripipe, 
" Didst hear any one move ?" 



THE YOUNG KING. 169 

"I cannot say I did. The blow was 
sudden and violent." 

" Bah ! 'tis mere fancy. Thou hast 
knocked thy head against the wall," cried 
Hothbrand. " Come along." 

And the rebel band marched on, greatly 
to the relief of those inside the passage. 

As soon as the enemy was out of hearing, 
the fugitives came forth, and again pursued 
their onward course. 

Though deprived of the torchlight, they 
proceeded far more expeditiously than here- 
tofore, their fears accelerating their move- 
ments. The fugitives had every reason to 
apprehend the speedy return of the rebels, 
as they knew the latter would be stopped 
by the iron gates. 

Another ground of apprehension existed, 
and this was that the outlet of the subter- 
ranean passage might be watched by the 
enemy. 



170 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Such, however, did not prove to be the 
case. In the small hunting-tower in Green- 
wich Park, in the lower storey of which the 
fugitives came forth from their underground 
journey, no one was to be seen but the 
persons in charge of the building. 

These persons declared that no rebels had 
been seen near the building, nor could they 
comprehend how any hostile intruders could 
have found access to the passage. Certainly, 
it must have been elsewhere, and not from 
the vaults beneath the tower. 

Apparently the Princess was satisfied 
with the explanation, though credence was 
not attached to it by Sir Osbert Montacute, 
who could not comprehend from what other 
point the passage could have been entered ; 
and Baldwin, who was better informed than 
any one else, entertained the same opinion. 

The Princess did not remain long at the 
hunting-tower; but descended from the 



THE YOUNG KING. 171 

woody heights on which it was situated, to 
Greenwich, where the royal barge was 
moored. 

Eejoicing at her escape, she went on 
board with her attendants, and gave orders 
that the oarsmen should proceed at once to 
the Tower. 

As the gilded bark, propelled by twenty 
stout rowers, clad in the royal livery, cut its 
way through the then clear and beautiful 
river, the Princess gradually recovered her 
spirits, which had been sadly shaken by her 
perilous journey from the palace of Eltham. 

Before entering the barge, her Grace, 
having no further occasion for an escort, 
dismissed Sir Osbert Montacute and all the 
men-at-arms. 

The gallant young knight expressed hi& 
intention of returning to the palace, at all 
hazards, through the subterranean passage. 
Unless the rebels should have found some 



172 MERRY ENGLAND. 

other means of exit than by the fortified 
sallyport, he must needs encounter them, 
and would attack them. If he perished, it 
would be in a good cause. 

With this bold resolve, Sir Osbert de- 
parted. 




XVI. 

HOW THE PRINCESS ARRIVED AT THE TOWER. 




HE passage to the Tower in the 
splendid royal barge had all the 
charm of novelty to Editha, and 
the pleasant sensations awakened by the 
easy motion of the vessel, combined with 
the novelty of the various objects presented 
to her gaze, speedily put to flight the 
alarm and anxiety she had previously 
experienced. 

The weather was delightful, and the con- 
trast between the bright river, with the 
numerous barks floating upon it, and the 
sombre passages she had just tracked, was 
indeed striking. Besides, she was going to 
the Tower, the place of all others she most 



174 MERRY ENGLAND. 

desired to visit. No wonder, therefore, that 
she quickly recovered her spirits. 

As she neared the great city, her delight 
and wonder increased ; but when at length 
the mighty bridge and the royal fortress 
burst upon her, she could scarcely control 
her emotions. 

The Princess perceived from her looks 
what was passing in her mind, but made no 
remark, being greatly pre-occupied at the 
time. 

For some minutes Editha's gaze had been 
fixed on the commanding White Tower, 
surmounted by the royal standard, and on 
the fortified towers around it ; and thrilling 
sensations of awe and wonder were excited 
in her breast ; but no sooner was the barge 
descried by the guard on St. Thomas's 
Tower, than trumpets were sounded loudly, 
and Sir Alan Murrieux, the Lieutenant, 
being informed that the Princess was ap- 



THE YOUNG KING. 175 

proaching, hastened to the wharf with a 
large body of warders to receive her. 

Before the Princess landed, Sir Simon 
Burley and the Baron de Gommegines had 
likewise reached the wharf, and the former 
gave her his hand as she stepped ashore. 

" Your Grace is ever welcome at the 
Tower," said Sir Alan Murrieux, the 
Lieutenant, advancing to meet her ; " but I 
much fear your present visit is not of your 
own choosing." 

" You are right, good Sir Alan," she re- 
plied. " I know not whether the news has 
reached you that the Baron de Vertain, Sir 
John Philpot, and my son, Sir John Hol- 
land, have been discomfited by the rebels ?" 

" I grieve to hear it, madam," replied Sir 
Alan ; " but we had little hope that the 
expedition would be successful." 

"All are safe, I trust?" observed Sir 
Simon Burley, anxiously. 



176 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" They are all at Elthain," replied the 
Princess ; " but they are still in some 
danger. They have been pursued by a 
large body of the insurgents, who are now- 
besieging the palace. This is the cause of 
my sudden flight. As the palace is sur- 
rounded by the enemy, I could only escape, 
with my ladies, through the subterranean 
passage." 

"Certes, you bring bad news, madam," 
said Sir Simon. "Some men-at-arms and 
archers must be sent to aid the besieged ; 
yet I know not how it can be safely done." 

" I am ready to take the command of any 
party you may send," observed De Gromme- 
gines. 

" Men are wanting, my lord, not leaders," 
rejoined Sir Simon. 

" The besiegers muster about five 
hundred, as I understand," observed the 
Princess. " They have archers and cross- 



THE TOUNG KING. 177 

bowmen with them, and are under the com- 
mand of the Outlaw Chief. Sir Eustace de 
Valletort has undertaken the defence of the 
palace." 

" And better commander could not be 
found !" cried De Gommegines. " But he 
ought to have assistance. With a hundred 
lances these churls could be driven off!" 

" Eltham palace shall never be taken by 
them, come what may !" cried Sir Simon. 

" I am glad to hear you say that, Sir 
Simon !" cried the Princess. 

By this time all the ladies, having dis- 
embarked, were now gathering round their 
royal mistress. They expressed the greatest 
satisfaction at having exchanged the doubt- 
ful security of Eltham for the protection of 
an impregnable fortress like the Tower. 

" Here, at least, we are safe from the 
rebels !" cried the Lady Egelwine. 

" I never liked the Tower half so much 
VOL. II. 12 



178 MERRY ENGLAND. 

as I do now," said the fair Agnes de Somer- 
ville. " I used to think it a dismal place ; 
but, after the vaults of Eltham, it 
appears charming!" 

" Did you observe how the deer in the 
park fled at the approach of the rebels ?" re- 
marked the dark-eyed Ela de Fauconberg. 
" They seemed to know that the leader was 
a deerstalker." 

" I saw not the deer," replied the Lady 
Egelwine ; " but I heard the ravens croak 
ominously." 

"And I heard the bitterns boom," added 
the blonde Hawisia. 

" And I saw several birds of prey, hawks 
and kites, hovering above the palace," said 
the lovely, but timorous, Sybilla de Fes- 
champ. 

" All these are portents of ill," said the 
Lady Egelwine. " I much fear the palace 
is doomed to destruction." 



THE YOUNG KING. 179 



"Have no such fear, fair damsels," ob- 
served De Gommegines, who was standing 
by. " Eltham is not destined to become a 
den of robbers. When you return thither 
you will find the palace uninjured." 

An exclamation, which Editha could not 
repress, attracted the Baron's attention, and 
he inquired her name. 

The Lady Egelwine told him; adding, 
" She comes from the priory at Dartford, 
and is a great favourite of the Princess." 

"So it appears," observed De Gomme- 
gines, as, in obedience to a sign, Editha 
took a place behind her royal mistress. 

Meanwhile, Sir Simon Burley had quitted 
the Princess, in order to despatch a mes- 
senger with a letter to the Lord Mayor, 
telling him that Eltham was beleaguered 
by the rebels, and praying him to bring as 
many men-at-arms as he could without 
delay to succour the besieged. 

12—2 



180 MERKY ENGLAND. 

It devolved, therefore, on the Lieutenant 
to conduct her Grace to St. Peter's Chapel 
in the "White Tower, whither she desired 
to repair at once, to offer up thanks to 
Heaven for her Providential deliverance. 
Her confessor had already gone on to the 
chapel. 

As the Princess and her train proceeded 
to the inner ward, Editha was enabled to 
take a rapid survey of certain portions of 
the ancient palatial fortress, and she was 
greatly impressed by the stern grandeur of 
the White Tower, which burst upon her 
after she had passed through the arched 
gateway of the Garden Tower, since known 
as the Bloody Tower. 

Not being aware of the situation of St. 
Peter's Chapel, she was surprised when the 
Princess entered the massive donjon, and, 
ascending a spiral staircase, proceeded along 
a corridor to a door, before which stood a 



THE YOUNG KING. 181 

couple of halberdiers and an officer of the 
guard. 

Here the Princess learnt that the King 
was then in the chapel, and that mass was 
being performed by the Archbishop of 
Canterbury. 

"Waiting for a moment till all her at- 
tendants had assembled, she entered the 
sacred apartment, and leaving her ladies in 
the aisles, proceeded at once to the altar, 
and knelt down beside the King. 

Never had Edith a been so much struck 
by any place of worship as by this wondrous 
chapel, with its enormous circular columns, 
its covered roof and gallery. To her it 
scarcely seemed the work of man's hand. 

Having seen the Archbishop of Canter- 
bury at the Priory, she was familiar with 
his stately figure, but she never yet beheld 
him officiate at the altar, and she listened 
with deepest awe to his solemn accents. 



182 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Excited by the incense with which the 
atmosphere was laden, and by the melodious 
chants of the choir, she fell into a sort of 
trance, from which she did not entirely 
recover till the service was concluded. 

"While she was in this rapt state, celestial 
visions seemed to pass before her, and she 
fancied she heard seraphic voices. 








XVII. 

HOW SIR SIMON BURLEY, THE BARON DE 
GOMMEGINES, AND THE LORD MAYOR SET 
OUT TO SUCCOUR THE BESIEGED AT 
ELTHAM PALACE. 

HEN the Princess quitted the 
chapel with the King, Editha 
followed, and being still some- 
what confused, scarcely knew where she was 
going, though conscious she had quitted the 
White Tower, and entered the palace, till 
she found herself in a large chamber, richly 
furnished, and hung with tapestry. 

The King graciously saluted the Court 
damsels ; but he bestowed such marked at- 
tention on Editha that the others were 
quite piqued. 



184 MERRY ENGLAND. 

But the smiles quickly fled from his Ma- 
jesty's countenance, and his frivolity of 
manner disappeared, when he was informed 
by his mother of the attack upon Eltham by 
the rebels, 

" Now, by St. George and St. Mark, this: 
passeth all endurance !" he cried, fiercely. 
" Our palace attacked by this vile rabble !': 
Cost what it may, they shall be driven off t 
Bid Sir Simon Burley come to me !" 

" Sir Simon is mustering a troop of 
knights and esquires in the court, my 
liege !" replied the usher. " Your Majesty 
can see him from the window, if it pleases 
you to look out." 

" 'Tis well," cried Bichard. " He has an- 
ticipated my wishes. Ha !" 

The exclamation was caused by the 
entrance of the Baron de Gommegines, fully 
armed. 

Bichard sprang forward to meet him. 



THE YOUNG KING. 185 

"Thou hast made ready to succour the 
besieged at Eltham ?" he cried. 

" 'Tis true, my liege," replied the Baron ; 
"and I am come to crave your Majesty's 
permission to proceed thither with Sir 
Simon Burley." 

" Sir Simon has not asked our leave, hut 
he hath it, and so hast thou," rejoined 
Bichard. " I will go with you. I will lead 
you against these rebellious hounds ! Let 
my horse be brought out at once ! I will 
not stay to arm — I am impatient to be off. 
Farewell, madam !" he added, to his mother. 

Never had Editha thought Bichard looked 
so like a king as at that moment, and she 
gazed at him with admiration she had not 
felt before. His gesture was proud, and his 
eyes seemed literally to flash fire. 

The Brincess thought he looked like his 
heroic father when his breast was kindled 
with anger. 



186 MERRY ENGLAND. 

But though delighted with this unwonted 
display of spirit, she deemed it prudent to 
restrain him. 

" My liege, you must not expose yourself 
to needless risk !" she said. 

" I care not for the risk !" he cried, 
impetuously. " I will go !" 

But De Gommegines ventured to oppose 
him. 

" Her Grace is in the right, my 
liege," he said. " You cannot leave the 
Tower." 

" Cannot leave !" exclaimed Eichard. 
*' Who shall hinder me ?" 

" I will, my liege !" said Sir Simon 
Burley, entering at the moment. 

Clad in armour from head to heel, the old 
knight had a snowy plume in his helm, and 
a long sword attached to his girdle. 

" As one of the Council of Regency," he 
continued, in an authoritative tone, " and 



THE YOUNG KING. 187 

responsible for your Majesty's safety, I 
cannot allow you to leave the Tower." 

For a moment Richard looked as if he 
would set the old knight's authority at 
defiance ; and Editha, who watched the 
scene with breathless interest, thought he 
would break through all the trammels 
imposed upon him. 

But Sir Simon's firmness prevailed, and 
in the end the young monarch, though 
sorely against his will, succumbed. 

" I must obey you now, Sir Simon," he 
cried. " But a time will shortly come " 

" My liege," interrupted the old knight, 
"that time will never come, unless those 
bound to watch over you fail in their duty. 
I know I shall incur your Majesty's dis- 
pleasure by the step I am taking, but I 
cannot help it." 

" What are you about to do ?" demanded 
the King, sullenly. 



1SS MERRY ENGLAND. 

"I am about to join the Lord Mayor, 
my liege, who, with a troop of loyal 
citizens, is waiting for me at the Bulwark 
Gate," replied Sir Simon. " We shall then 
make all haste we can to Eltham ; and I 
hope soon to bring your Majesty good 
news." 

Accompanied by the Baron de Gomme- 
gines, he then departed, leaving the King 
in high dudgeon. 

Hoping to soothe Eichard's irritation, 
the Princess led him to a large bay window 
commanding the inner ward. 

Beneath the trees, then growing on the 
patch of greensward in front of the 
Lieutenant's lodgings, was drawn up a 
company of nobles, knights, and esquires, 
all glittering in complete steel, and mounted 
on powerful chargers, making a very goodly 
show. 

Each of the knightly companions carried 



THE YOUNG KING. 189 

a long lance, on the summit of which 
fluttered a pennon. Each esquire bore a 
shield, emblazoned with his lord's cogni- 
zance. 

Presently, Sir Simon Burley and the 
.Baron de Gommegines came forth, and, 
mounting their chargers, put themselves at 
the head of the splendid troop. 

Trumpets were then sounded, and, ani- 
mated by the martial clangour, which made 
the battlements ring, the knightly company 
rode off, lowering their lances as they 
passed beneath the arch of the Garden 
Tower. 

At this sight Bichard turned away in 
deep vexation, and, as he did so, he en- 
countered Editha's gaze, which was 
anxiously fixed upon him. 

He could not speak to her, but addressed 
his mother in words meant for the damsel's 
ear. 



190 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" My crown is not worth wearing if I 
cannot fight for it !" 

" Trouble not yourself on that score, my 
liege," replied the Princess. " These churls 
are unworthy of your sword. Leave others 
to deal with them." 

On issuing from the Bulwark Gate, Sir 
Simon Burley and his noble companions 
found the Lord Mayor, with a troop of 
well-mounted and well-armed citizens, wait- 
ing for them. 

• Sir William "Walworth was cased in mail, 
but did not bear a lance, like the knights 
attendant upon Sir Simon. In lieu thereof, 
he had a mallet affixed to his saddle-bow, 
and, with his strong arm, he was well able 
to use the heavy weapon. 

Sir Simon heartily thanked the Lord 
Mayor, in the King's name, for his prompt 
and efficient response to the summons ; after 
which the two companies rode off together. 



THE YOUNG KING. 191 

When they had crossed London Bridge, 
they set spurs to their steeds, and dashed 
off at a gallop along the road to Blackheath 
and Eltham, burning to punish the presump- 
tuous rebels. 




XVIII. 




WHAT BEEEL SIR OSBERT MONTACUTE ON HIS 
RETURN THROUGH THE SUBTERRANEAN 
PASSAGE. 

N re-entering the subterranean pas- 
sage, Sir Osbert Montacute and 
the men-at-arms with him did 
not light the torches, but proceeded, as 
noiselessly as they could, along the gloomy 
road, in the hope of passing the intruders 
unperceived. 

They had gone on in this manner for 
some time without meeting with any in- 
terruption, when a distant sound reached 
the ears of Baldwin, who was marching in 
advance, and he called to the others, in a 
low tone, to stop. 



THE YOUNG KING. 193 

" I will go on alone to reconnoitre," he 
whispered to Sir Osbert. 

Some minutes elapsed, and as he did not 
return, Sir Osbert became exceedingly un- 
easy. 

The state of suspense in which he was 
kept was well-nigh intolerable. Vainly did 
he peer into the gloom — vainly listen. He 
could hear nothing — see nothing. 

Just as he had resolved to move on, he 
became aware that some one was near him, 
and thinking it must be the guide come 
back, he said, in a low voice, " Is it thou, 
Baldwin ?" 

Instead of answering, the person would 
have retreated, had not Sir Osbert seized 
him by the throat, and held him fast. 

" Attempt to give the alarm, and I will 
kill thee !" said the knight, feeling sure he 
had captured a rebel. " Where are thy com- 
rades?" he added, slightly relaxing his grasp. 

vol. n. 13 



194 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" They are trying to get out of this 
accursed place," replied the man. " They 
are dispersed. Some have fallen into a pit 
in the darkness, and are unable to get out." 

A smothered laugh arose from the men- 
at-arms at this satisfactory intelligence. 

" But where are the rest ?" demanded 
Sir Osbert. 

" 'Tis a question difficult to answer," 
replied the prisoner, evasively, " seeing that 
I know not where I am myself." 

"Are they in this passage ?" demanded 
Sir Osbert, sternly. " Thou canst tell that. 
Thou hadst best not trifle with me, fellow. 
Thy name is known to me — thou art called 
Liripipe." 

"Certes, my name is Liripipe," replied 
the prisoner, surprised. 

" I recollect thy voice," said Sir Osbert. 

" Now mark me, Liripipe ! Thou shalt go 
on with us. If we avoid thy comrades, I 



THE YOUNG KING. 195 

will spare thee. If we meet them, thou 
shalt die ! Take heed — my poniard is at 
thy throat !" 

Still keeping fast hold of the prisoner, 
Sir Osbert compelled him to retrace his 
steps ; but before they had got far, a noise 
announced that several persons were coming 
quickly towards them. 

" They are here !" said Liripipe. " What 
is to be done ?" 

" Bid them go back instantly/' replied 
Sir Osbert. "Say that the enemy is at 
hand ! Shout lustily !" 

Liripipe called out as he was enjoined ; 
whereupon the rebels immediately stopped. 

" Tell them to fly, and conceal themselves, 
or they will certainly be captured!" whispered 
Sir Osbert. 

Liripipe obeyed, and the sound of retreat- 
ing footsteps was immediately heard. 

"May I follow them?" implored the 

13—2 



196 MERRY ENGLAND. 

prisoner. " By St. Babylas of Antioch, I 
will not betray you !" 

" I have not done with thee yet," re- 
joined Sir Osbert, slightly pricking him with 
the poniard. " Keep near me." 

They then moved on, though somewhat 
slowly; for Sir Osbert had to drag the 
prisoner along. 

Once more footsteps were heard, but they 
proved to be those of a friend. Next 
moment Baldwin came up, and announced 
himself. 

"I did not think I should have been 
able to rejoin you, Sir Osbert," he said. 
" The rebels got hold of me, but I managed 
to escape while they were retreating by a 
side-passage." 

" Is the main passage clear ?" asked the 
knight. 

" I think so," replied Baldwin. " But 
the villains may return." 



THE YOUNG KING. 197 

" Forward, then !" cried Sir Osbert. 
" Not a moment is to be lost !" 

The party then set off at a quick pace, 
and soon reached the outer gate, which was 
unlocked by Baldwin. 

In fulfilment of his promise, Sir Osbert 
here liberated the prisoner ; but he told him 
if he was again captured he should assuredly 
be hanged. 

" Say to thy comrades we will soon come 
in search of them," added Baldwin ; " and 
woe betide them if they are caught !" 

Liripipe scarcely heard the words, though 
he guessed their import, but hurried off as 
fast as his legs could carry him. 

Having carefully fastened both gates, the 
party made their way to the subterranean 
chamber. 

In another minute the trapdoor was 
opened for them by the guard, but not till 
he was satisfied they were friends. 



198 



MERRY ENGLAND. 



As Sir Osbert came forth, his first in- 
quiry was, " How goes the siege ?" 

" I can scarce tell, my lord," replied the 
guard. " The rebels have gained none of 
the outworks, but they still obstinately con- 
tinue the attack. The archers, I hear, are 
under the command of a certain Conrad 
Basset." 

" I know the man you speak of, and 'tis 
like enough he may be their leader," said 
Sir Osbert. "Where is Sir John Hol- 
land?" 

" Half an hour ago he was on the north 
battlements, my lord, and doubtless he is 
there still," rejoined the guard. 

"Then I will go to him at once," 
cried Sir Osbert. " Come with me, all of 
you," he added, to Baldwin and the men- 
at-arms. 

So saying, he hurried off to the battle- 
ments, but, before he reached them, loud 



THE YOUNG KING. 199 

shouts and other noises, accompanied ever 
and anon by the blast of a trumpet, in- 
formed him that an assault was being made 
by the* besiegers, and vigorously repelled by 
the defenders of the palace. 




XIX. 



HOW ELTHAM PALACE WAS VALIANTLY DE- 
FENDED BY SIR JOHN PHILPOT. 




HE attack, which had commenced, 
as previously related, at the pre- 
cise moment of the Princess's de- 
parture from the palace, had now lasted for 
more than two hours, without any material 
advantage to the assailants. 

The royal residence, as we have already 
explained, was capable of making a stout 
defence, being entirely surrounded by for- 
tified walls, and a wide, deep moat. 

The moat was crossed by two stone 
bridges, respectively situated on the north 
and south of the palace, and protected by a 
barbacan. 



THE YOUNU KING. 201 

The chief attack of the assailants was 
directed against the north barbacan, which 
was guarded by a dozen archers and cross - 
bowmen, under the command of Sir John 
Philpot, who had sought this post as being 
that of the greatest danger. 

And well did the brave knight prove his 
skill and valour. Twice were the insur- 
gents successfully repulsed by him, when 
they advanced on foot, and in great num- 
ber?, to attack the barbacan, and though he 
sustained some slight losses, they were 
nothing in comparison with the damage 
done by him to the foe. 

Conrad Basset was made a mark by the 
cross-bowmen and archers on the barbacan 
but he escaped without injury, owing to the 
vigilance of a gigantic woman, who stooc 
by his side. 

This Amazon wore a breast-plate thai 
must have been fashioned for a strongly- 



202 MERRY ENGLAND. 

built man, and in addition to a broad- 
bladed sword, carried a large triangular 
shield, with which she warded off many a 
shaft and bolt aimed at Conrad. 

While these assaults were made, the Out- 
law was not idle, but gave all the support 
he could to his friends. 

Sheltered by the wood, and without 
much risk to the large party of archers with 
him, he sent constant showers of arrows 
against those on the battlements. 

After the unsuccessful issue of the second 
attack, Conrad Basset repaired to the wood, 
where a brief conference took place between 
him and the Outlaw. 

Somewhat discouraged, Conrad expressed 
an opinion that it was useless to make a 
further attempt. 

" "We have got a most resolute and skilful 
opponent in Sir John Philpot," he said. 
" He will hold the barbacan to the last. I 



THE YOUNG KING. SOS 

should not have cared for Sir John Holland, 
but Philpot is a very different man." 

" True," replied the Outlaw, " but he is 
not invincible ; and if you defeat him, so 
much greater will be the honour. Eather 
than the siege should be abandoned, I will 
lead the attack myself." 

Conrad might have agreed to the pro- 
position, though it was mortifying to his 
pride, but Frideswide, who had followed him 
into the wood, and stood at a little distance, 
leaning on her sword, called out, in a tone 
that scarcely admitted of dispute — 

" Do not relinquish your post ! Despite 
Sir John Philpot, the barbacan can easily be 
taken, and I will tell you how." 

" Show me the way, and I will thank 
thee heartily," rejoined Conrad. 

" This is my plan," said Frideswide. 

"You want a battering-ram. I will 
supply you with one. Not fifty yards from 



204 MERRY ENGLAND. 

this spot lies a huge beam. I noticed it as 
I came hither. 'Twill take a dozen men to 
lift it, but I will help them, if need be." 

" Ha ! I see !" cried Conrad, joyfully. 
" With this beam thou wouldst burst open 
the postern ?" 

"That is my plan," said Frideswide. 
" When the postern is burst open, as it will 
be of a surety by this simple battering-ram, 
who is to prevent thee from entering the 
barbacan ? Not Sir John Philpot !" 

"No, by St. Anselm, not twenty Phil- 
pots !" cried Conrad. " Thou hast devised 
an excellent plan. The barbacan once 
gained, the palace will be ours !" 

" Ay, marry, will it !" said the Outlaw. 
" When we have crossed the bridge, and 
appear before the gate, Sir Eustace de Valle- 
tort will be forced to surrender. Besides 
the plunder to be gained, the capture of a 
royal palace like Eltham will be of immense 



THE YOUNG KING. 205 

service to the cause, and strike terror into 
the breasts of the nobles." 

" Let not the final assault be delayed !"" 
cried Conrad, who was now full of ardour 
and impatience. " If we triumph, it will be 
owing to thee," he added, to Frideswide. 

She spoke no word, but her look implied, 
" The suggestion was made to please thee.'* 

Another assault being resolved upon, 
horses were brought, and ropes fastened to 
the ponderous beam which was found lying 
in the spot indicated by Frideswide. 

This done, the improvised battering-ram 
was dragged towards the barbacan, but kept 
under cover of the trees till it should be 
required. 

Very little delay occurred — Conrad 
Basset, as we have just remarked, being 
now all impatience for a fresh assault, 
in which he might retrieve his past ill- 
success. 



206 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Again trumpets were sounded by the in- 
surgents — again the challenge was scorn- 
fully answered by the defenders of the 
barbacan, and still more scornfully by those 
on the battlements — after which a large 
party of rebels, headed by Conrad Basset, 
who was accompanied by the Amazon, again 
advanced to the assault. 

A thick and continuous flight of arrows 
from the archers in the wood tended to 
confuse the besieged as the assailants came 
on, and some of the defenders of the barbacan 
having disappeared, the order was given by 
Conrad to bring on the battering-ram. 

In another . minute the great beam was 
dragged by the horses as close as it could 
be to the tower, and in spite of shafts, 
bolts, and missiles directed against them, it 
was laid hold of by some twenty sturdy 
yeomen, and in another minute propelled 
with resistless force against the postern. 



THE YOUNG KING. 207 



One blow of this tremendous engine was 
sufficient. 

The strong oaken door, though strength- 
ened with iron, and secured with bolts and 
bars, yielded, and Conrad, still attended by 
the faithful Frideswide, rushed into the 
tower, followed by as many archers as he 
could get in with him. 

A desperate conflict now took place in 
the lower chamber of the barbacan. 

Every inch was disputed with the 
assailants. More than once Sir John Phil- 
pot drove them back, killing or wounding a 
rebel with every blow of his trenchant 
sword. 

Conrad would undoubtedly have fallen 
by his hand, but for the interposition of 
Frideswide. Even in that fierce struggle, 
the valiant knight, seeing he had to deal 
with a woman, forbore to strike. 

At length, being left almost alone — 



208 MERRY ENGLAND. 

for nearly all the men-at-arms with him 
were down — Sir John was compelled to 
retreat. 

Facing the foe to the last, he passed out 
at the rear of the tower by a door com- 
municating with the bridge; but being 
instantly followed by Conrad, Frideswide, 
and a score of rebels, armed with pikes, bills, 
and gisarmes, he stopped, and courageously 
Confronted the whole host. 

At this critical juncture the gate of the 
palace was thrown open, and Sir Eustace 
de Valletort, Sir John Holland, the Baron 
de Vertain, Sir Osbert Montacute, and a 
dozen men-at-arms, sallied forth to the 
rescue. 

Driven back by the fierce onset of the 
nobles, the rebels were immediately rein- 
forced by great numbers of their comrades, 
who rushed in through the barbacan gate, 
and Conrad returned to the attack. 



THE YOUNG KING. 209 

Another desperate fight then took place 
in the centre of the bridge. For a few- 
minutes nothing could be heard but the 
•clash of arms, mingled with shouts, yells, 
and groans. Several of the rebels were 
thrown over the sides of the bridge into the 
moat. 

Little assistance could be rendered to Sir 
Eustace by those on the walls, because they 
were exposed to a continuous flight of 
arrows from the archers whom the Outlaw 
had now brought to the very verge of the 
moat. 

Despite the superior skill of the knights, 
they were so greatly outnumbered by the 
assailants, that Sir Eustace felt it would be 
impossible to maintain the bridge much 
longer, and he was, therefore, preparing for 
a final effort before re-entering the palace, 
when the sound of a trumpet was heardrm 
the distance. 

VOL. II. 14 



210 MERRY ENGLAND. 

At the same moment loud and joyous 
shouts arose from those on the battlements. 

From their elevated position on the walls, 
the men-at-arms could descry a clump of 
spears galloping along the avenue in the 
direction of the palace, and they therefore 
called out, " A rescue ! a rescue!" 




XX. 

HOW THE PALACE WAS DELIVERED. 




[UESSING- the cause of the shouts, 
Conrad Basset, who, up to this 
moment, had felt sure of victory, 
checked the further advance of his com- 
panions, and his dismay was increased 
when warning cries arose from the party 
stationed on the outer side of the moat. 

" To horse ! to horse !" vociferated the 
insurgent archers. " The enemy is at 
hand !" 

" Fall back instantly, and mount your 
steeds !" shouted Conrad to those behind 
him ; and the order was repeated by 
Frideswide. 

Finding the rebels w r ere retreating, Sir 

14—2 



212 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Eustace and the knights dashed upon them, 
and in a marvellously short space of time 
the bridge was entirely cleared of the 
assailants. 

Sir Eustace did not deem it prudent to 
follow up his advantage, but re-occupied the 
barbacan, and caused the gate to be closed. 

The first aim of the rebels on quitting 
the bridge was to regain their horses, and 
this was quickly accomplished, since the 
animals were tied to the trees at the upper 
end of the avenue. 

While Conrad was getting together the 
disorderly rout, Frideswide brought him his 
steed, and having already secured her own 
horse, lent the young man great aid in his 
troublesome task. 

Exertions of a similar kind were made at 
the same time by the Outlaw, and a junc- 
tion was quickly formed between the two 
parties. 



THE YOUNG KING. 213 

Just before the alarm was given that a 
troop of lances was approaching, several 
persons belonging to the party whose mis- 
adventures in the subterranean passages 
have been recounted, reappeared. 

No time was allowed them to describe 
their proceedings, but they were ordered by 
the Outlaw to mount at once, and join the 
battalion already drawn up in the avenue. 

All necessary arrangements were made 
with surprising celerity; and before the 
knights could come up, the rebel host, 
slightly diminished in numbers, but still 
presenting a very formidable appearance, 
was fully prepared to receive them. 

Such of the insurgents as were provided 
with pikes were placed in the fore- 
most ranks of the battalion, and their 
leaders strenuously enjoined them to stand 
firm. 

Close to Conrad was the faithful Frides- 



214 MERRY ENGLAND. 

wide, who looked as undaunted as the young 
chief himself. 

In another moment the charge was made. 
At the head of the party rode Sir Simon 
Burley and De Gommegines, shouting 
their battle-cry as they couched their 
lances. 

The shock was tremendous and resistless. 
Bearing down all before them, unhorsing 
numbers, and trampling them under foot, 
splintering the pikes as if they had been 
willow-wands, the knights divided the com- 
pact mass in twain, and scattered the rebels 
in every direction, so that they could not 
reunite. 

All this was the work of a few minutes. 

Luckily for themselves, the two rebel 
leaders avoided the shock ; but they saw at 
once that it would be impossible to rally 
their terror-stricken followers, who were 
now flying wildly off, and trying to save 



THE YOUNG KING. 215 

themselves by plunging amid the trees on 
either side of the avenue. 

For a few moments Conrad remained 
stupefied by the disastrous result of the 
charge; but he was at length roused by 
Frideswide, who remained with him. 

" Seest thou not that thy brother chief is 
gone?" she said. "He called to thee to fly, 
but thou didst not heed." 

" I did not hear him call," replied Conrad, 
bitterly. " I did not see him depart. Why 
has he fled ?" 

" Because all is lost," rejoined Frideswide. 
" Not a man of all the host is left to stand 
by thee. Fly, or thou wilt be slain by these 
fierce knights." 

" No, I will stand my ground !" he ex- 
claimed fiercely, but despairingly. " If I 
must die, I will die here." 

"Thou shalt not throw away thy life 
thus," she cried. 



216 MERRY ENGLAND. 

And seizing the bridle of his steed, she 
forced him away. 

Their flight was perceived, and three 
knights instantly started in pursuit. 

But both Conrad and his companion were 
well mounted, and the instinct of self- 
preservation having resumed its sway over 
the young man, he yielded to Erideswide's. 
suggestion, and made for the forest lying 
between Eltham and Dartford. 

This shelter gained, they were safe from 
pursuit. 

" Nothing more is to be done here," said 
Conrad. "I will rejoin Wat Tyler at 
Rochester." 

" Be it so," replied the submissive Erides- 
wide. 

Thus was the beleaguered palace of Eltham 
delivered. 

Though the majority of the rebels escaped 
and found their way back to Rochester, 



THE YOUNG KING. 217 

numbers were slain. No prisoners were 
made. 

The knights slew all who fell into their 
hands. 

When the good news was brought them 
of the defeat of the rebels, the King and his 
mother were greatly rejoiced. 

A banquet was given that evening at the 
royal palace at the Tower, at which Sir 
Simon Burley, the Baron de Grommegines, 
the Lord Mayor, and other nobles and 
knights assisted. 



END OF BOOK THE SECOND. 



BOOK III. 



BLACKHEATH. 



THE SIEGE OE ROCHESTER CASTLE. 




HILE the events just recounted 
took place, Rochester Castle 
was besieged by the main body 
of the rebels, who were supplied by the 
townspeople with scaling-ladders, battering- 
rams, and mangonels, the latter being an 
extremely powerful engine, used at the time, 
for hurling large stones against the walls 
or gates of a fortress. 

Many of the townspeople likewise 
assisted in the assault, which was begun 
without delay ; and though justly accounted 
one of the strongest in the kingdom, it 
seemed unlikely the castle could long hold 
out against such a multitude of assailants. 



222 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Other circumstances warranted this con- 
clusion. Not only was the fortress in- 
sufficiently garrisoned, but the Constable, 
Sir John de Newtoun, had reason to doubt 
the fidelity of his men. 

Thinking to intimidate the rest, and pre- 
vent any acts of insubordination or 
treachery, he not only hanged Thurstan, 
the burgher of Gravesend, who had been 
sent to him by Sir Simon Burley, and whom 
the rebels had sworn to release, but five 
archers suspected of sedition, and suspended 
the bodies from the lofty towers of the 
keep, in sight of the enemy. 

But the Constable's severity produced the 
contrary effect to that intended. It 
heightened the spirit of mutiny, instead of 
quelling it, and caused the insurgents to 
redouble their efforts to take the place. 

Hence a siege that might have endured 
for months, lasted only a couple of days. 



BLACKHEATH. 223 



On the first assault scaling-ladders of im- 
mense length were affixed to the great 
partition-wall of the castle, and party after 
party of assailants mounted them, but were 
unable to gain the battlements. 

Huge stones were thrown, with pro- 
digious force, against the gates from the 
mangonels, and battering-rams, each worked 
by a score of stalwart individuals, were 
employed ; but no entrance could be 
effected, and, after hours of fruitless labour, 
attended by great loss, the insurgents were 
compelled to retire. 

During the night some secret commu- 
nication must have taken place between the 
seditious garrison and the rebels ; for, next 
morning, the latter, instead of preparing to 
renew the assault, made ready to enter the 
fortress in triumph. 

The royal standard, which had hitherto 
floated proudly on the summit of the keep, 



224 MERRY ENGLAND. 

was taken down, and replaced by a white 
flag. The drawbridge was lowered, and the 
gates thrown wide open, to admit the in- 
surgents, who marched in, headed by Wat 
Tyler, fully armed, and mounted on a 
powerful steed. 

On entering the base-court they found 
Sir John de Newtoun a prisoner, and 
guarded by a party of his own men-at-arms. 

Eyeing "Wat Tyler fiercely, he said to 
him, " Base varlet, thou hast won the castle 
by treachery. Never would I have sur- 
rendered it to thee." 

" Go to, proud knight," rejoined Wat. 
"Thou hast learnt, to thy cost, that the 
strongest fortress cannot resist the people, 
when banded together." 

"No fortress is safe when garrisoned 
by traitors," said the Constable, scorn- 

fully. 

" I will not parley with thee !" cried 



BLACKHEATH. 225 



Wat. " Richly dost thou deserve death at 
our hands for thy misdeeds and cruelty. 
Yet are we willing to spare thy life, if thou 
wilt join us." 

"Join you!" cried the Constable. "Darest 
thou make such a proposition to me, vile 
churl ? Dost think I would dishonour my- 
self by joining such a company of false 
traitors and knaves as thee and thy fellows ? 
Undeceive thyself. Give me my sword ; and 
then come on, all of you, and put me to 
death, if you can !" 

" We have not done with thee yet," 
rejoined Wat Tyler. " Whether thou wilt 
join the league or not, thou shalt go with 
me. I have certain propositions to make 
to the King, and thou shalt act as my am- 
bassador." 

" Dost thou expect me to bring back his 
Majesty's answer to thee?" demanded the 
Constable. 

VOL. II. 15 



226 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Assuredly," replied Wat ; " and thou 
must pledge thy word to return." 

After a moment's reflection Sir John de 
Newtoun said, " I will do as you desire, 
provided you will forthwith liberate my 
wife and children." 

" I cannot liberate them now," said Wat 
Tyler. " I shall hold them as hostages for 
the due fulfilment of thy promise. When 
thou dost bring back the King's answer, 
whether it be favourable or otherwise, I 
will set them free." 

" Enough !" said the Constable. " I will 
do thy bidding." 

At a sign from Wat Tyler, he was then 
removed by the guard, and placed in a 
strong room. 

The rebel leader then dismounted, and, 
attended by Hothbrand and several others, 
proceeded to the Baron's Hall, a noble 
chamber, which, with its three massive 



BLACKHEATH. 227 



columns and grand arches, presented a fine 
specimen of Norman architecture. 

Within this magnificent hall, where the 
-Constable had dined daily during his long 
tenure of the post, and where he had con- 
stantly entertained nobles and knights, a 
banquet was spread for the rebel leader and 
his companions. 

Before partaking of it, however, Wat 
Tyler descended to a large, gloomy dun- 
geon, situated immediately beneath the 
Baron's Hall, wherein several State 
prisoners were confined, and liberated them. 

He also caused all the other captives im- 
mured in the great tower to be set free. 

He then returned to the banquet ; and 
while he and his companions feasted, the 
castle was plundered by the insurgents and 
the townspeople. 

Two hours afterwards, the rebel army, 
now enormously augmented, quitted Eo- 

15—2 



228 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Chester, and commenced its march towards 
London. 

By Wat Tyler's express command, Sir 
John de Newtoun was furnished with a 
charger, and not even guarded, since he had 
pledged his word not to attempt escape; 
hut of course he was deprived of his arms. 

Throughout the march he maintained a 
haughty deportment, and refused to con- 
verse with his captors. 

Slow progress was made by the insur- 
gents. They stopped to plunder every 
castle and mansion on the road, putting all 
who resided there to the sword, and com- 
mitting other atrocious acts. 

All men of law, justices, and questors, 
whom they caught were beheaded, by order 
of John Ball, who told the peasants and 
serfs they would never enjoy their native 
and true liberty till all magistrates, lawyers, 
and proctors were despatched. 



BLACKHEATH. 229 



Moreover, the crafty monk commanded 
them to burn and destroy all records, evi- 
dences, court-rolls, and other muniments, 
that their landlords might not be able to 
<3laim any right hereafter. These precau- 
tions taken, they believed themselves 
secure. 

Many persons who would fain have 
avoided them, were arrested, and com- 
pelled to take the oath of fidelity to the 
league. 

Numbers of others, likewise, nocked to 
the rebel standard : men in debt flying from 
their creditors, common robbers, sturdy 
beggars, outlaws, and desperadoes of all 
sorts. 

Of such nefarious characters, whose main 
object was plunder, a considerable portion 
of the enormous host was now composed ; 
and, as may well be supposed, it required 
.great vigour and determination . on the part 



230 MERRY ENGLAND. 

of the leaders to control such an undisci- 
plined and tumultuous army. 

After a march marked by rapine and 
bloodshed, the vast insurgent host reached 
Dartford Brent, where they met the Outlaw 
and Conrad Basset and his men, returning' 
from the unsuccessful siege of Eltham 
Palace. 

Wat Tyler and John Ball were greatly 
enraged when they heard of the disaster, 
but they felt no blame could reasonably be 
attached to the Outlaw. 

Not willing to take the overwhelming; 
host into Dartford, Wat Tyler ordered a 
halt for the night on the plain; and the 
numerous purveyors having just returned 
with a plentiful supply of provisions and 
wine, the insurgents had no inducement to. 
plunder the village, but were content to* 
remain where they were. 



II. 

WAT TYLER REVISITS DARTF0RD. 




E AVINGr the army to the care of the 
Outlaw, Hothbrand, and some of 
the subordinates, the rebel leader 
rode down into the village. 

Attended by Conrad and Frideswide, and 
followed by a large mounted escort, among 
whom were Liripipe, Curthose, Grouthead, 
and others of the Dartford men, he rode 
slowly on — his banner of St. George being 
borne by Frideswide, and trumpets were 
sounded loudly as he crossed the bridge 
over the Brent. 

At the same time the bells of the church 
rang joyfully, and the priests of St. 
Eclmond's Chapel, who were alarmed for 



232 MERRY ENGLAND. 

their safety, came forth, and falling on their 
knees before him, humbly implored his 
protection. 

"Best easy, good fathers," said Wat. 
" I have said that no one in Dartford shall 
be injured in person or property, and be 
assured I will faithfully keep my word." 

Thereupon the priests, taking courage, 
arose and gave him their blessing. 

After this momentary halt, Wat Tyler 
and his followers rode on, and were greeted 
with such feeble acclamations as could be 
raised by the old folks, women, and children. 

Swollen with pride and success, and com- 
manding an enormous army that implicitly 
obeyed all his behests, Wat Tyler had 
assumed a haughty, even arrogant mien, 
very different from his former deportment. 

In fact, he scarcely looked like the same 
individual ; and when Baldock came forth 
from the hostel to salute him, he was 



BLACKHEATH. 233 



amazed by the extraordinary change in his 
appearance. The bewildered host made 
him an obeisance, as profound as he would 
have rendered to the highest noble. 

Not displeased by the homage which he 
thought his due, Wat addressed the host in 
a condescending tone. 

" Thou seest I have returned in triumph, 
Baldock," he said. " I have now seventy 
thousand brave followers on Dartford Brent 
— seventy thousand ! What dost thou 
think of that ? Ha !" 

" I think it wonderful, my lord," replied 
Baldock, again bowing obsequiousty. " Yet 
'tis only what I expected." 

" I am receiving constant accessions," 
pursued the rebel leader. " Before I reach 
London I doubt not my army will number 
a hundred thousand. Thus supported, the 
King, with whom I am about to confer, 
cannot refuse my demands." 



234 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"I account them already granted, my 
lord," rejoined Baldock. 

" Mark me, Baldock," continued Wat 
Tyler. " A week hence there will be no 
council — no chancellor — no treasurer — no- 
hierarchy — no nobles — no knights ! The 
Commonalty of England will be supreme 1" 

" And you will govern the Commonalty, 
my lord?" observed Baldock. " Of necessity 
you must exercise almost sovereign sway, 
since the King is yet too young to rule." 

"Truly, Richard will need a counsellor,, 
like myself, to attend to the welfare of the 
people," said Wat. " Whatever power I 
possess will be exerted in behalf of the 
inhabitants of Dartford. Fare thee well, 
good Baldock ; I am now about to pay a 
visit to the Prioress." 

" A word ere you depart, my lord," 
remarked the host, with some hesitation. 
"You are aware that your dame is now 



BLACKHEATH. 235 



staying at the Priory ? You may not care 
to meet her?" 

" Nay ; I must needs see her," said Wat, 
knitting his brows ; " though it will be for 
the last time !" 

As he passed the green, he threw a 
glance at the smithy, and at the cot- 
tage adjoining it. Both places were 
deserted. 

While looking at them, he thought of 
former days ; but the recollection was not 
pleasant. 

Heretofore Wat Tyler had never entered 
the court of the Priory, save on foot, and 
alone. Now, his followers filled the place. 

At his loud and peremptory summons, 
Sister Eudoxia came to the portal, looking 
dreadfully frightened. 

" Be not alarmed, good sister," he said. 
" Neither the Lady Superior nor any of the 
nuns shall be molested. None of my fol- 



236 MERRY ENGLAND. 

lowers shall enter the Priory. But I desire 
to speak with the Lady Isabel." 

" I cannot admit thee till I have consulted 
our holy mother," replied Sister Eudoxia. 

She then disappeared; but presently re- 
turned, saying that the Prioress would grant 
him an interview. 

Chancing to notice Frideswide at the 
same time, Sister Eudoxia added, "If that 
is a woman, she may enter with thee." 

Thereupon Wat Tyler and Frideswide 
dismounted, leaving their horses with 
Oonrad, and the Amazon was taken to the 
refectory by some of the nuns, who were 
struck with wonder at her gigantic stature ; 
while the rebel leader was conducted to the 
locutory, where were the Lady Isabel and 
his wife. 

The Prioress was seated in the large oak 
chair when he entered, and, being greatly 
offended by his haughty deportment and 



BLACKHEATH. 237 



overweening manner, did not rise to receive 
him. 

He scarcely noticed his wife, who gazed 
at him in astonishment, not unmingled with 
anger. 

"Holy mother, you have doubtless heard 
of the great success of the insurrection?" 
he said. 

" I have heard that the rehels under thy 
command have done much mischief, and 
plundered many religious houses," rejoined 
the Prioress, coldly. " Thou art bound in 
gratitude to respect this convent." 

" I mean to respect it," said "Wat. " I am 
come to speak to you, holymother, respecting 
Editha. I mean to take her with me." 

" Take her with thee ?" exclaimed his 
wife. " I would never consent to such a 
step. Luckily, thou canst not execute thy 
wicked design. Editha has left the convent, 
and is now under the care of the Princess." 



238 MERRY ENGLAND. 



" Under the care of the Princess 1" cried 
Wat, with a look of disappointment and 
vexation. " Thou didst wrong to part with 
her without my consent — which would have 
been refused," he added to the Prioress. 
" I had other designs for her." 

"What designs ?" demanded the Lady 
Isabel, uneasily. 

"I meant to make her Queen of Eng- 
land!" rejoined Wat. 

" Hold thy peace !" cried his wife. "Thou 
art mad to talk thus." 

"Nay; by my troth!" rejoined Wat. 
" 'Tis no visionary scheme, as you shall find. 
I will take her from the Princess, and force 
the young King to wed her!" 

"And thinkst thou, presumptuous man, 
that such an alliance will be permitted?" 
remarked the Prioress. "I tell thee no !" 

" And I say ' Yea !' " cried Wat, in a tone 
of thunder that made his listeners tremble. 



BLACKHEATH. 239 



" My word is now law, and I will have it so. 
My daughter shall be wedded to the King !" 

" Thy daughter !" exclaimed the Lady 
Isabel, indignantly. 

Then checking herself suddenly, she 
added, " Thou wilt not sacrifice her thus ! 
Were thy insane scheme carried out f it 
would be fatal to her ! " 

"Ay, truly would it," said Dame Tyler. 
*' The King would repudiate her." 

" Not while I am what I am !" rejoined 
the rebel leader, sternly. 

" Thy pride will bring thee to destruc- 
tion, thou headstrong and mistaken man !" 
said the Prioress, in a tone of severe rebuke. 
" As thou wouldst live hereafter, I charge 
thee not to meddle with Editha." 

" I am not to be turned from my fixed pur- 
pose," he rejoined. " All I have hitherto 
attempted has succeeded, and this will not 
fail. I shall wed my daughter to the King." 



240 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Disregarding his wife's prayers and en- 
treaties, and the Prioress's expressions of 
anger, he quitted the locutory, and strode 
along the corridor to the porch. 

Frideswide went forth at the same time 
with him. 

Just as he was about to mount his steed, 
his wife rushed out, exclaiming, dis- 
tractedly — 

"Wouldst cast me off, Wat? wouldst 
cast me off?" 

" Begone ! . thou art unsuited to me, 
woman !" he rejoined, harshly. 

" Unsuited or not, I will go with thee !" 
she rejoined, trying to cling to him. 

But Frideswide thrust her back ; and 
Wat Tyler, without bestowing another look 
upon the unhappy woman, rode off, and, 
followed by his attendants, returned at once 
to Dartford Brent. 



III. 



THE HERMIT S WARNING. 




SUMPTUOUS tent, part of the 
plunder of Kochester Castle, was 
pitched for Wat Tyler in the 
centre of the plain ; but, though fatigued, 
he felt little inclination for slumber, and 
after disencumbering himself of the heaviest 
portion of his armour, and placing his 
sword by his side, he merely threw hiraseli 
on the couch. 

A lamp, hanging from the top, illumined 
the interior of the tent. 

It might be about two hours after mid- 
night when Wat, who had sunk into a 
troubled doze, was roused by a noise out- 
side ; and as he started up and seized his 

VOL. II. 16 



242 MERRY ENGLAND. 

sword, the folds of the tent were drawn 
back, and Frideswide, fully armed, stood 
before him. 

" What brings thee here at this hour ?" 
demanded the rebel leader. 

" First, learn that thy drunken sentinels 
are worse than nought, being both fast 
asleep," she rejoined. "I spurned them 
with my foot, but could not wake them. 
A traitor might have slain thee sleeping, 
had he chosen." 

" To thy business," said Wat. 

"There is a holy hermit without, who 
would fain speak with thee. He calls him- 
self Friar Grawen. I discovered him 
moving, like a spectre, among the slum- 
bering host; and, finding he was seeking 
thy tent, I brought him hither." 

" Admit him. I know the holy man." 

Next moment, the hermit, who was wait- 
ing outside the tent, was introduced. 



BLACKHEATH. 243 



As he entered, he threw back his 
cowl. 

His conductress would have withdrawn, 
but "Wat Tyler bade her remain. 

" I would speak to thee alone, my son," 
said the friar. 

"It cannot be, holy brother," replied 
"Wat. " Heed not the presence of this 
courageous damsel. She can keep a secret 
.as well as a man." 

" Better," observed Frideswide. 
" Thou hearest. Say on." 
" Then blame me not if I offend thee," 
replied the hermit. " I have had a vision 
in my cell, and thy fate has been revealed 
to me." 

" My fate !" exclaimed Wat. 
"Art thou prepared to hear it?" de- 
manded the hermit, solemnly. 

" Yea," replied the rebel leader. " I 
shrink not from the knowledge." 

16— 2 



244 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"Then learn that, before another week, 
thou wilt die a bloody death !" 

A chill, as of the grave, fell upon Wat, 
and seemed to benumb his faculties. 

For nearly a minute he scarcely drew 
breath, but remained staring fixedly at the 
hermit. 

Seeing the effect produced, Frideswide 
stepped up, and shook him roughly. 

"Be thyself!" she cried. "Be not 
troubled by the foolish talk of this visionary 
friar ! I would not have brought him to 
thee had I guessed his errand. Shall I 
take him hence ?" 

" Listen to me ere thou dost dismiss 
me," said the hermit. "Quit this re- 
bellious host before daybreak, and thy life 
may yet be spared." 

" "Wilt thou do that ?" cried Frideswide, 
to the rebel leader. " Thou art not what I 
deem thee if thou wilt. Thou hast an 



BLACK HEATH. 245 



army, with which thou canst exterminate 
all the nobles of the land, and raise thee up 
a sovereignty an thou choosest. Wilt 
thou abandon it at the word of a drivelling 
friar ?" 

" No !" cried "Wat Tyler, springing to 
iis feet, and glaring fiercely at the hermit. 
'"' I see through thy design, false priest ! 
Thou art sent to fright me back by idle 
warnings. I laugh at them. I will march 
-on courageously as ever. Nor will I pause 
till I have reached the mark at which I 
aim. 

" March on, then, proud man, and meet 
thy doom," said the hermit. " I have 
warned thee." 

And he turned to depart. 

"Stay!" cried Wat. "Confess thou 
wert sent to me by the Prioress of St. 
Mary." 

" I was sent to thee by thy deserted 



246 MERRY ENGLAND. 

wife, to whom I related the vision," replied 
the hermit. 

" I guessed as much," said Wat. " Be- 
gone ! 

" Shall he be allowed to go free ?" asked 
Frideswide. 

" Ay ; and do thou convey him to the 
outskirts of the camp," replied "Wat. " I 
would not harm should come to him." 

Friar Gawen fixed an earnest, imploring 
look on the rebel leader; but seeing no 
change in his looks, he quitted the tent 
with Frideswide. 

About half an hour afterwards, "Wat 
Tyler, having put on his armour, and girded 
on his sword, went forth. 

The sentinels were still sleeping at the 
door of the tent ; but he did not disturb- 
them. 



IY. 




THE OUTLAW ACCEPTS THE COMMAND OF THE 
ESSEX BATTALION. 

T must be borne in mind that the 
season when the march of the 
rebels took place, was not far 
from midsummer, when the nights are 
shortest, and ordinarily so fine and warm, 
that there can be no great hardship in 
sleeping upon a heath without other cover 
than the sky. 

By the grey light of earliest dawn, which 
gave additional effect to the extraordinary 
picture presented to him, Wat Tyler beheld 
thousands upon thousands of peasants lying 
stretched upon the ground in every direction,. 



248 MERRY ENGLAND. 

almost the whole of the countless host being 
still buried in slumber. 

Some few were astir, and here and there 
a watch-fire was blazing, the yellow flame 
contrasting with the grey glimmer of dawn ; 
but the general appearance of the plain was 
that of an immense battle-field, thickly 
strewn with corpses of the slain. 

This idea occurred to Wat as he gazed 
-around, and filled him for a time with 
-sombre presentiments. 

Not having altogether shaken off the 
effect of the hermit's warning, he could not 
rspress the dread thought that ere a single 
week had passed that enormous host might 
be scattered and destroyed, and he himself, 
their haughty leader, gone. 

Occupied by such reflections, he almost 
insensibly quitted the camp, and was walk- 
ing slowly on, when he heard a shout 
behind him, and turning, perceived the 



BLACKHEATH. 249 



Outlaw galloping towards him, accompanied 
by two other persons on horseback, whom 
he did not recognise. 

Seeing his brother chief was in quest of 
him, he immediately stopped, and next 
moment the Outlaw and his companions 
came up. 

" I have been to thy tent," said Jack 
Straw, " and not finding thee there, have- 
come in quest of thee. A message has just 
been brought to me by our friends here, 
Eochford and Thurrock," he continued, 
pointing to the two individuals with him, 
"to the effect that ten thousand trusty 
Essex men are ready and eager to join us, 
but are unable to cross the river." 

" 'Tis true," said Eochford. 

" Since they cannot come to us, I will go 
to them," pursued Jack Straw, " and put 
myself at their head. How say you, 
brother? Have I determined aright?" 



250 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Ay, marry," replied Wat Tyler. " You 
will bring the battalion round to the north 
side of London. We shall thus completely 
environ the city." 

" Such is my design," said the Outlaw ; 
" and I had already imparted it to our friends 
here." 

Rochford and Thurrock bowed, and the 
latter said, "The vessel in which we crossed 
awaits us in Dartford Creek. Our con- 
federates are stationed near Barking." 

" My chief concern is that I cannot 
capture Eltham Palace," observed the Out- 
law. 

"The Palace will fall into our hands 
hereafter," said Wat. " I shall not waste 
time in beseiging it now." 

" Then all is settled," cried Jack Straw. 
<c To-morrow morn, if all goes well, I shall 
have brought my battalion to Hampstead 
Heath, and shall fix my tent on the highest 



BLACKHEATH. 251 



point of the hill, whence I can survey 
London, which will shortly be in our power. 
Farewell !" 

So saying, he galloped off with his com- 
panions, and dashing down the sloping 
sides of the hill, proceeded to the creek, 
where they embarked with their horses in 
the vessel waiting for them, and crossed the 
Thames to Purfleet. 



END OF VOL. II. 



LWfDOir: 

SATIIiL, EDWABD3 AND CO., PEIWIEBS, CHANDOS SIBEET 
COYBlfl GABDEIC 



MERRY ENGLAND, 



MERRY ENGLAND 



OE, 



NOBLES AND SEKFS. 



BT 

WILLIAM HARRISON AINSWORTH, 

AUTHOR OP 
"THE TOWER OF LONDON," " BOSCOBEL," ETC. 



"In order that gentlemen and others may take example and correct wicked 
rebels, I will most amply detail how this business was conducted." 

Fboissaet. 



IN THEEE VOLUMES. 
VOL. I. 



LONDON: 

TINSLEY BROTHERS, 8, CATHERINE STREET, STRAND. 

1874. 

[Right of Translation reserved by the Author.'] 



LONDON: 

SAVIIX, BDWABDS AND CO., PEINIEBS, CHANDOS STEBBT, 

COVENT GARDEN. 



TO 



KALPH FAWSETT AINSWOBTH, M.D. 



F.E.C.P.E., F.L.S., 

ETC. ETC. 




NOW fulfil a promise, long ago 
made to myself, to dedicate a 
book to you. 
Accept from me, therefore, this Story of 
the Conspiracy and Insurrection of the Serfs 
in 1381 — an outbreak as remarkable for 
the rapidity of its progress, as for its sudden 
and complete suppression. 

Had the Eebellion been successful, in the 
opinion of Froissart, who, as a contemporary, 
was well able to judge, the nobles and 



VI DEDICATION. 



gentlemen of England would have entirely 
disappeared. 

It is quite certain that the citizens of 
London were favourably disposed to the 
insurgents, and willing to aid them. 
" They are our friends," they said to the 
Lord Mayor, " and what they are doing is 
for our good." But the hour of freedom 
was not come for the villeins. Another 
century of servitude had to be borne. 
Quoth old Thomas of Walsingham, ad- 
dressing the serfs on the unsuccessful revolt, 
" Villeins you were, and still are, and in 
bondage ye shall remain." Rustici quidem 
Juistis, et estis, et in bondagio permanebitis. 

All the terms granted to the rebellious 
serfs by Eichard IT. in his hour of peril 
were revoked, and his grants of pardon and 
enfranchisement broken and annulled. 



DEDICATION. Vll 



When the young king asked the nobles 
if they would sign charts of freedom for the 
serfs, they exclaimed indignantly, " Heaven 
forbid ! Eather than sign such charts, we 
would all perish in a single day! Better 
lose life than our heritages !" 

Eroissart, Thomas of "Walsingham, 
Henry Knyghton, Grafton, Holinshed, and 
Stow have furnished the materials of this 
Tale, which pretends to be little more than 
a picturesque chronicle. 

Such as it is, I offer it to you, in remem- 
brance of past days ! 

Ere saying adieu, let me congratulate 
you on your recent noricultural triumph. 

Several years' patience, only to be endured 
by an enthusiast, have been rewarded by 
the production of a perfectly new, and ex- 
quisitely beautiful hybrid orchid, described 



Vlll DEDICATION. 



as a "large, lovely white flower of great 
elegance of form, and with plum-coloured 
lip," and which justly merits the name 
conferred upon it of Dendrobium Jinsworthii. 
Compared with this, what is a literary 
success ! 

Your affectionate Cousin, 

W. Harrison Ainsworth. 



Little Rockley, Hurstpierpoint. 




CONTENTS 



OF 



THE FIRST VOLUME. 



BOOK I. 

THE INSUEBECTTON. 

PAGE 
I. THE SMITH, THE FRIAR, AND THE OUTLAW 3 

II. EDITHA 20 

III. OF THE INTERVIEW ON DARTFORD BRENT . 34 

IV. HOW THE PRINCESS OF WALES VISITED THE 

PRIORESS OF ST. MARY AND ST. MARGARET 50 

V. THE PRIORESS OF ST. MART AND ST. MAR- 
GARET, DARTFORD 59 

VI. OF THE COUNSEL GIVEN BY THE LADY ISABEL 

TO THE PRINCESS 64 

VII. THE LAPIS LAZULI TABLET 73 

VIII. OF THE ROUGH RESPONSE MADE TO SIR JOHN 

HOLLAND BY THE SMITH 81 

IX. ST. edmond's CHAPEL 92 

X. THE LOMBARD MERCHANT 96 

XI. THE TAX-COLLECTOR 104 

XII. MARK CLEAVER, ELIAS LIRIPIPE, AND JOS- 
BERT GROUTHEAD 109 

XIII. GEOFFREY CHAUCER 1]4 

XIV. SEDITIOUS TALK BENEATH THE OAK . . .126. 
XV. WHAT PASSED BETWEEN CHAUCER AND EDITHA 135 



X CONTENTS. 



PAGE 
XVI. THE EREMITE 141 

XVII. MYSTERIOUS TRAVELLERS ARRIVE AT THE 

HOSTEL 145 

XVIII. THE SMITH AT THE SMITHY 153 

XIX. THE HERMITAGE 158 

XX. SHOWING WHO SENT THE CASKET . . .165 
XXI. THE RESCUE 170 

XXII. EDITHA DISTRUSTS HER DELIVERER . . . 174 

XXIII. A SUDDEN QUARREL 178 

XXIV. MESSER BENEDETTO IS CAPTURED BY THE 

ROBBERS 186 

XXV. THE HOUR APPROACHES 191 

XXVI. THE SIGNAL 197 

XXVII. THE INSURGENTS MARCH OUT OF DARTFORD 203 

XXVIII. THE MARCH TO ROCHESTER 211 

XXIX. FROM ROCHESTER TO HARBLEDOWN . . . 218 

XXX. THE REBEL CHIEFS HOLD A CONFERENCE WITH 

THE PRINCESS 225 

XXXI. SIR JOHN HOLLAND AND HIS COMPANIONS 

TAKE REFUGE IN THE ARCHBISHOP'S PALACE 233 

XXXII. FRIAR NOSROCK AND THE BAN-DOGS . . . 240 

XXXIII. THE HOSTEL IN MERCERY LANE .... 246 

XXXIV. THE SIEGE OF THE ARCHBISHOP'S PALACE . 254 



BOOK I. 



THE INSUKRECTIOK 



VOL. I. 



MERRY ENGLAND; 



OB, 



NOBLES AND SEEFS. 



THE SMITH, THE FRIAR, AND THE OUTLAW. 




T the pleasant village of Dartford, 
in Kent, in 1381, and in the fifth 
of Eichard II., there dwelt a smith 
named Wat Tyler. 

Somewhat above the middle height, and 
very powerfully built, he had a broad, manly 
visage, characterized by a stern expression, 
and his deep-set eyes possessed a latent fire 
very easily kindled. His dark locks were 
clipped close to his head, so as to reveal a 

1—2 



MERRY ENGLAND. 



massive brow, but his beard was busby and 
overgrown. 

The smith's ordinary apparel was well 
calculated to display his stalwart frame, and 
consisted of a coarse, brown serge tunic, 
with skirts reaching below the girdle, long 
russet hose, and sandals fastened with 
thongs. 

When he went forth he put on a hood 
that covered his head, neck, and shoulders, 
and only left the face visible. Attached to 
his girdle were a pouch and a dagger, the 
latter being of his own manufacture. 

It was a sight to see the lusty smith in 
his leather apron, with his brawny arms 
bared to the shoulders, making the sparks 
fly as he beat the glowing iron on the anvil. 
When surrounded by his men, most of whom 
were built on his own robust model, he 
looked like Vulcan amid the Cyclops. 

Wat Tyler was in the prime of manhood, 



THE INSURRECTION, 



not being more than forty. He was mar- 
ried, and had one child, a daughter, whom 
he loved as the apple of his eye. Bough 
with all others, he was ever gentle with her. 

He had not always been a smith. In his 
younger days he was an archer, and drew as 
strong a bow as a Sherwood forester. A 
vassal of Sir Eustace de Valletort, he formed 
part of the train of that noble knight, and 
accompanied his lord to the wars in France 
and Bretagne. In some rude encounters 
with the enemy, he had the good fortune to 
attract the notice both of the Black Prince 
and the Duke of Lancaster. Severely 
wounded at the siege of Eennes, he was left 
for dead, but recovered, and eventually re- 
turned with Sir Eustace to England. 

At this period all the peasants were serfs, 
being unable to abandon the small portion 
of land which they cultivated, or quit the 
service of their lords, who could compel 



6 MERRY ENGLAND. 

them to follow them to the wars, or sell 
them with their habitations, their cattle, 
their implements of labour, and their fami- 
lies. In short, the villeins, as they were 
termed, were in the same wretched state of 
bondage that they had been after the Con- 
quest ; freedom being rarely granted save on 
payment of a heavy fine„ 

When Wat Tyler went to the wars he 
was a bondman, but on his return, in con- 
sideration of his good service, he was eman- 
cipated by his lord, and enabled to establish 
himself as a smith at his native village of 
Dartford. Being skilful at his work, he 
found plenty of employment; and it was 
said that he could make a stronger breast- 
plate and a better skull-cap than any 
armourer in Kent. 

But though he had little reason to com- 
plain, Wat was a discontented man. Of 
late he had become more sullen than hereto- 



THE INSURRECTION. 



fore, and seemed brooding over some secret 
wrong. Could we penetrate the inmost 
recesses of his breast, we should find it 
occupied by fierce and turbulent thoughts, 
by intense hatred of the noble and the rich, 
by a burning desire of vengeance upon the 
oppressors of the people, and by a fixed 
determination to divide all property among 
the lower classes, should the great revolt 
of the commonalty, which he felt assured 
would speedily take place, be crowned with 
success. 

Ever since the accession of Richard II. 
to the throne, in 1377, strong symptoms 
of popular agitation had been manifest, 
though they had been disregarded by the 
nobles, who felt secure of their power ; but 
now the storm that had so long been brew- 
ing seemed likely to burst, and with extra- 
ordinary fury. 

The youthful monarch, who was now in 



8 MERRY ENGLAND. 

his sixteenth year, was governed by his 
uncles, the Duke of Lancaster and the Earls 
of Cambridge and Buckingham, subse- 
quently created Dukes of Cambridge and 
Gloucester, and their exactions and severity 
had exasperated the people almost beyond 
endurance. 

Moreover, Eichard had several rapacious 
favourites, the chief among them being 
his two half-brothers, the Earl of Kent 
and Sir John Holland, the Earls of 
Salisbury, Warwick, and Suffolk, and Sir 
Eichard le Scrope, steward of the house- 
hold ; and these helped to drain the royal 
exchequer, which needed constant reple- 
nishment. 

Added to all, in consequence of the conti- 
nual and fruitless wars with France, the 
expenses of the nobles and knights, who 
vied with each other in the number and 
splendour of their trains, were excessive, 



THE INSURRECTION. 9 

and could only be maintained by repeated 
exactions from the serfs. 

At length the miserable peasants deter- 
mined to throw off the yoke under which 
they laboured. Secret meetings took place 
among them in several parts of Kent and 
Essex, and a great league of the commons 
was formed for the purpose of compelling 
the nobles, knights, and gentlemen to re- 
nounce the privileges they had so shame- 
fully abused. 

A mysterious mode of communication was 
devised, by means of which the members of 
the association could correspond with each 
other without danger of discovery. 

The chief contriver of this extensive and 
dangerous conspiracy was Wat Tyler, who 
aspired to be the leader of the insurrection, 
and, from his daring and resolute character, 
he seemed well fitted for the post. 

One of Wat Tyler's confederates in the re- 



10 MERRY ENGLAND. 

volutionary scheme, and who lent the sedi- 
tious smith great aid, was a Franciscan friar, 
named John Ball, a professed disciple of the 
great religious reformer, John Wycliffe, whose 
doctrines were then extremely popular. 

Clad in his grey gown, and girded with a 
cord, the barefooted friar went from village 
to village throughout Kent, preaching 
equality, the necessity of a general partition 
of property, and the abolition of the ecclesi- 
astical hierarchy. 

" My good friends," he said to the peasants 
who collected to hear him, " things cannot 
go on well in England, nor ever will, until 
everything shall be in common ; when there 
shall neither be vassal nor lord, and all dis- 
tinctions levelled ; when the lords shall be 
no more masters than ourselves. How ill 
have they used us ! and for what reason do 
they hold us in bondage ? Are we not all 
descended from the same parents, Adam and 



THE INSURRECTION. 11 

Eve ? And what can they show, and what 
reason give, why they should be more the 
masters than we ourselves ? They are 
clothed in velvets and rich stuffs, ornamented 
with ermine and other furs, while we are 
forced to wear poor cloth. They have wines, 
spices, and fine bread, when we have only 
rye, and water to drink. We are called 
slaves, and if we do not perform our services 
we are beaten. Let us go to the King, who 
is young, and remonstrate with him on our 
servitude, telling him we must have it other- 
wise, or we shall find a remedy for it our- 
selves." 

Inflammatory preaching like this, ad- 
dressed to an ignorant peasantry, half- 
maddened by the cruelty and injustice with 
which they were treated, could not fail to 
produce the effect intended. 

All who listened to the factious monk re- 
solved to shake off their chains, and be free. 



12 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Not content with haranguing the peasants, 
John Ball sent a letter secretly to the head 
man in each village, couched in the follow- 
ing terms : — 

" John Ball greets you well; 
Soon you'll hear the signal bell. 
When it sounds, rise suddenly : 
And, as you would freemen be, 
Hold together steadfastly, 
In brotherhood and unity. 
Nothing fear, 
The end is near — 
The end you hope for — Liberty." 

John Ball's proceedings, not being con- 
ducted with sufficient caution, came to the 
knowledge of the Archbishop of Canterbury, 
who caused him to be arrested. 

The Archbishop looked upon him as a 
half-crazed enthusiast, affected by the heresies 
of "Wycliffe, but had no idea of the mischief 
he was doing, or he would have put him to 
death. As it was he imprisoned him in the 
barbacan of the old castle of Canterbury, 



THE INSURRECTION. 13 

destroyed by Louis of France in the time of 
King John. 

Another important member of the league, 
but of a very different stamp from the friar, 
was an outlaw and captain of robbers, whose 
real name was Guibald le Mauduit, though 
he had assumed the appellation of Jack 
Straw. 

Having been guilty of a trespass on a 
royal forest in the reign of Edward III. — in 
other words, of killing deer, a heinous offence 
in those days, and punishable with death — 
Guibald fled to avoid the consequences of 
his act, and, since he could not be captured, 
he was outlawed, and a price set on his 
head. 

He was soon joined by several marauders, 
fugitives from justice like himself; and, 
being superior to the rest of his lawless 
companions, was chosen as their leader ; and 
a very determined leader he proved, and 



14 MERRY ENGLAND. 

enforced the strictest obedience to his 
commands. 

Jack Straw and his band speedily became 
the terror of all travellers in Kent ; and, to 
avoid being plundered, the numerous 
pilgrims to the shrine of St. Thomas a 
Becket, at Canterbury, were obliged to be 
guarded by an escort. 

But the robber-chief modelled his conduct 
on that of another renowned outlaw, Robin 
Hood ; and while he despoiled the rich with- 
out scruple, he gave very liberally to the 
poor. Hence he had always spies to tell him 
of the approach of a party of travellers, or to 
warn him of danger ; and though his retreat 
was well known, it was never discovered by 
the officers of justice. 

For seven years Jack Straw had now been 
master of the road between Blackheath and 
Canterbury, and made every traveller he 
could lay hands upon pay .toll. 

Almost as soon as an insurrection of the 



THE INSURRECTION. 15 

Kentish peasants was planned, Jack Straw- 
heard of the plot, and immediately sent a 
faithful messenger to "Wat Tyler, offering to 
join the league, and engaging to bring his 
followers with him. 

The proposal was eagerly accepted; and 
shortly afterwards a secret meetirjg took 
place between the smith and the Outlaw r , 
who were well pleased with each other. 

Their feelings were in common. They 
both hated the nobility, and burnt to avenge 
the wrongs inflicted on the serfs. Both 
desired to level all distinctions of rank, and 
partition all property among the people. 
And this was singular in the case of Gruibald 
le Mauduit, for, though an outcast, he really 
belonged to a noble family. 

Before separating, each confederate drew 
his dagger, pierced his left arm, and, as 
blood flowed from the puncture, they vowed 
eternal fidelity to each other. 

Guibald le Mauduit, or Jack Straw, as we 



16 MERRY ENGLAND. 

shall henceforth style him, was some ten 
years younger than the burly smith. Tall 
and well-proportioned, he had a spare but 
sinewy frame, and was exceedingly active; 
being so swift of foot that he could keep up 
with a horse at full gallop. More than once 
he had owed his safety to his remarkable 
fleetness. 

Jack Straw was by no means ill favoured, 
but his countenance had a sinister expres- 
sion. His complexion was excessively 
swarthy — so swarthy as to suggest that the 
skin must be stained by walnut juice. 

Be this as it may, his dark visage, lighted 
up by a pair of fiercely-flashing eyes, was 
calculated to inspire terror. His raven locks 
hung down in disorder ; and a shaggy beard, 
of the same hue, clothed his chin. 

The daring Outlaw usually rode a powerful 
black charger, taken from the Sire de Gom- 
megines, as that baron was on his way to 



THE INSURRECTION. 17 

visit the young King at the Palace of 
Shene ; and all his men were well mounted, 
for they found no difficulty in providing 
themselves with steeds. They were, like- 
wise, well armed; some with cross-bows, 
some with long bows. 

Their leader wore a doublet of Kendal 
green, with a horn slung over his shoulders 
by a green baldrick ; and on his head was a 
small cap, with a heron's feather stuck in it. 
Boots of supple leather, fitting close to the 
leg, and ascending above the knee, completed 
his picturesque costume. He was armed 
with a broad-bladed sword and poniard, 
and a small battle-axe was affixed to his 
saddle. 

Appended to his neck by a slender chain, 
but entirely concealed by his jerkin, was a 
small silver case, containing a single straw, 
brought from the dungeon of St. Peter, at 
Koine. Prom this straw, which he devoutly 

vol. i. 2 



18 MERRY ENGLAND. 

believed would shield him from a violent 
death, the Outlaw took his name. 

When John Ball was arrested by the 
Archbishop of Canterbury, Jack Straw found 
means of communicating with him in his 
prison, and undertook to deliver him ; but 
the friar bade him not trouble himself 
about him, saying that his work was done, 
and that it would be time enough to set him 
free when the general rising took place. 

It was clear that the outbreak could not 
long be delayed, for the ferment among the 
people had been heightened by another most 
obnoxious measure. 

A poll-tax of three groats was imposed 
upon every person, male and female, through- 
out the kingdom, above fifteen years of age ; 
and as it was foreseen that there would be 
great difficulty in collecting this tax, it was 
farmed to a rich company of Lombard mer- 
chants, then resident in the City of London. 



THE INSURRECTION. 19 

As might be expected, these merchants 
proceeded most rigorously ; and employed 
the roughest collectors they could find, en- 
joining them to let none escape who were 
liable to the tax. 

The collectors set about their task with 
zeal ; and everywhere complaints arose from 
the people of the brutal usage- they expe- 
rienced from them. 

Wat Tyler heard of these murmurs with 
secret [satisfaction. The more the peasants 
were exasperated, the better it served his 
purpose. 

As yet no collector of the poll-tax had 
visited Dartford ; but its turn would soon 
come, and then a disturbance might be 
expected. 



2—2 



II. 



E D I T H A. 




DITHA, the smith's daughter, was 
now verging upon fifteen, and, 
though her charms were not fully- 
developed, she gave promise of remarkable 
beauty. 

Her lineaments were delicately moulded ; 
her eyes blue and limpid, and arched over 
by dark, pencilled brows ; while her tresses 
were light and fleecy. 

She had neither the look nor the manner 
of a rustic maiden ; nor did she bear any 
personal resemblance to either of her parents. 
But it will not be wondered at that her 
manner should be superior to her condition, 



THE INSURRECTION. 21 

when we mention that she had been most 
carefully instructed by the prioress of St. 
Mary and St. Margaret, who took especial 
interest in her. 

So much effect had the good prioress's 
teaching and discourses produced upon the 
smith's daughter, that the villagers declared 
that she would end by becoming a nun. 

Dame Tyler was three or four years 
younger than her husband, and still comely. 
She was rather inclined to gossip with her 
neighbours ; and so little reliance had Wat 
Tyler in her discretion, that he kept her in 
complete ignorance of the plot in which he 
was engaged. 

On Whit-Monday morn, in the year pre- 
viously mentioned — and a most lovely morn 
it was — a young damsel issued from the 
Priory gate, and took her way beneath the 
trees towards the village. 

Her footstep was as light as that of a 



22 MERRY ENGLAND. 

fawn ; and as she tripped along the path, 
ever and anon pausing to listen to the 
carolling of the birds, a smile of happiness 
played upon her charming countenance. 

No fairer creature was abroad on that 
delightful morning than this young damsel. 
As some old folks who watched her thought, 
she was an object to gladden the eye. 

Her simple attire suited her well. She 
wore a hood and wimple. Her kirtle was 
of scarlet sendall, but not too long to hide 
her small laced buskins. From the girdle 
that spanned her slender waist hung a 
osary of red beads ; and she was likewise 
provided with an aulmoniere, or silken 
purse, which had been given her by Prioress 
Isabel. In her hand she carried a mass- 
book. 

As she moved on she met several village 
maidens, most of them a few years older 
than herself, but none half so fair. 



i 



THE INSURRECTION. 23 

All of them greeted her, and some stopped 
for a moment to exchange a few words with 
her. 

" Grive you good morrow, gentle Editha !" 
cried one of these maidens, a comely damsel 
of nineteen, with a ripe cherry lip and eyes 
black as a sloe, who was carrying a pail of 
milk to the Priory. " You will come to the 
sports this afternoon, I hope ? All the lads 
of the village will be on the green. They 
are now dressing the May-pole with garlands 
and flowers, and a band of minstrels from 
Eochester arrived last night at the ' Bull.' 
There will be dancing and mumming, and 
no lack of cakes and Whitsun ale." 

Thus spoke Marjory, the milkmaid, a 
damsel who had many admirers; and she 
ended by a loud laugh, that displayed her 
white teeth. 

But Editha replied, rather gravely, " The 
Lady Prioress has given me permission to 



24 MERRY ENGLAND. 



view the sports, so I shall come to the green 
with my mother ; but I don't think I shall 
take any part in them." 

" Ah, you'll change your mind when you 
hear the merry sound of the tabor and pipe !" 
said Marjory, again laughing. 

"I scarcely think so," replied Editha. 
" I'm sure the Lady Prioress wouldn't ap- 
prove of my dancing." 

" She wont inflict a very severe penance 
upon you," returned Marjory ; " and if you 
mean to take the vow, I would advise you 
to enjoy yourself while you can." 

" I have no intention of becoming a nun," 
rejoined Editha. " But I wont do anything 
to incur Lady Isabel's displeasure." 

" No wonder you're such a favourite with 
her," cried Marjory, rather spitefully. 

And she went off with her pail. 

As Editha pursued her way homewards 
she had to pass the green, in the midst of 
which stood the May -pole. 



THE INSURRECTION. 25 

Already adorned with garlands and ropes 
of flowers, as Marjory the milkmaid had 
stated, it looked very pretty ; and as she 
stopped for a moment to gaze at it, several 
young rustics hastened towards her; but 
she started off again instantly, and left 
them. 

Erom the aspect of the usually quiet vil- 
lage, any one might have known it was a 
fete day. The church bells were ringing 
joyous peals, and other enlivening sounds 
were heard. 

Preparations for merry-making and festi- 
vity at a later hour seemed to be going on 
at many of the picturesque habitations that 
formed the long, straggling street leading 
to the wooden bridge across the silver 
Parent. 

The chief hostel in the village bore the 
sign of the " Bull," as does the large, com- 
fortable inn that has succeeded it. In 
front of the " Bull" stood the little band 



26 MERRY ENGLAND. 

of minstrels of whom the milkmaid had 
spoken. 

Tall, strong-looking fellows, not much 
like ordinary minstrels, they were provided 
with cornet, tabor, and fife. Though urged 
to play by the crowd collected around, 
they declined to do so till the sports 
began. 

Like the rest of the villagers, Wat Tyler 
seemed disposed to give himself a holiday. 
He did not put out the fire of his forge ; 
but left his men in charge of the smithy, in 
case they should be called upon to shoe a 
horse, or do some other work that could 
not be delayed. 

Having put on his hood and tunic, he 
was preparing to sally forth, when he met 
his daughter at the door. 

" Are you going out for a walk, father ?" 
she asked. " If so, pray take me with 
you." 

" I am going to Dartford Brent," he 



THE INSURRECTION. 27 

replied. " You had better go in to your 
mother." 

But Editha would not be denied. 

"That is just the walk I should like," 
she said. "I want to gather some wild 
thyme on the downs, and the morning is 
charming. I must go." 

The smith would rather have been with- 
out her, but he could not resist her look, 
and they went on together. 

Many an eye followed them as they walked 
along ; and not a few of the beholders were 
struck by the contrast offered by Wat's 
burly frame to the slight and graceful figure 
of his daughter. 

In the market-place there were a few 
women with baskets, containing eggs, butter, 
and honey ; and others with pigeons, ducks, 
goslings, and freshly-caught trout, for which 
the Darent was renowned, and they all 
gathered round the smith ; but he made no 
purchases. 



28 MERRY ENGLAND. 

When he drew near the " Bull," one of 
the minstrels we have described made a sign, 
and having caught Wat's eye, pointed to- 
wards the eastern downs. 

The smith nodded his head, to signify 
that he understood what was meant, and 
marched on with his daughter. 

They were now in St. Edmund's Way, so 
called from the chantry of St. Edmund 
Martyr, which stood there. Of such, pecu- 
liar sanctity was this ancient chapel, that it 
was always visited by the pilgrims to Can- 
terbury. The priests were now saying mass 
in the chantry, and Editha would fain have 
had her father enter, and join them in their 
devotions, but he heeded not her request. 

A little further on was the church, and 
here again mass was being celebrated. Once 
more Wat turned a deaf ear to his daughter's 
entreaties to him to go in, and hastened to 
cross the wooden bridge over the Darent. 



THE INSURRECTION. 29 

Leaning for a moment over the rails, he saw 
the trout darting past beneath, and pointed 
them out to Editha. 

They now began to climb the steep side 
of the hill, which was overgrown with juni- 
per, and when they gained the brow of the 
eminence a lovely prospect burst upon them. 
Both, of course, were familiar with the 
view, yet they regarded it with as much 
delight as if they beheld it for ths first time. 
The bright sunshine that lighted up the 
picture enhanced its beauty. 

In the midst of a wide valley, watered by 
the silver Darent, and by another clear trout 
stream, called the Cray, and bounded on 
either side by a range of downs, lay the 
pretty and picturesque village of Dartford. 
Even then, it was not a very small village, 
and boasted, as we have shown, a church, a 
priory, and a chantry, the two latter being 
in great repute. 



30 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Indeed, Lady Isabel, the Prioress of St. 
Mary's, of whom we have already spoken, 
and several . of the nuns, belonged to noble 
families. 

The priory, which had only been founded 
some five-and-twenty years before the date 
of our story by Edward III., was a large 
pile, built of brick, situated at the foot of a 
softly-sloping hill at the north-west of the 
village. In the wood near the priory was a 
hermitage. 

Almost immediately beneath those who 
gazed upon the prospect were the chantry 
and the church, with the Darent flowing on 
through the valley, till it was joined by the 
Cray, when their combined waters formed a 
creek, deep enough to serve as a harbour 
for small vessels trading with London. 

Water-mills there were on both streams ; 
but paper-mills and powder-mills were, of 
course, unknown. 



THE INSURRECTION. 31 

At a short distance beyond the creek we 
have just described could be seen the 
Thames ; the woody heights on the opposite 
shore belonged to Essex. 

On the left the view was circumscribed 
by a number of hills, most of them covered 
with woods, amidst which, here and there, 
could be distinguished the turrets and cas- 
tellated walls of some Norman mansion. 

At that early period the original aspect 
of the country was almost unchanged. Much 
land was uncultivated, and not even cleared ; 
vast tracts being still covered by primaeval 
forests. 

Beyond the down, on which Wat Tyler 
and his daughter stood, contemplating the 
lovely scene we have attempted to describe, 
stretched a flat, heathy plain, called Dartford 
Brent. 

It was skirted on the right by a thick 
wood, which was thought to harbour rob- 



32 MERTtY ENGLAND. 

bers ; lor several travellers journejdng by 
that road to Rochester, or coming thence to 
Dartford, had been plundered of late. 

Editha was somewhat surprised, therefore, 
when her father told her he was going on to 
a short distance by himself, and bade her sit 
down on the turf, and read her mass-book 
till his return. 

Without waiting for an answer, he set off 
at a quick pace in the direction of the wood ; 
but he had not got far, when a band of 
armed men issued from the thicket, and rode 
towards him. 

From the wild appearance of these men, 
who were about a dozen in number, Editha 
could not doubt they were robbers ; but it 
was evident her father had no cause for 
apprehension, for the leader of the band, 
who was mounted on a powerful black horse, 
signed to his followers to halt, and gallop- 
ing up to the smith, greeted him in a very 
friendly manner. 



THE INSURRECTION. 33 

Editha was confounded at the sight. 

She was reluctant to believe that her 
father would hold any intercourse with the 
captain of a band of robbers ; yet there he 
was, standing close to the suspicious-looking 
horseman, and conversing amicably with 
him. 




VOL. i. 



III. 




OF THE INTERVIEW ON DARTFORD BRENT. 

ACK STEAW— for it was he 
whom Editha beheld conversing 
with her father — was urgent that 
the signal for revolt should be given. 

" I cannot see what is to be gained 
by further delay," he said to the smith. 
" Everywhere the people are ready to rise, 
and as soon as the standard of rebellion is 
raised, thousands will join it. In Essex 
there has already been an outbreak. Two 
of my emissaries have just returned from 
Brentwood, with the news that the men of 
Fobbing have put to flight the Chief Justice 
of the Common Pleas, and have slain the 
jurymen and clerks, and stuck their heads 



THE INSURRECTION. 35 



on poles. The whole country will soon be 
in a flame." 

"This occurred at Fobbing, you say?" 
remarked Wat Tyler. 

"Only yesterday," replied the Outlaw. 
" Thomas de Bampton, the tax commis- 
sioner, has been holding a court of taxation 
at Brentwood; but the men of Fobbing 
refused to attend him, and the Chief Justice 
came down to punish them. But they have 
punished him. Shall we not follow their 
example ?" 

"They have had a pretext, which we 
want," observed the smith. 

"But the opportunity ought not to be 
neglected," pursued the Outlaw. "The 
King's three uncles are absent. John of 
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, who governs in 
his youthful nephew's name, and whom we 
have most reason to dread, is at Eoxburgh, 
seeking to make a truce with the Scots. He 

3—2 



36 MERRY ENGLAND. 

cannot return. Then the Earl of Cambridge 
is at Plymouth, preparing to set sail to 
Lisbon, with five hundred men-at-arms, and 
five hundred archers, to aid the King of 
Portugal against the King of Castile. The 
Earl of Buckingham is in Wales. Not one 
of the three is likely to interfere with 
us. 

" There is no one to resist us, unless it be 
the King's half-brother, the Earl of Kent," 
observed "Wat Tyler ; " and he will not be 
able to raise an army, for the nobles hate 
him, and will not serve under him." 

'•'Our march to London will be almost 
unopposed," said the Outlaw ; " and when 
we arrive there, the citizens will open their 
gates, and give us a hearty welcome." 

" Nay, of a surety, we shall have the 
Lord Mayor, William Walworth, against 
us," said Wat Tyler. " Moreover, Sir John 
Philpot, who levied war on his own account, 



THE INSURRECTION. 37 

and got reprimanded by the council for his 
pains, will stand by the King. That we 
shall be masters of London in the end, I 
nothing doubt ; but we must dispose of 
Walworth and Philpot, and many others, 
before we shall be secure. You ask me why 
I hesitate to give the signal for the insur- 
rection when all is ready, and the moment 
seems propitious. I have delayed because 
the poll tax is goading the people to mad- 
ness, as this outbreak in Essex proves, and 
I want them to be thoroughly roused. They 
will not then turn back. Besides, we have 
a duty to perform. We must be true to our 
friends. Before the rising in this county 
takes place, John Ball must be delivered 
from prison, or he will be put to death by 
the Archbishop of Canterbury. Were that 
to happen, it would be an eternal reproach 
to us, since he is the chief contriver of the 
plot." 



38 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" The barbacan in which he is confined is 
strongly guarded, or I should have already 
liberated him," rejoined Jack Straw. " But 
I will make another attempt." 

"His deliverance will be best accom- 
plished by stratagem," remarked Wat Tyler. 
" As I came hither, I noticed that some of 
your band are in the village, disguised as 
minstrels." 

"I thought you might want assistance 
in the event of some sudden emergency, so 
I sent Hugo Morcar and three others 
to attend your orders. You will have a 
grand company of pilgrims in Dartford 
to-day." 

" And you mean to wait for them here — 
eh ?" cried Wat Tyler. 

"No," replied the Outlaw; "I shall not 
attack them. 'Tis the Princess of Wales — 
the King's mother — who is making a pil- 



THE INSURRECTION. 39 

grimage to Canterbury. She will be at- 
tended by all her ladies, and escorted by her 
second son, Sir John Holland, and a large 
retinue of nobles and knights." 

" Indeed !" exclaimed Wat Tyler. " Could 
you not follow the train to Canterbury? 
Perchance you might find some means of 
liberating John Ball." 

" I will think the matter over," replied 
the Outlaw. " The attempt will be fraught 
with danger, but I care not for that. If 
aught should occur to you, send a mes- 
sage to me by Morcar. He will know where 
to find me." 

" Grood !" said the smith. " Know you 
at what hour the Princess of Wales may be 
expected at Dartford ?" 

"Early in the day," rejoined the other. 
"She purposes reaching Canterbury to- 
night." 



40 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"You are well informed." 

" Ay ; few persons travel by this road 
without my hearing of them. The Princess 
rested yesterday at the Palace at Eltham, 
and meant to start on her pilgrimage be- 
times. On arriving at Dartford, she will 
visit the Lady Isabel at the priory, and 
pay her devotions at the chantry of Edmund 
the Martyr." 

" You know more than the people of 
Dartford themselves. I question much if 
the Lady Isabel is aware of the honour 
intended her. My daughter has just come 
from the priory, and she heard nothing of 
the Princess's visit." 

"Here comes your daughter," said the 
Outlaw, directing his attention to Editha, 
who was speeding towards them. " She has 
something to tell you." 

" She ought not lo have quitted the spot 
where I left her," said the smith, frowning. 



THE INSURRECTION. 41 

Bidding his confederate a hasty adieu, he 
was about to depart, when Editha, who ran 
with great swiftness, came up. 

"Wat Tyler looked angry, but the Outlaw 

was glad of the opportunity afforded him of 

exchanging a word with the fair damsel. 

He did not ride off, therefore, as Wat 
hoped he would, but saluted her respect- 

fully. 

" Give you good day, fair maiden," he 
said, with a smile that sat very ill on his 
grim visage. 

Editha returned his salutation, but not 
without visible embarrassment, for she 
could not conceal the mingled terror and 
aversion with which he inspired her. 

In reply to her father, who chided her for 
disobeying his injunctions, she said, "I 
thought you would like to know that some 
great persons have just arrived at the vil- 
lage. There was quite a long cavalcade of 



42 MERRY ENGLAND. 

nobles, knights, esquires, and ladies, one of 
whom was magnificently attired, and rode 
a richly-trapped palfrey. I could see her 
quite distinctly from where I stood on the 
brow of the hill. The ladies with her 
looked younger than she did, but were not 
so richly dressed, though they all wore silks 
and velvets; but her apparel glittered in 
the sunshine like gold. A thought crossed 
me that it might be the King's mother, the 
Princess of Wales." 

" You guessed rightly, fair damsel," ob- 
served the Outlaw, nothing abashed by the 
coldness with which Editha regarded him ; 
" it was the Princess of Wales. Her 
Highness is performing a pilgrimage to 
Canterbury." 

" The Lady Isabel has always told me 
the Princess is very devout and good, and 
passes much time in prayer," said Editha. 
And she added, earnestly, " I hope St. Ed- 



THE INSURRECTION. 43 

mund and St. Thomas, and all good saints, 
will watch over her, and guard her from 
every danger — especially from robbers who 
may lie in ambush to fall upon her." 

" Her Highness has too strong an escort 
with her, as you may have remarked, fair 
damsel, to be in any danger from robbers," 
rejoined the Outlaw. " But were she wholly 
unattended, I am sure no one would molest 
her." 

" I am glad to hear you say so," observed 
Editha. " The widow of the Black Prince, 
and the mother of the King, ought to be safe 
everywhere in England." 

" Go to, child ; the Princess is not the 
friend of the people," observed Wat Tyler, 
sternly. 

" Nay, dear father, I have heard quite the 
contrary," replied Editha. " The Prioress, 
who always speaks truth, says she is very 
compassionate and charitable, distributes 



44 MERRY ENGLAND. 

large alms among the poor, and would 
redress all grievances if she could." 

" She must have some influence over her 
royal son," said Wat Tyler. " Why does she 
not induce him to make all men free — to 
relieve them from the tyranny of the nobles 
— to mete out even justice — and to lessen 
the taxes ? If she did this, the people would 
bless her." 

" She does all she can, I doubt not, dear 
father. But the young King may have ill 
counsellors." 

" Ay, marry has be ; but they will be 
speedily removed." 

" Do you mean that he will be forced to 
dismiss them, father?" 

" Mark my words, child. Ere a month 
shall have passed, the young King will 
have other and better counsellors ; who will 
tell him plainly what the people want, and 
what must be conceded to them, if he would 
continue to reign." 



THE INSURRECTION. 45 

" Then you think a change is at hand, 
father ?" 

" I am sure of it, child — a great change. 
Many will be hurled from their high places, 
never to rise again ! They cannot resist the 
power that will be directed against them — 
the power of a long-enslaved people, who 
have burst their fetters, and are determined 
to assert their rights !" 

" I do not like to hear you talk thus, dear 
father," said Editha. " I hope the people will 
not rebel. They may be treated with unjust 
severity by their lords ; but if they complain 
to the King, he will redress their wrongs." 

" They will not sue for justice, but insist 
upon it !" rejoined Wat Tyler. 

" And they will speak in language that 
cannot be misunderstood, and to which the 
King has been hitherto unaccustomed," 
observed the Outlaw. 

" I am too young to advise you, dear 
father," said Editha ; " and I would not pre- 



46 MERRY ENGLAND. 

sume to speak did I not fear you may place 
yourself in fearful jeopardy by aiding this 
rebellious scheme, which, I can perceive, is 
on foot. Take no part in it, as you value 
your safety !" 

" You are wise beyond your years, child," 
said her father ; " and are better able to give 
advice than many of your elders. But your 
discernment fails you now. You are ignorant 
of the sufferings of the people, and of their 
utter inability to obtain redress." 

" Surely they can obtain redress by lawful 
means ?" 

" No !" replied her father, sternly ; "jus- 
tice is utterly denied them. They have 
borne their burthen till it has become un- 
supportable; and they must cast it off, or 
sink under the weight. The nobles have 
had repeated warnings ; and if they will 
not heed them, they must take the con- 
sequences." 



THE INSURRECTION. 47 

" They shall not tyrannize over us much 
longer !" said the Outlaw. " "We will sweep 
them all from the face of the land !" 

" And seize upon their possessions — is that 
what you mean ?" cried Editha, with disgust. 
" Father," she added, turning to him, " the 
cause cannot be good that renders it neces- 
sary to associate with lawless men." 

Wat Tyler repressed the angry remark 
that rose to his lips ; and changing his 
manner suddenly, said, " You think we have 
been talking seriously, child." 

" Have you not ?" she cried, eagerly. 

Her father replied by a rough laugh, in 
which the Outlaw joined. 

"Not we!" said the latter. "I but 
carried on the jest started by your father — 
ho, ho!" 

" 'Tis for poor men to rebel," added Wat 
Tyler. " I have too much to do, and gain 
too much." 



48 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" And I can help myself to what I want !" 
laughed the Outlaw. " The nobles must 
submit to my exactions ; not I to 
theirs." 

Editha did not seem convinced by these 
assertions ; but, being anxious to get her 
father away, she made a movement to depart, 
saying she wished to see the Princess of 
Wales. 

"With a significant glance at the Outlaw, 
Wat Tyler immediately followed her. 

" I hope you will have nothing to do with 
that man, dear father," she remarked, as 
they walked along. " His appearance 
terrifies me !" 

" Oh, you will get accustomed to him in 
time." 

" Never ! I shall never be able to endure 
him ! But he will not dare to enter the 
village, so I am not likely to behold him 
again." 



THE INSURRECTION. 49 

Wat Tyler made no reply to this observa- 
tion, and they went on in silence. 

The Outlaw's thoughts dwelt upon Editha 
as he rode back to his men. 

"A lovely creature !" he mentally ejacu- 
lated. " I must ask her father to give her 
to me as a wife. He cannot refuse ; and 
her own consent is unnecessary." 




VOL. I. 



IV. 




HOW THE PRINCESS OE WALES VISITED THE 
PRIORESS OF ST. MARY AND ST. MARGARET. 

OHANNA, daughter of Edward of 
Woodstock, widow of the Black 
Prince, and mother of Eichard 
II., had been accounted the most beautiful 
woman in the kingdom, and she was still 
superbly handsome. 

By her first husband, Sir John Holland, 
who, in right of his wife, was created Earl 
of Kent and Lord Wake of Lydell, she had 
two sons, the elder of whom succeeded to the 
title on the death of his father, while the 
other was merely Sir John Holland. Both 
were proud and ambitious, and great 
favourites with the young King. 



THE INSURRECTION. 51 

Owing to the death of her renowned con- 
sort in the lifetime of his father, Edward 
III., the Princess of Wales never rose to the 
throne. Devotedly attached to her son 
Kichard, she constantly prayed that he might 
become a great warrior like his sire. 

She dreaded John of Graunt, believing that 
he designed to dethrone her son ; but she 
had equal reason to fear the baneful in- 
fluence exercised over the young King by 
his two half-brothers. Maternal partiality, 
however, blinded her to their faults. 

The Princess was not ignorant of the 
general discontent caused among the common 
people by the capitation tax; but she did 
not apprehend any serious result, far less 
imagine that an insurrection was imminent. 

It was at the instance of the Archbishop 
of Canterbury that she had undertaken her 
present pilgrimage to the shrine of St. 
Thomas-a-Becket. 

4—2 



52 MERRY ENGLAND. 

She' was accompanied in the journey by 
her ladies, all of whom were high-born 
damsels of great beauty ; by a numerous and 
splendid retinue of nobles and knights, at 
the head of whom was her handsome and 
haughty son, Sir John Holland ; by her 
confessor, her physician, her almoner, 
esquires, pages, yeomen, and grooms, all in 
the royal liveries ; two yeomen ushers, two 
grooms, two pages, and a guard of armed 
men. 

Though the Princess of Wales was no 
longer the peerless beauty, who, as the 
widowed Countess of Kent, had captivated 
that flower of English knighthood, the brave 
Edward of England, Prince of Wales and 
Aquitaine, she was still, as we have already 
said, exceedingly handsome, and possessed 
great dignity of manner. 

Her complexion was ravishingly fair, and 
her dark tresses, arranged in thick square 



THE INSURRECTION. 53 

plaits at the side of the face, set off her 
finely cut features. 

At the back of her head she wore a caul, 
adorned with precious stones, from which 
streamed a long contoise. Her gown, of 
satin tissue, fitted tightly at the waist, so as 
to display her charming figure, and was suf- 
ficiently long to cover her feet. Her cyclas, 
or upper tunic, was of cloth of gold. Her 
girdle, which hung loose above the hips, 
was studded with gems. From it was sus- 
pended &gipciere, or purse of crimson velvet, 
adorned with gold lace tassels. Nor can it 
be supposed that she was unprovided with 
a rosary. 

The trappings of her palfrey were of blue 
velvet, embroidered all over in gold and 
silver thread, with the royal badge of the 
white hart, crowned and chained, the sun 
emerging from a cloud, and the planta 
genista, or bloom plant. 



54 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Thus splendidly arrayed, the Princess of 
"Wales completely outshone the troop of 
noble damsels by whom she was attended. 
Yet they were the fairest ornaments of the 
Court ; surpassingly beautiful, and richly 
attired. But they paled before her like stars 
in the presence of the queen of night. 

Sir John Holland possessed a tall and 
graceful figure, set off by rich apparel ; but 
his handsome features were marred by an 
expression of pride and arrogance. He rode 
a high-mettled Andalusian jennet, given 
him by the Duke of Lancaster, and the 
impatient movements of the fiery horse 
accorded with his own haughty deportment. 

He was accoutred in a light blue tunic, 
interwoven with threads of gold and silver, 
fitting tightly to his person, but having 
loose sleeves. A short two-edged sword 
hung from his side, and a gipciere was 
attached to his girdle. His hose were parti- 



THE INSURRECTION. 55 

coloured, blue and white, and his red Morocco 
leather boots had enormously long peaked 
points — then called cracowes — fastened to 
the knees with chains of gold, and prevent- 
ing the use of the stirrup. His spurs were 
of gold. 

On his dark-brown locks, cut short, and 
square on the forehead, but allowed to hang 
down on the side, he wore a blue velvet 
cap, trimmed with costly fur, and having an 
ostrich feather at the back, that drooped 
over the head, and was secured by a diamond 
clasp. 

"We have been thus minute in describing 
the rich attire of the young King's half- 
brother, because we desire to give some 
notion of the splendour affected by the 
Court gallants of the period. 

Indeed, all the young nobles and knights 
who now formed the Princess's equipage 
wore velvet doublets and mantles of varied 



56 MERRY ENGLAND. 

hues, and more or less richly embroidered, 
particoloured hose and cracowes. 

The royal confessor and almoner rode 
upon mules, and could easily be distinguished 
amid the gaily attired throng, by their dark 
stoles and hoods. 

Sumpter-mules followed, laden with 
trunks, containing change of apparel for the 
Princess and her ladies ; and the armed 
escort brought up the rear. 

After descending the hill, the cortege pro- 
ceeded to the priory, the gardens and out- 
buildings of which extended to the foot of 
the down. 

A harbinger, apparelled in the royal 
livery, had been sent on to announce the 
approach of the Princess, so that her arrival 
was expected. 

Passing through the embattled gateway, 
in front of which a considerable number of 
villagers, of both sexes, were collected round 



THE INSURRECTION. 57 

the procession, the Princess and her suite 
entered the spacious courtyard ; the armed 
men being left outside the gate. 

Beneath the deep-arched doorway of the 
religious edifice, with a cluster of nuns be- 
hind her in white angular head-dresses and 
gorgets, was stationed the Prioress, awaiting 
her royal visitor. 

So rigid was the attitude of the Lady 
Isabel, that as she stood there, with her 
arms folded upon her breast, in her loose 
white woollen robe, worked with a cross, 
with her coverchief on her head, and a 
pleated linen barbe beneath her chin, she 
looked like a sculptured effigy on a tomb. 

The only signs of life discernible in her 
pale and motionless features came from the 
eyes. 

With the assistance of the grooms, the 
Princess alighted from her palfrey, and at- 
tended by the pages, and followed by the 



58 MERRY ENGLAND. 

whole of her ladies, stepped towards the 
Prioress, who advanced to meet her in a very 
stately manner, and stretching her arms over 
her, as she bent reverently, pronounced a 
benison upon her. 

This ceremonial performed, the Lady 
Superior bade her royal visitor welcome, and 
conducted her into the priory. 




V. 




THE PRIORESS OF ST. MARY AND ST. MARGARET, 
DARTFORD. 

SABEL DE CAVEESHAM, 

Prioress of St. Marj and St. 
Margaret, belonged to a noble 
family ; and before her retirement from the 
world — now some fifteen years ago — had 
been distinguished for grace and beauty. 
Knights had worn her colours and con- 
tended for her smiles. 

Once the fairest of the fair, the Lady 
Isabel had become prematurely old ; her 
dark tresses were streaked with grey, and 
though her face still retained its noble out- 
line, its softness and comeliness had fled. 

Yet she was barely thirty-five. Never 



60 MERRY ENGLAND. 

now did a smile play upon her thin lips ; 
but though her looks were severe, and her 
manner cold, her heart was full of kindness 
and compassion. 

Among the sisterhood she had no special 
favourites, though several were high-born 
like herself; but she was greatly attached, 
as we have shown, to the smith's daughter, 
Editha, who had been brought to her, when 
a child, by Dame Tyler, and whom she had 
caused to be carefully instructed by Sister 
Eudoxia, one of the elder nuns. 

The Lady Isabel led her royal visitor to 
the refectory, a large hall, wainscoted with 
dark oak, and provided with two long, 
narrow tables and benches for the sisterhood, 
and an elevated table for the Prioress and 
her guests. 

At the upper end of the hall was a large 
painted wooden carving of the crucifixion. 
Midway was a reading-desk, from which 



THE INSURRECTION. 61 

grace was said before each meal. At the 
bottom of the hall were open hatches, com- 
municating with the kitchens, whence the 
simple fare allotted to the sisterhood was 
brought. 

All the domestics were lay sisters, and 
wore the habits of the order. They were 
now garnishing the upper table, while the 
nuns were assembled in the centre of the hall. 

Shortly after the entrance of the Princess 
her ladies made their appearance ; and 
several of them having relatives among the 
nuns, affectionate greetings took place. 
Thus mingled together, the gaily-attired 
damsels and the saintly sisters in their 
woollen robes and white head-dresses and 
wimples, formed a curious picture. 

The only male persons privileged to 
enter the nunnery were the confessor and 
the almoner, and they were presented to the 
Lady Superior by the Princess. Nobles, 



62 MERRY ENGLAND. 

knights, and esquires were compelled to 
remain without in the courtyard. Even 
the pages were excluded. 

All being arranged on the upper table, 
the Prioress besought her royal guest to 
take some refreshment ; but the latter 
declined, telling the Lady Isabel that she 
wished to confer with her in private. 

On this, the Prioress signed to a dignified 
nun, whom she addressed as Sister Sulpicia, 
and bade her take her place ; after which she 
quitted the hall with the Princess, and con- 
ducted her to a locutory, or parlour, on the 
other side of the building. 

They were preceded by Sister Eudoxia, 
the elderly nun of whom we have spoken ; 
and having ushered them into the locutory, 
the sedate sister, whose countenance seemed 
as if it could never be ruffled, immediately 
retired. 

The locutory, which was used by the 



THE INSURRECTION. 63 

Prioress and the sisters for conversation, 
differed little from an ordinary parlour of 
the period. It was furnished with high- 
backed oak chairs, one of which, more 
elaborately carved than the rest, and pro- 
vided with a brocaded cushion and a velvet 
footstool, was reserved for the Lady Supe- 
rior. Near this was a small oak table. 
The walls were hung with tapestry. The 
bay windows were filled with stained glass, 
that gave a dim, religious light to the room, 
and adorned with a picture of the Madonna. 

No sooner was the door of the locutory 
closed by Sister Eudoxia, than a remarkable 
change took place in the deportment both 
of the Prioress and her royal guest. 

As yet, they had given no sign of previous 
acquaintance. Now it was certain they 
were old friends. After gazing at each 
other affectionately for a few moments, they 
embraced as tenderly as sisters. 



VI. 




OP THE COUNSEL GIVEN BY THE LADY ISABEL 
TO THE PRINCESS. 

HEN the first effusions of delight 
were over, the Lady Isabel 
begged the Princess to take the 
state-chair, and sat down opposite her. 

" I did not think I should ever see your 
Grace again," she said. "But though 
many years have flown since we met, my 
love for you is in nowise diminished, and 
you have rarely been absent from my 
thoughts. But you have never come near 
me !" she added, in a tone of slight reproach. 
" You know why I have not visited you, 
dearest Isabel," replied the Princess, " so I 
need make no excuse. I hope you are 



THE INSURRECTION. 65 

happy. I did not expect to find you so 
much, changed." 

" I am as happy as I am ever likely to be 
in this world," said the Prioress, mournfully, 
for some painful recollections had evidently 
rushed upon her. " You yourself have had 
a great sorrow ; but the affliction you have 
undergone has not impaired your beauty." 

"I marvel at it, for I have suffered much 
and deeply," rejoined the Princess ; " but I 
have been obliged to smother my grief. 
When I lost the noblest, the bravest, the 
best husband ever possessed by woman, I 
should have followed your example, and 
have retired to a convent, had it not been 
for the Prince, my son. But I promised his 
royal father, who foresaw the danger he 
would incur when he came to the throne 
from his ambitious uncles, that I would 
watch constantly over him, and I have kepb 
my word. Only by ceaseless vigilance have 

vol. i. 5 



66 MERRY ENGLAND. 

I preserved the young King from their 
designs. You may think I have uncontrolled 
authority, but x I have little real power. 
Eichard is surrounded by favourites and 
flatterers, and will not always listen to my 
advice." 

" Be not discouraged, gracious madam !" 
said the Prioress, earnestly. " Persevere in 
your efforts to keep the youthful King in 
the right course, and make him worthy of 
his illustrious father. I would you had 
power to redress the grievances of the people, 
who suffer much from oppression; and if 
their complaints continue unheeded, I fear 
they will break out into open rebellion. I 
do not desire to alarm your Grace ; but I 
must not conceal from you that there is 
great murmuring among the peasantry in 
this part of Kent, and also, as I understand, 
in Essex." 

"Discontent everywhere prevails," said 



THE INSURRECTION. 67 

the Princess, " and unhappily there is good 
cause for it. But an insurrection would 
serve the Duke of Lancaster's purpose, as it 
might end in the King's dethronement, and 
enable the Duke to seize the crown. There- 
fore the people are goaded on instead of 
being quieted." 

" Is it possible the King can be insensible 
to this danger ?" asked the Prioress. 

" He has perfect faith in the loyalty of 
his uncles, and will not believe me when I 
warn him against them. He thinks my 
apprehensions groundless." 

"Have you lost your influence over 
him ?" 

" Not entirely. But I must confess it is 
less than it used to be. I have told you 
the King is surrounded by flatterers, who 
are secretly adverse to me." 

" By counteracting their designs, you 
cannot fail to regain your influence over 

5—2 



68 MERRY ENGLAND. 

your son. But your first business must be 
to save him from bis present danger. Be- 
lieve me, it can only be averted by making 
large concessions to the people." 

" Were I to propose such a measure as 
you recommend, I should array all the 
nobles against me. Besides, I am certain 
the Council of State would reject it." 

" Not if the King insists. Something 
must be promptly done to allay the present 
agitation, or great calamities will inevitably 
ensue. The throne itself may be shaken." 

Pronounced with great solemnity, these 
words could not fail to produce a strong 
effect upon the listener. 

" Give heed to my warning, Princess," 
pursued the Lady Isabel, with increased 
earnestness of tone. " Let not the King 
hesitate, or he may be forced into com- 
pliance." 

"Ha!" exclaimed the Princess; "you 



THE INSURRECTION. 69 

have heard more than you choose to tell 
me. 

" I have heard more than I dare repeat," 
rejoined the Prioress. " Had I not seen 
your Grace to-day, it was my intention to 
write to you." 

" Can you give me any proofs of the dan- 
gerous design you apprehend, that I may 
lay them before the King ?" demanded the 
Princess. 

" Impossible ! But I may perhaps obtain 
more precise information before you return 
from Canterbury. Think you not, since the 
danger is so imminent, that you ought to 
put off your pilgrimage ?" 

" I cannot," replied the Princess. " I 
have a vow to fulfil." 

"Prolong not your stay more than is 
needful. Haply your Grace may think I 
exaggerate the peril, and am unduly appre- 
hensive ; but I have good reason for my 



70 MERRY ENGLAND. 

» 

fears. There is a smith, in this village, 
whose daughter, Editha, comes daily to re- 
ceive instruction from Sister Eudoxia, and 
from this damsel I have learnt much that 
has led me to make further inquiries, the 
result being to convince me that a rising of 
the peasantry is to be apprehended. The 
mischievous doctrines of the apostate priest, 
Wycliffe, who preaches equality and the 
partition of property, have been dissemi- 
nated among the people by a Franciscan 
friar, named John Ball, and the seeds of 
sedition being thus scattered broadcast, are 
now producing a plentiful crop. Wycliffe 
deserves death. Neither the King nor our 
holy Church have a worse enemy. He 
would overthrow both." 

" Wycliffe is protected by the Duke of 
Lancaster, and is therefore safe from punish- 
ment," observed the Princess. " Should it 
chance that the smith's daughter of whom 



THE INSURRECTION. 71 

you have just spoken is in the priory at this 
moment, I would fain question her." 

" I will ascertain at once," replied the 
Lady Superior. 

And she struck a small silver bell placed 
upon the table. 

The summons was immediately answered 
by Sister Eudoxia, who, in reply to the 
Prioress's inquiries, said that Editha had 
just come in, and had gone to the novi- 
tiate. 

" Bring her hither," said the Lady Isabel. 
" The Princess desires to speak to her." 

Much pleased by the order, Sister Eu- 
doxia hastened to obey it. 

" I am not sorry your Grace should see 
the young damsel," continued the Prioress. 
" I take great interest in her. She is very 
good and very gentle, and I hope may be- 
come a novice. But she is not yet old 
enough to profess." 



72 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" What is her age ?" inquired the Prin- 
cess. 

" Scarce fifteen," was the reply. 

" She must have been born about the time 
you entered this retreat," observed the 
Princess. 

Made quite inadvertently, this remark 
caused the Lady Isabel to become pale as 
death, and the Princess regretted that she 
had uttered it. 




VII. 




tired. 



THE LAl'IS LAZULI TABLET. 

HOETLY afterwards Editha was 
ushered into the locutory of Sister 
Eudoxia, who immediately re- 



The young damsel made a profound 
obeisance to the Princess, and then in- 
clining to the Lady Superior, kissed her 
hand. 

Struck by her remarkable beauty and com- 
posure of manner, the Princess contemplated 
her with surprise, not unmixed with cu- 
riosity. 

" This fair girl cannot be a smith's daugh- 
ter," she remarked, in an under-tone, to the 
Prioress. 



74 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" 'Tis as I have stated," rejoined the Lady 
Isabel. 

" And her mother ?" 

" Is a very worthy dame of like degree." 

For a moment the Princess seemed lost in 
reflection. 

Then with a very gracious smile, she ad- 
dressed Editha. 

" Have you always dwelt in Dartford, 
child?" she asked. 

" Always, your Grace," was the reply ; 
" and I have no desire to dwell elsewhere." 

" Not even in a palace ?" asked the Prin- 
cess. 

" Such a thought has never entered my 
head. A palace is no place for me." 

" A discreet reply," said the Princess, 
smiling approvingly. " But suppose I were 
to make you one of my handmaidens ?" 

Editha looked at the Prioress, not knowing 
exactly what answer she ought to give. 



THE INSURRECTION. 75 

" Be not afraid to speak, daughter," said 
the Lady Isabel. 

" I have taken a fancy to you, child," 
pursued the Princess, " and I should like to 
have you near me." 

" I am deeply beholden to your Grace/' 
replied Editha. " But I am so happy in the 
priory, that I should be loth to quit it. All 
the Sisters are kind to me; but kindest 
of all is our holy Prioress, and I should 
be ungrateful, indeed, if I could leave 
her." 

" Heaven forbid I should tempt you, 
child," cried the Princess. " Think no more 
of what I said. I am glad to find you are 
so warmly attached to the good Prioress, 
who well deserves your love." 

" Our Lady Superior has often spoken to 
me of your Grace," said Editha, " and has 
held you up to me as a model of piety and 
goodness." 



76 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Nay, you must not learn to natter, 
child," observed the Princess. 

" I have told you, daughter, that the 
Princess is most anxious to redress the 
grievances of the people." 

" That I am," said the Princess. " Do 
the people of Dartford complain?" she 
added, to Editha. 

" They do more than complain, your 
Grace," was the reply — " they threaten ; and 
I fear if something be not done speedily to 
tranquillize them, they will rise in revolt." 

The Princess and the Lady Isabel ex- 
changed glances. 

" A few villagers cannot rise in revolt, 
child," remarked the Princess. 

" The rising will not be confined to Dart- 
ford, gracious madam ; but will extend to 
the whole country, which is in a most dis- 
turbed state, owing to the preaching of Friar 
John Ball. He is now in prison, but his 



THE INSURRECTION. 77 

discourses are repeated by others, coupled 
with denunciations of vengeance." 

" Vengeance against whom ?" demanded 
the Princess. 

" Against the nobles, your Grace," replied 
Editha. 

" Has the King been threatened ?" 

" No, madam ; but threats are frequently 
uttered against his ministers." 

" And such seditious talk is tolerated 
here?" 

" Not tolerated, gracious madam ; but it 
cannot be repressed. The peasantry are 
deeply discontented, and keep little guard 
upon their tongues. Could your Grace 
behold their sullen countenances when they 
assemble to discuss their wrongs, as they 
term them, or listen to their murmurs 
against their oppressors, as they designate 
the nobles, you would think that such signs 
of danger ought not to be neglected." 



78 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"They shall not be neglected," remarked 
the Princess. 

" I feel I am presumptuous in speaking 
thus," added Editha. " But my zeal must 
plead my excuse." 

"You have spoken well," rejoined the 
Princess ; " and I thank you." 

Then taking a small tablet of lapis lazuli, 
garnished with precious stones, from her 
gipciere, she graciously bestowed it upon the 
damsel. 

" As coming from your Grace, I shall ever 
prize the gift/' cried Editha, in accents of 
the liveliest gratitude, and pressing the 
tablet to her heart as she spoke. 

The Princess then announced to the Lady 
Isabel that she was about to depart. 

" I would fain tarry longer with you, holy 
mother," she said, " and profit by your dis- 
course. But time presses. After hearing 
mass at St. Edmond's Chapel, I shall pro- 
ceed on my pilgrimage to Canterbury." 



THE INSURRECTION. 79 

" All good saints watch over your Grace !" 
exclaimed the Prioress, fervently. "And 
may holy St. Thomas listen to your suppli- 
cations, and grant your prayers !" 

Summoned by the bell, Sister Eudoxia 
appeared, and threw open the door of the 
locutory ; and the Prioress, passing out with 
her royal visitor, conducted her through 
several passages to the entrance hall, where 
the nuns had assembled. 

All was in readiness for the Princess's de- 
parture ; her ladies were on horseback ; her 
palfrey was waiting for her. 

The Prioress attended her to the door, 
and tears involuntarily sprang to the saintly 
lady's eyes, as she bade her royal visitor fare- 
well. 

However, she quickly regained her self- 
possession, and her deportment became as 
rigid as heretofore, and her looks austere. 

By this time the Princess had mounted 
her palfrey, and her parting look at the Lady 



80 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Isabel was full of significance, though the 
latter seemed not to heed it. 

All was stir and bustle in the courtyard, 
and the noise and confusion continued until 
the whole of the brilliant cavalcade had 
ridden forth from the gateway. 

The Prioress remained to the last moment. 
At this juncture, Editha, who was standing 
behind her with Sister Eudoxia, watching 
the Princess's departure, preferred a request 
— or, rather, Sister Eudoxia preferred it for 
her. 

" Holy mother," she said, " have I your 
permission to take Editha to St. Edmond's 
Chapel?" 

Consent was readily given, and the young 
damsel and the elderly nun at once set out. 




VIII. 

OF THE ROUGH RESPONSE MADE TO SIR JOHN 
HOLLAND BY THE SMITH. 




EANWHILE, the cavalcade pro- 
ceeded slowly on its way, followed 
by the villagers, who had been 
lingering outside the priory during the 
Princess's halt there. 

As the splendid train approached the 
green, the throng increased ; little groups 
being collected at intervals on either side of 
the road. 

But though much curiosity was evinced 
to see the young King's mother, and the 
Court damsels in their rich attire, the male 
portion of the lookers-on raised no shouts, and 
some of them even refused to doff their caps. 

vol. i. 6 



82 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Their sullen and disrespectful demeanour 
could not fail to strike the Princess, and 
confirmed what she had just heard. 

Attended by two or three young nobles, 
Sir John Holland rode a little in advance 
of the cortege, and both he and his com- 
panions cast scornful glances at the spec- 
tators, which were well calculated to irritate 
them in their present mood. 

On reaching the skirts of the green, the 
haughty young noble passed near a stalwart 
personage, whose garb proclaimed him to 
be a smith, and who stood there with his 
arms folded upon his broad chest, watching 
the procession. 

The sullen expression of this man's coun- 
tenance, and the manner in which he re- 
turned Sir John's haughty glance, provoked 
the young nobie so much that he reined in 
his jennet, and called out — 

"Who art thou, fellow, that thou darest 
knit thy brows at me ?" 



THE INSURRECTION. 83 

"I am Wat Tyler, the smith, of Dart- 
ford!" replied the other, in a bold voice, 
but without in any way altering his de- 
portment. 

" Doff thy bonnet, thou saucy knave !" 
cried Sir Osbert Montacute, one of Sir 
John's companions. "Know'st thou to 
whom thou art speaking ?" 

"I have been speaking to the King's 
half-brother," replied Wat Tyler, resolutely; 
" but I owe him no homage !" 

" Thou shalt owe him a lesson in courtesy, 
thou rude churl !" cried Sir John, raising 
his riding-whip to strike him. 

But ere the whip touched his shoulders, 
the smith seized it and flung it to the 
ground. 

This daring act would have been punished 
by Sir John's companions if a young damsel, 
who was crossing the green at the moment 
with an elderly nun, and saw what was 

6—2 



84 MERRY ENGLAND. 

occurring, had not flown to the spot, and 
interposed between the smith and the young 
nobles. 

At the same time, three or four men, 
arrayed like minstrels, sprang forward. 

" Fear nothing, Wat ; we are with you !" 
cried a voice. 

" Begone, child !" said the smith, to his 
daughter; "you are in the way. If any 
one touches me, he will rue it !" 

And drawing his dagger, he stood upon 
his defence. 

" No ; I will not leave you, father," cried 
Editha. " Come with me, I beseech you !" 

"Hold!" exclaimed Sir John Holland, 
who saw that a serious disturbance was 
likely to ensue. "Here comes our lady 
mother." 

The Princess was now close at hand, her 
attention having been called to the affair by 
Sister Eudoxia. 



THE INSURRECTION. 85 

At her approach the young nobles drew 
back, and Sir John Holland appeared some- 
what disconcerted by the severe look she 
threw at him. 

" This disturbance is most inopportune," 
she said, in a tone of rebuke, to her son. 

" 'Tis not my fault," he rejoined. " The 
knave was insolent, and deserved more 
punishment than he has received." 

" You have done wrong, I tell you ; this 
is not the moment to quarrel with the 
common people, but to conciliate them." 

" You are best able to perform that task 
yourself, madam," muttered her son. " Had 
you not been here, the knave would not 
have been alive to mock us as he doth now." 

"No more, I command you," said his 
mother. 

Then, addressing Editha, who was still 
standing before her father, she said, in a 
very gracious tone — 



86 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"I did not expect to see you again so 
soon, fair maiden. I thought I had left you 
at the priory." 

" I was hastening to St. Edmond's Chapel, 
your Grace, when " 

" No matter," interrupted the Princess ; 
" 'tis over now. This is your father, I pre- 
sume?" she added, with a kindly look at 
Wat, that quickly banished the cloud from 
his brow. 

Long before this, he had restored the 
dagger to his girdle. 

"Father, the Princess speaks to you," 
said Editha, plucking his sleeve. 

Thus exhorted, Wat removed his cap, 
and made an obeisance such as he had not 
rendered to any one for many a day. 

The Princess now smiled very graciously 
indeed ; as did also Editha, for she was well 
pleased with her father's ready assent. 

Addressing Wat Tyler, but, at the same 



THE INSURRECTION. 87 

time, taking care that her words should 
reach the ears of the other bystanders, all 
of whom had uncovered and observed a 
respectful demeanour, the Princess said — 

"As you are aware, I am performing a 
pilgrimage to Canterbury, and it would 
grieve me if any untoward circumstance 
should occur during my journey, so as to 
interrupt my devotional thoughts. T have 
learnt, from your good Prioress, with whom 
I have just been conversing, that some 
discontent prevails among the inhabitants 
of this village. I am sorry to hear it. 
But rest assured that, on my return, I will 
speak to the King, my son; and I doubt 
not, if it be practicable, he will redress your 
grievances." 

While the Princess was thus speaking, 
the crowd had greatly increased, and her 
words and gracious manners produced a 
marked effect upon the assemblage. 



88 MERRY ENGLAND. 

But positive enthusiasm was excited 
when she took her purse from her girdle, 
and, giving it to an attendant, bade him 
distribute its contents amid the throng. 

As a scramble took place for the gold 
pieces, loud shouts arose of " Long live the 
Princess of Wales !" and blessings were 
heaped upon her head. 

His mother's treatment of the audacious 
smith, which he regarded as a reproof to 
himself, was exceedingly mortifying to Sir 
John Holland, and might have drawn some 
angry remarks from him, had he not been 
attracted by Editha, whose beauty greatly 
impressed him. 

He called Sir Osbert Montacute's atten- 
tion to her, declaring he had never seen 
any one so lovely. 

" She much surpasses all our Court 
damsels," he exclaimed. " No one can 
compare with her." 



THE INSURRECTION. 89 

"I cannot go quite so far as that, my 
lord," replied Sir Osbert, laughing. " But, 
for a country maiden, I own she is passing 
fair." 

" There is nothing rustic about her," 
said Sir John. " She looks like one of 
Diana's nymphs." 

" Or a vestal ?" suggested the other. 

"Ay, a vestal. She is purity itself, I'll 
be sworn." 

"Then you must not gaze at her so 
ardently, my lord, or you will trouble her. 
See ! she casts down her eyes, and blushes 
deeply." 

"The blush heightens her beauty. By 
heaven, she shall be mine ! 'Twill serve 
her churlish father right to rob him of his 
daughter." 

" Beware, my lord, what you do ! She 
must belong to the priory. One of the 
sisterhood has just joined her." 



90 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" That will not' deter me," returned Sir 
John. "But an opportunity of speaking 
with her presents itself. My mother has 
just called her." 

With this, he pushed forward, and ad- 
dressed a few gallant remarks to the young 
damsel, who was thanking the Princess for 
her generosity. 

Evidently alarmed, Editha made no 
answer, but, as soon as she could do so 
with propriety, returned to Sister Eudoxia 
and her father. 

Even then Sir John did not desist, and 
regardless of the stern glances cast upon 
him by the smith, he followed Editha as 
she moved away, and continued to address 
her with even greater freedom than before. 

" A truce to this, I pray you, my lord !" 
cried "Wat Tyler. "My daughter is not 
accustomed to courtly compliments, neither 
are they agreeable to me." 

" I care little whether thou art pleased or 



THE INSURRECTION. 91 

not, fellow," rejoined the haughty young 
noble. " I am not paying compliments to 
thy daughter, but telling her the truth. 
Her beauty ought not to be hidden at 
Dartford, and it were a positive crime to 
shut her up in a convent." 

" Come away, Editha," cried Sister 
Eudoxia. "Your ears must not be defiled 
by this unrestrained talk." 

"No; let her stay," said the smith. 
" She knows how to comport herself." 

" Be not angry, father," whispered 
Editha; "I will exchange no word with 
him." 

Failing to extract a word from her, or 
even a smile, Sir John at length departed, 
saying, as he bade adieu, " When we meet 
again, fair damsel, I trust you will be less 
obdurate." 

Bounding off on his impatient jennet, he 
resumed his place at the head of the caval- 
cade, which was already in motion. 



IX. 




st. edmond's chapel. 

HE bulk of the assemblage followed 
the cortege to St. Edmond's Chapel, 
which, as the reader is aware, was 
situated at the further end of the village* 
and not far from the church. 

"Wat Tyler thought his daughter had 
best go home ; but as she wished to attend 
mass, and Sister Eudoxia undertook to take 
charge of her, he allowed her to proceed. 

" After all," he said, " there is nothing to 
fear. This insolent noble will not dare 
molest thee in the chapel. I will go home, 
and tell thy mother what has happened. 
She will be uneasy." 

Sister Eudoxia and Editha did not reach 



THE INSURRECTION. 93 

the chapel till the Princess and her train 
had gone in; bat though there was little 
room left, the nun and her charge were 
allowed to enter. 

Completely filled by the splendidly- 
attired Court damsels and nobles, the little 
temple presented a superb appearance — 
additional effect being given to the scene 
by the lights on the altar, and the gorgeous 
tints thrown on the assemblage from the 
painted windows. The atmosphere was 
heavy with incense. 

Mass had begun, and the Princess was 
kneeling at the altar. 

No place being vacant near the door, 
Sister Eudoxia and Editha were obliged to 
move on till they reached the foremost 
ranks, where they were enabled to kneel 
down. 

What was the young damsel's fright 
when she found she had inadvertently 



94 MERRY ENGLAND. 



placed herself next the very person she was 
most desirous to avoid. 

She did not raise her eyes, but she felt 
his ardent gaze was fixed on her, and her 
mind became so disturbed, that all devo- 
tional feelings were banished, and had 
retreat been possible, she would have 
quitted the chapel. 

Her close proximity to her dreaded neigh- 
bour caused a tremor to run through her 
frame, and she shrank from his slightest 
contact. . 

Moreover, a strange terror seized her 
that he was in some way mixed up with 
her destiny, and that she should not be able 
to escape from him if she fell into his toils. 

While she was endeavouring to shake off 
this painful idea, a low voice breathed in 
her ear, " You are mine !" 

She knew who had spoken, and her terror 
increased. 



THE INSURRECTION. 95 

Shortly afterwards the solemn service 
ended, and the courtly throng began to 
quit the chapel. 

Fearful of encountering her dreaded 
neighbour's glance, she did not look up till 
she felt sure he was gone. 

When she arose, the Princess was bend- 
ing reverently to the altar before taking her 
departure, and allowing her to pass by, she 
followed slowly after with Sister Eudoxia. 

The Princess had noticed her, and, on 
reaching the porch, summoned her, and 
said, with a gracious smile — 

" Eemember what I have told you. 
Should you require my aid at any time, fail 
not to come to me. Adieu !" 

Assisted by her grooms and pages, who 
were standing by, the royal lady then 
mounted her palfrey and rode off; but she 
was instantly succeeded by Sir John Hol- 
land, who had lingered with Sir Osbert 



96 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Montacute to have a last look at the fair 
damsel who had bewitched him. 

Curbing his fiery jennet as he passed the 
porch, he looked fixedly at Editha ; but she 
cast down her eyes, and, provoked by her 
coldness, he rode on. 

Amid the shouts and blessings of the 
villagers, the Princess then crossed the little 
bridge over the Darent, and, attended by 
her retinue and escort, mounted the hill on 
the road to Eochester and Canterbury. 




X. 



THE LOMBARD MERCHANT. 




(OMEWHAT retarded by the im- 
portant event described, the sports 
now commenced on the green, 
and were carried on merrily enough, the 
villagers being in high good humour owing 
to the Princess's liberality. For the time, 
their grievances were forgotten. 

There was dancing round the Maypole 
to the blithe strains of the minstrels, mum- 
ming, wrestling, and trials of skill with the 
quarter-staff, resulting in several broken 
pates. Moreover, there was much drinking 
of Whitsun ale. 

Towards evening a large party of tra- 
vellers from London arrived at the " Bull," 

vol. i. 7 



98 MERRY ENGLAND. 

and having secured lodgings for the night 
at that comfortable and roomy hostel, took 
part in the village festivities. 

Among the new-comers was a grave- 
looking man, in a long gown and furred 
velvet cap. His dark complexion, aquiline 
nose, quick black eyes, and beetling brows, 
together with a foreign accent, showed that 
he was not an Englishman, though he spoke 
the language well. 

Jacopo Benedetto del Treviso — for so was 
he named, from the city of his birth — be- 
longed to a company of wealthy Lombard 
merchants at that time established in 
London, who lent money on usance, like 
the Jews, and were looked upon to be as 
great extortioners as the Israelites them- 
selves by those who borrowed from 
them. 

This enterprising company had recently 
farmed the Government taxes, and collected 



THE INSURRECTION. 99 

them with great rigour, as we have pre- 
viously mentioned. 

One of the richest members of the com- 
pany, Messer Benedetto, exercised conside- 
rable influence over its councils. Indeed, it 
was he who had proposed the farming of 
the King's taxes, by which it was expected 
that a large sum would be realized. 

Messer Benedetto lived luxuriously at his 
house in Lombard Street, but he was care- 
ful not to make any display when he tra- 
velled ; neither did he carry much gold 
about him, so that if he were robbed his 
losses would be inconsiderable. 

However, he had never yet been robbed, 
for he always contrived to join some strong 
party whom marauders, such as Jack Straw, 
did not venture to attack. 

On the present occasion he had started 
early in the morning from the " Tabard" at 
Southwark, where a rendezvous of travellers 

7—2 



100 MERRY ENGLAND. 

bound for Rochester and Canterbury was 
generally held. The muster was quite 
strong enough to insure safety. 

As will be conjectured, Messer Benedetto 
had some business on hand. At Dartford 
he expected to meet a tax-collector named 
Humphrey Shaxton, and he found him 
awaiting his arrival at the Ci Bull." 

This Shaxton had previously been em- 
ployed by the Government, and his rough- 
ness in the discharge of his obnoxious office 
recommended him to Benedetto. 

Rude and brutal with the lower orders, 
Shaxton was fawning and obsequious to 
those of higher degree. His coarse, repul- 
sive physiognomy indicated his nature. 
Red-haired and flat-nosed, he had a long 
upper lip and heavy chin. 

Heretofore, Shaxton had worn the royal 
livery ; but this he had now laid aside, and 
was habited in a dark serge tunic, with an 



THE INSURRECTION. 101 

inkhorn at his girdle, and a parchment 
account-book hanging beside it. 

His red locks were covered by a felt cap, 
turned up only at the back, and having a 
long, projecting point. 

Immediately after his arrival, Messer 
Benedetto had a long conference in private 
with the collector, and learnt that a good 
deal of resistance to his demands of three 
groats a head had been made by the 
peasantry. 

Small as the tax appeared, they were 
very reluctant to pay it ; but Shaxton de- 
clared he would allow none to escape — 
youths or maidens — unless he was satisfied 
they were under the appointed age of 
fifteen. 

" According to their own showing, they 
are all under age," he said ; " but they can't 
deceive me," he added, with a coarse grin. 
" When I demand it, the poll-tax must be 



102 MERRY ENGLAND. 

forthcoming. Already, I have got a good 
sum, as your worship will find when I make 
up my accounts." 

" I am glad to hear it," replied Bene- 
detto. " Have you begun to make a col- 
lection here at Dartford?" 

" Not yet, worshipful sir," said Shaxton. 
" I must look about me, and make inquiries 
before setting to work. It saves time and 
trouble. I am told the villagers are very 
angry with the tax, and some of them de- 
clare they wont pay it. We shall see. 
There is a smith here, named Wat Tyler — 
an obstinate churl — who incites the people 
to resistance. He has a very pretty daugh- 
ter, who looks sixteen or seventeen, though 
some say she is younger — under age, in fact. 
But I am determined he shall pay the tax 
for her, if only to plague him." 

" Eight. 'Tis best to put down such mis- 
chievous knaves," observed Benedetto. " Be- 
gin with this smith." 



THE INSURRECTION. 103 

" I have placed him first on my list, as 
your worship will observe," rejoined the 
tax-collector, opening his book. 

" Has he other children liable to the im- 
post ?" asked the merchant. 

" No ; he has only this daughter," re- 
plied Shaxton. " I would he had a dozen — 
he should pay for them all. Most of the 
villagers are now assembled on the green, 
with their wives and families. If your 
worship will be pleased to step forth, you 
will see them, and may be able to form an 
estimate of their numbers, and the probable 
amount of impost they will yield." 

" Come, then !" cried Benedetto. 

And, followed respectfully by the tax- 
collector, he went forth to survey the festive 
scene. 




XI. 



THE TAX-COLLECTOR. 




HE merriment was then at its height 
on the green. Youths and maidens 



were disporting themselves ; vari- 
ous pastimes were going on ; and, judging 
from the shouts and laughter, everybody 
seemed to be happy. 

The only person who appeared out of place 
amid such a joyous scene was the tax-col- 
lector. Luckily, very few of the concourse 
were aware of his ill-omened presence ; 
so he did not disturb the general enjoy- 
ment. 

A large circle, some four or five feet deep, 
was formed round the May -pole, and through 
this ring our Lombard merchant contrived 
to penetrate, and was thus enabled to see 



THE INSURRECTION. 105 

the dancers, who were hidden by the 
throng. 

Several of the damsels were comely, and 
he was particularly struck by the well- 
formed limbs of one of them. This was 
Marjory, the milkmaid, whom Editha had 
met earlier in the day ; and though the 
active damsel had now been bounding round 
the May-pole for nearly an hour, with very 
little intermission, she did not appear half 
so much fatigued as the swain next her. 

If her object was to tire out this poor 
youth, Marjory completely succeeded; for 
soon afterwards he was fain to give in, and 
she then relinquished the rope of flowers 
which she had held so long, and retired with 
him, flushed and panting, amid the cheers 
and laughter of the bystanders. 

Messer Benedetto withdrew at the same 
time, having seen enough of the dancing, 
and looked round for Shaxton, whom he 
had left outside the ring. 



106 MERRY ENGLAND. 

He did not see him ; but his eye alighted 
on a sturdy individual, in the garb of a 
smith, standing at a little distance with a 
comely dame, and a young damsel beside 
him. 

It instantly occurred to the Lombard 
merchant that this person must be Wat 
Tyler of whom the tax-collector had spoken, 
and he therefore regarded him with a certain 
curiosity; but his attention was quickly 
diverted from the smith to the young 
damsel with him, and he was gazing at her 
with surprise and admiration, when Shaxton 
came up. 

After a word with his employer, the tax- 
collector strode towards the smith, and, in a 
loud and insolent voice, demanded his name. 

" What is it to thee how I am called ?" 
rejoined the other, sternly. 

"Much," said Shaxton. "In virtue of 
mine office I am empowered to interrogate 



THE INSURKECTION. 107 

any man I think proper, and I again demand 
thy name and calling. Thou wilt incur a 
penalty an' thou refusest to answer." 

" Wat Tyler is my husband's name," in- 
terposed the dame, fearing some disturbance 
might occur. "He is a smith and ar- 
mourer." 

" Tut, wife !" cried Wat. " He knows 
who I am well enough. Now, about thy 
business, fellow ?" 

" I have not yet done," said Shaxton, per- 
tinaciously. " This maiden is thy daugh- 
ter?" 

Wat's patience was nearly exhausted, and 
he was also enraged by the bold, offensive 
stare with which the tax-collector regarded 
Editha. 

" Ay, ay ; she is our child," again inter- 
posed Dame Tyler. 

"Child!" exclaimed Shaxton. "By St. 
Blaise ! she is ripening into womanhood." 



108 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Thou hadst best begone !" cried Wat 
Tyler, with, a look so fierce and menacing, 
that the tax-collector deemed it prudent not 
to provoke him further, more especially as 
several persons had gathered round the 
smith, and seemed disposed to take part 
with him. 

He therefore contented himself with say- 
ing, " Thou shalt hear more from me on the 
morrow," and marched away. 



$^&&- 



XII. 




MARK CLEAVER, ELIAS LIRIPIPE, AND JOSBERT 
GROUTHEAD. 

S Shaxton departed, Messer Bene- 
detto came up, and said, in a bland 
half-apologetic voice to Editlia, 
" I trust the man has not been rude to you, 
fair damsel ?" 

Editha scarce made any reply, being un- 
willing to enter into conversation with a 
stranger, whose manner, though courteous, 
was somewhat forward ; but her father said, 
bluntly, "You should teach your servant 
better manners, sir." 

" My servant !" exclaimed Benedetto. 
" Ay ; or your factor, or whatever you 
call him," said the smith. " Unless I am 



110 MERRY ENGLAND. 

much mistaken, you are one of the Lombard 
merchants who have farmed the poll-tax, 
and this insolent fellow is your collector." 

Astounded at being addressed in this 
manner, Benedetto glanced at the speaker, 
but his eye sunk beneath the smith's steady 
gaze. 

" Art sure this is one of the Lombard 
merchants, Wat ?" asked a bystander, notice- 
able for his round, rosy visage. 

" As sure as I am that thou art an honest 
butcher, Mark Cleaver," replied Wat Tyler. 
" Let him deny it if he can. "Tis to him 
and his brethren, and not to the King 
and the Government, that we now pay taxes. 
Why should we Englishmen allow ourselves 
to be despoiled by usurious foreigners ?" 

" Ay, wherefore ?" cried several angry 
voices. 

"If you will listen to reason, my good 
friends," said Benedetto, in a calm, per- 



THE INSURRECTION. Ill 

suasive tone, " I will show that you are not 
unjustly treated by us. We did not impose 
the taxes of which you complain." 

"But the Government did not dare to 
collect the taxes, or they would not have 
sold them to you," interrupted Wat Tyler. 

" The Government wanted the money im- 
mediately, and we advanced it," said the 
merchant. " You cannot in fairness expect 
us to be losers by the transaction." 

" You hope to be large gainers by it, I 
doubt not," said Wat ; " but I think you 
will find yourselves out in your reckoning. 
'Twas a wrongful bargain, and ought never 
to have been made !" 

"Blame not us, good friends, but the 
Government that made it," said Benedetto, 
still in the same calm voice. " If the poll- 
tax presses hardly upon you, as it may in 
some cases, you should call upon the 
ministers to refund the money we have paid 
them." 



112 MERRY ENGLAND. 

'„. "You are jesting with us, master," said 
Mark Cleaver. " I should like to see the 
ministers refund money." 

" We have been bought and sold — that is 
quite clear," said another bystander, a little 
man in a grey woollen jerkin and a tall, 
conical cap. "But these Lombard mer- 
chants and the ministers will both rue their 
bargain." 

" Thou art a brave man for a tailor, Elias 
Liripipe," observed Wat Tyler. "Wilt 
thou clip off this caitiff tax-collector's 
ears r 

" Ay, marry will I — with my shears," 
replied Liripipe, suiting the action to the 
word. 

" He shall fare worse if he comes to me," 
cried Josbert Grouthead, the cheesemonger. 
" I will him cut in twain as I would a Ched- 
der cheese." 

"And eat him afterwards/' observed 



THE INSURRECTION. 113 

Benedetto, drily. " Methinks you grumble 
more than is needful. After all, three groats 
a head is not much. Were beauty taxable," 
he added, to Editha, " your father ought to 
pay twenty nobles for you. The King hath 
no fairer damsel in his dominions. 'Tis true, 
by St. Anthony, gainsay me who will !" 

" Nay, we will none of us gainsay you," 
said Liripipe, who, like his companions, was 
somewhat appeased by the merchant's man- 
ner ; "we are all agreed as to Edith a' s 
beauty." 

Satisfied with the favourable impression 
he had produced, Messer Benedetto walked 
off towards another part of the green. 

Wat Tyler looked after him, and observed 
to Liripipe — 

" Thou art right, gossip ; these Lombard 
merchants will rue their bargain." 



VOL. I. 



XIII. 



GEOFFREY CHAUCER. 




EANTIMB another traveller had 
arrived at the " Bull." 

He had come from Canter- 
bury, and as he had ridden across Dartford 
Heath, it was wonderful that he had met 
with no molestation 'from the Outlaw and 
his band. 

In age, this traveller was between fifty 
and sixty ; but he was still active and full 
of vigour, and had a striking and highly 
intellectual countenance, grave in expres- 
sion, and lighted up by fine dark eyes. 

The face was a perfect oval, the nose 
being somewhat pronounced, but handsomety 
formed. His dark, forked beard was still 



THE INSURRECTION. 115 

unmixed with grey, as were his locks. His 
frame was tall, spare, but remarkably well 
proportioned . 

He wore a dark velvet tunic, over which 
was a loose gown, and his coif was encircled 
by a roll of stuff like a turban, which gave 
effect to his physiognomy. From his girdle 
hung a pouch, and he had a short sword by 
his side. He wore boots of supple leather, 
but not with the long-pointed toes pre- 
viously described. 

As the traveller rode up to the inn, Urban 
Baldock, the host, a stout, good-humoured 
personage, came forth to greet him. 

" Your worship is welcome to Hartford," 
he said. " Will it please you to alight ?" 

" Canst thou give me a lodging, Baldock ?" 
inquired the traveller. 

" Ah, marry can I !" replied the host. 
"The house is full; for a large party has 
just arrived from the ' Tabard,' at South- 

8—2 



116 MERRY- ENGLAND. 

wark ; but your worship shall not want a 
lodging, even if I give up my own chamber." 

" Gramercy, good host !" replied the other, 
" I would not have thee put to inconvenience 
on my account." 

" Nay, the inconvenience is nothing," said 
Baldock. " 'Twould be a reproach to me if I 
did not find accommodation for the renowned 
Geoffrey Chaucer, of whom, as a poet, all 
England is justly proud/' 

"Though thou hast not been at Court, 
thou has learned the art of flattery, I find, 
Baldock," said Chaucer, smiling, for he was 
not displeased by this tribute paid to his 
reputation. " But thou say'st thine house 
is full. Whom hast thou with thee?" 

" They are mostly strangers," replied the 
host, " and I have not yet learnt their 
names. But I will inform myself anon. 
One of them is yonder on the green. You 
may discern him amid the crowd." 



THE INSURRECTION. 117 

" I see him," observed Chaucer, looking 
in the direction indicated. " 'Tis Messer 
Benedetto, the great Lombard merchant. 
I'll be sworn he has come here to look after 
the collection of the poll-tax, which he and 
his partners have farmed." 

" No doubt your worship is in the right. 
There is a rascally tax-collector in the house. 
Would to heaven we were rid of him ! for I 
fear he may breed some disturbance in the 
village." 

With the host's assistance, Chaucer then 
dismounted; and having seen his horse 
taken to the stable and well cared for, he 
followed Baldock to the principal guest- 
chamber. 

It was a comfortable room, with a very 
low ceiling, supported by great beams. The 
panels were of oak, and the furniture — 
tables, chairs, and benches — were also of 
oak. The bay windows were open, and 
looked upon the green. 



118 MERRI ENGLAND. 

There were no guests in the room; and 
the seats outside the house were deserted. 
All were watching the sports. 

A good deal of noise arose from merry- 
makers ; but the poet did not find it dis- 
agreeable, and declined to have the windows 
shut. 

" What will your worship please to take 
for supper ?" inquired the host. " I have a 
cold capon, and a cold ham, and a famous 
cold pasty ; and I can fry you some noble 
crimson trout from the Darent, or silver 
eels, as you may like best, and I can add a 
dish of rare cray-fish, from the Cray." 

" Give me the trout and the capon/' 
replied Chaucer. " And, hark ye, while you 
are preparing supper, bring me a flask of 
red Gascoigne wine and a manchet." 

The host then disappeared, and the poet, 
left alone, leaned partly out of the window, 
to survey the pleasant scene. 



THE INSURRECTION. 119 

And now a word about him. 

Born in London in 1328, Geoffrey 
Chaucer, at the period of our story, was 
fifty-four; but, as we have already shown, 
he carried his years bravely. He was said 
to be of noble extraction; and it can, at 
least, be declared of him with certainty that 
he looked well born. 

Since the Conquest, all the poetry of the 
country had been written in Norman-French, 
then the dominant language ; but while he 
was a student at Cambridge, and not more 
than eighteen, Chaucer made his first essay 
with an English poem, which, from its 
novelty, as well as from its beauty, obtained 
an immense success, and won for him the 
proud title he has ever since borne of " The 
Father of English Poetry." 

Subsequently, Chaucer became a page at 
the Court of Edward III., and was speedily 
taken into favour by that monarch's second 



120 MERRY ENGLAND. 

son, John of Gaunt, the ambitious Duke of 
Lancaster. It was at this time that Chaucer 
wedded Philippa, sister of the Lady 
Catherine Swynford, to whom the Duke of 
Lancaster was secretly attached, and whom 
he ultimately married. 

During all this period the poet had been 
adding to his laurels. Appointed envoy to 
the republic of Genoa, he had an oppor- 
tunity of visiting Petrarch ; and on his re- 
turn from this embassy, and from a mission 
to Charles V. of France, he received the 
lucrative appointment of Controller of the 
Customs. A butt of sack was not bestowed 
upon him, as on Poets-Laureate in after- 
days, but a goblet of wine was brought him 
each day by the King's cup-bearer. 

Chaucer next followed Edward into France, 
and was present at the unsuccessful siege of 
Eheims. Influenced by the example of the 
Duke of Lancaster, with whom he was now 



THE INSURRECTION. 121 

connected by marriage, the poet embraced 
the doctrines of Wycliffe, and thereby 
incurred the enmity of the clergy and their 
partisans. 

On the accession of Eichard II., so long 
as the Duke of Lancaster swayed his royal 
nephew's councils, Chaucer was in high 
favour at Court ; but as the Duke's influence 
declined, the poet was neglected, and he had 
retired in disgust shortly before his intro- 
duction to the reader. 

Amid his varied occupations — embassies, 
conflicts with the clergy, and political in- 
trigues — Chaucer had found time to pro- 
duce several most exquisite poems; but his 
greatest achievement, " The Canterbury 
Tales," which raised him to the highest 
pinnacle of fame, and has maintained him 
there ever since, was not accomplished till 
some years later. 

While the poet was gazing through the 



122 MERRY ENGLAND. 

window, charmed by the beauty of the 
evening, amused by the scene, and allowing 
various fancies to flit through his mind, he 
became aware of a young damsel, who was 
passing across the green sufficiently near to 
enable him to judge of her beauty. 

So lovely, so graceful was she, that his 
eyes followed her as she moved along, and 
he almost refused to believe that the middle- 
aged dame who accompanied her, and evi- 
dently belonged to the lower class, could be 
her mother. 

But as the host appeared at the moment 
with the manchet and wine, he questioned 
him, and learnt, to his infinite surprise, that 
the fair damsel was the daughter of Wat 
Tyler, the smith. 

" How so rough a fellow came to have a 
daughter so fair and gentle puzzles me, but 
so it is," said Baldock. " The villagers 
think so highly of Editha's beauty, 



THE IXS'JRRliCTTON. 123 

that they call her the Fair Maid of 
Kent." 

" And she deserves the appellation," ob- 
served Chaucer. 

" She is now going to the priory," pur- 
sued the host. " She attends matins and 
vespers each day. Lady Isabel, the Prioress, 
takes much notice of her." 

" The fair damsel brings to mind her own 
youth and beauty, no doubt," said Chaucer. 
" Lovelier creature was never seen than the 
Lady Isabel Caversham. I well remember 
her. She had many lovers, and amongst 
them was one noble knight whom she pre- 
ferred to all the rest. But he proved false, 
forswore her to wed another, and she 
buried herself in this nunnery." 

" I have heard something of the story 
before," remarked Baldock. " But the scan- 
dalous gossips hinted at the time that the 
noble knight you mention had deeply be- 
trayed her." 



124 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Believe not the tale, good host," said 
Chaucer. 

" Nay ; it has long since been forgotten, 
I trust," rejoined Baldock. "Any faults 
the Prioress may have committed have been 
expiated, I make no doubt, by severe 
penance. She is worn to a skeleton by 
constant mortification of the flesh. The 
Princess of Wales, who is performing a pil- 
grimage to Canterbury, has been here 
to-day, and paid the holy mother a 
visit." 

" I met the Princess and her train near 
Bochester," said Chaucer. " But I had no 
converse with her Grace. I am curious 
to have another look at the smith's fair 
daughter, in whom, as you say, the good 
Prioress takes so much interest." 

" Nay; if your worship desires it, that can 
be readily accomplished," replied Baldock. 
" You have but to walk towards the priory, 



THE INSURRECTION. 125 

and vou will meet her returning from 
vespers." 

While this discourse was going on, 
Chaucer had eaten a few mouthfuls of bread, 
and drank a cup of wine. 

He now rose, and bidding the host keep 
back supper for an hour, went forth, and 
proceeded to the priory. 




XIV. 




SEDITIOUS TALK BENEATH THE OAK. 

|HAUCEE'S noble countenance and 
gravity of manner inspired respect, 
and caps were doffed as he passed 
through the concourse on the green; but 
no one ventured to address him except one 
stalwart individual, who separated him- 
self from the throng, and strode towards 
him. 

The poet stopped, and courteously awaited 
the man's approach. 

"Master Geoffrey Chaucer will scarcely 
recollect me," said the burly fellow, doffing 
his cap ; " but I well remember seeing him 
when he was in France with the late King 
and the Duke of Lancaster. I was then 



THE INSURRECTION. 127 

an archer in the train of Sir Eustace de 
Valletort." 

" Ha ! I mind thee well ! Thou wert 
the stoutest archer Sir Eustace had ; but I 
cannot recollect thy name." 

" I am called Wat Tyler, and am now a 
smith in this village," replied the other. 

" Wat Tyler, say'st thou ?" exclaimed 
Chaucer, regarding him in surprise. " How 
long hast thou dwelt here?" 

" JNigh sixteen years," replied Wat. 

" Then thou wert here before the Lady 
Isabel retired to the nunnery?" 

" I had married, and had set up as a 
smith about a twelvemonth before that 
event," said Wat. 

" I thought so," mentally ejaculated 
Chaucer. 

He then added aloud, " Had thy lord ful- 
filled his vow, the Lady Isabel might now 
adorn a Court, instead of wearing away her 



128 MERRY ENGLAND. 

life in a cloister. Nor do I think Sir Eustace 
is happy." 

" Mayhap his conscience afflicts him," 
observed Wat. 

A momentary silence ensued, which was 
broken by Chaucer. 

" Just now," he said, " as I was gazing 
from the window of the inn, mine eyes were 
greeted by a vision of exceeding beauty. 
'Twas not a fairy, nor a nymph, that I 
beheld, but a young damsel ; and I was told 
by the host that she was the daughter of 
Wat Tyler, the smith." 

" My daughter !" exclaimed Wat. " You 
greatly overrate her beauty, worshipful sir." 

" Not a whit. 'Tis true I caught only 
a momentary glimpse of her, but she ap- 
peared to me the fairest maiden mine eyes 
ever lighted on. However, I must needs 
see her again, to make sure." 

" Editha is gone to vespers at the priory, 



THE INSURRECTION. 129 

or I would beg you to step into my cot- 
tage. She would esteem it a great honour 
to converse with the famous Master Geoffrey 
Chaucer." 

" Walk with me towards the priory. Per- 
chance we may meet her," said Chaucer. 

As they went on together, the conversa- 
tion dropped, and the poet seemed occupied 
by his reflections. 

From time to time Wat Tyler stole a 
glance at him, but did not make a remark. 

They had now quitted the village, and 
entered an avenue leading to the priory. 
Halting beneath a fine old oak, which 
threw its mighty branches across the road, 
Chaucer said to his companion, " Art thou 
aWycliffite?" 

" Truly am I," replied Wat. " I am a 
friend of the Franciscan friar, John Ball, who 
is now imprisoned for preaching Wycliffe's 
doctrines." 

vol. i. 9 



130 MERRY ENGLAND. 



" I saw John Ball while I was at Canter- 
bury, and he spoke to me obscurely, as if he 
believed a religious insurrection to be at 

hand." 

"If an insurrection takes place, it will 
not be merely against the clergy," said 
Wat. " Before the abuses of the Church 
are reformed, the grievances of [the people 
must be redressed." 

"The ecclesiastical hierarchy must be 
abolished," said Chaucer. 

" Serfdom destroyed, and property equally 
divided amongst all," added Wat. 

"Nay, I cannot go so far with thee as 
that," rejoined Chaucer. " And be not led 
away by idle talk. Property never will be 
in common. Thus much I can tell thee, 
and thou mayst repeat it to thy fellows, if 
thou wilt : had not the Duke of Lancaster 
been thwarted — ay, constantly thwarted — 
in his plans for the people's benefit, most of 



THE INSURRECTION. 131 

their grievances would by this time have 
been remedied." 

" I can easily understand why you should 
endeavour to justify the Duke of Lancaster, 
sir," rejoined "Wat Tyler, boldly. " But his 
Grace has lost the people's confidence, and 
will never regain it." 

" How? — never regain it ?" cried Chaucer. 

" He is known to be ambitious, and they 
think he aims at the Crown. I must speak 
plainly," rejoined Wat. " The people will 
not help him to dethrone his nephew — son 
of the Black Prince." 

" He does not need their aid for any such 
rebellious design!" said Chaucer, in a tone 
of stern rebuke. " Great wrong is done him 
by the foul suspicion. The Duke is the 
firmest supporter of the Throne." 

" But is he not mistrusted by his royal 
nephew — greatly mistrusted?" observed Wat 
Tyler. 

9— a 



132 MERBT ENGLAND. 

" The Duke hath many enemies, avowed 
and secret, and I know not what false asser- 
tions concerning him may have been made by 
the latter to the King ; but this I wot well, 
Eichard hath not a more loyal and devoted 
subject than his uncle, John of Gaunt." 

" Loyal the Duke may be ; but 'tis certain 
he is aspiring, and the people like him 
not," 

" Would they like any Prince ?" demanded 
Chaucer, sceptically. "Would they follow 
any leader but one of themselves ?" 

" Time will show," rejoined Wat Tyler, 
with a feeling of self-exultation. 

" Thou thinkst we are on the eve of an 
insurrection — eh?" cried Chaucer, fixing a 
searching look upon him. 

" Nay, I say not that," rejoined the other; 

« 

" but I affirm that the people are resolved to 
obtain a hearing." 

" And 1 tell thee again there is no one 



THE INSURRECTION. 133 

who can obtain a hearing for them, unless 
it be the Duke of Lancaster." 

Wat Tyler shook his head. 

" They fear lest they should be betrayed," 
he said. " They think the Duke will use 
them for his own purpose ; and that gained, 
will sacrifice them." 

"The rising will be instantly crushed 
without his support," cried Chaucer. 

" I do not think so," rejoined Wat Tyler. 

All this time there had been a secret 
listener to their discourse. 

Behind a neighbouring tree was ensconced 
the tax-collector, who had followed them 
cautiously from the green. 

Not a word uttered by either speaker had 
escaped Shaxton's quick ears. Having now 
heard enough, he prepared to decamp. 

" 'Twas lucky I followed them," he 
thought. " I have learnt a most important 
secret, which I can turn to profit, by reveal- 



134 MERRY ENGLAND. 

ing it to the Council. Evidently an in- 
surrection of the people is about to burst 
forth. Wat Tyler is concerned in it, and 
Master Geoffrey Chaucer is now privy to it ; 
if, indeed, he be not, as I suspect, one of the 
chief contrivers. Both must be arrested. 
I will consult with Messer Benedetto. No ; 
that were unwise — as, if he takes the matter 
in hand, I shall lose the reward. I must 
proceed cautiously. What if I were to send 
a message to the Lord Mayor, and Sir John 
Philpot ! I will do it, if I can find a trusty 
messenger. But — hist ! I hear footsteps ! 
Some one comes this way, I must be gone." 
With this he stole noiselessly away, en- 
tirely escaping the notice of the two persons 
in his vicinity. 




XV. 



WHAT PASSED BETWEEN CHAUCER AND EDITHA. 





KS 



HE footsteps that had alarmed the 
spy were those of Editha and her 
mother, who were returning from 
the priory. 

Wat Tyler pointed them out to the poet, 
but Chaucer did not require to be told who 
they were, for he instantly recognised the 
fair young damsel. 

The pair quickened their pace as soon as 
they descried the smith, and presently came 
up. But they stopped at a short distance 
till called forward. 

Chaucer did not embarrass the young 
damsel by regarding her too steadfastly ; 
but, nevertheless, his gaze threw her into 



J. 36 MERRY ENGLAND. 

some confusion, and covered her fair cheek 
with blushes. 

Whatever inference he drew from this 
rapid but close inspection of her features, he 
allowed no sign to escape him. 

" This is Master Geoffrey Chaucer, child," 
said Wat Tyler, in a low tone, to his daughter. 

The mention of that name operated like 
magic on Editha, and seemed instantly to 
dispel her timidity. 

Raising her eyes, she gazed at the poet 
with mingled reverence and admiration. 

" By St. Anselm ! she is very like the 
Lady Isabel," thought Chaucer. 

" Pardon my boldness," cried Editha ; " I 
did not think I should ever behold Master 
Geoffrey Chaucer, and I cannot repress my 
delight at seeing him. Till now I thought 
he could be no mortal man !" 

"Then, I fear, you must be grievously 
disappointed," observed Chaucer. 



THE INSURRECTION. 137 

" Disappointed ! — no ! I have hitherto re- 
garded you as a superior being, whom I 
should not dare to address." 
[4 " But you have no such feeling now, I 
trust?" he said. 

" No," she replied ; " you look so good- 
natured that I will venture to tell you 
that I have read ' The Court of Love/ and 
' Troilus and Cressida,' and will try to ex- 
press the pleasure those poems have given 
me. 

" My daughter is never tired of reading 
your poems, worshipful sir," observed Dame 
Tyler. 

" They afford me fresh delight every time 
I turn to them," cried Editha. 

" I did not anticipate this gratification," 
remarked Chaucer. "Many compliments 
have been paid me, many nattering things 
have been said Jto me by Court dames, but 
none that have pleased me so much as you 



138 MERRY ENGLAND. 



simple praise, for I am willing to believe it 
the language of truth." 

" It is so/' cried Editha, earnestly. 

Wat Tyler forbore to take any part in 
this conversation, but he listened to it well 
pleased, and when a proposal was made by 
Chaucer to return with the party to the 
village, the smith fell back with his wife, 
and allowed the poet and Editha to precede 
them. 

Chaucer evidently took a lively interest 
in his young companion, which could not 
fail to gratify her, and she replied to all 
his questions with the most perfect can- 
dour and simplicity. 

She told him of the constant kindnesses 
she had received from the good Prioress, 
and how warmly attached she was to her. 
At this he did not seem at all surprised, 
but he counselled her not to become a 
novice without due consideration. 



THE INSURRECTION. 139 

Neither did he seem surprised when she 
told him of the notice that the Princess of 
Wales had taken of her that morning ; but 
he said she was wrong not to accept the 
Princess's gracious offer of a place in her 
Highness' household. 

He looked very grave, however, when in- 
formed of the annoyance she had experienced 
from Sir John Holland. 

" I strongly commend .your prudence," he 
said. "You treated the insolent young 
noble as he deserved, and I trust you may 
never behold. him again." 

" But his last words, whispered in St. 
Edmond's chantry, seemed to intimate that 
he meant not to desist from pursuing me," 
she said. " He terrifies me." 

" If you have any real uneasiness, men- 
tion the matter to the Prioress, and she will 
advise you how to act." 

"I have already done so, and she has 



140 MERRY ENGLAND. 

promised to send a message to the Princess 
of Wales." 

" Then you may rest easy," he rejoined. 
"Your persecutor will trouble you no 
more." 




XVI. 



THE EREMITE. 




HEY had now nearly reached the 
end of the avenue, when a friar 
was seen approaching from a side 
path. 

His long, grey gown almost covered his 
hare feet, and his cowl was drawn over the 
hack of his head. A cord was tied round 
his waist, and from this girdle hung a long 
string of beads. A white beard added to 
his venerable appearance. 

" 'Tis Friar Gawin, the eremite," ob- 
served Editha. " He is going from his cell 
to the priory." 

"Where is the hermitage?" inquired 
Chaucer. 



142 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"Not far hence, in the wood," she re- 
joined. " I pray you to excuse me, sir. I 
think, from the holy father's manner, that 
he desires to speak to me." 

Chaucer bowed, and walked slowly on ; 
and by the time Wat Tyler and his wife 
had joined Editha, the hermit came up. 

" Dominus vobiscum !" he exclaimed. 
" Ye are well met. I have something to 
say to thee, daughter," he added, to Editha, 
" but I cannot say it now. Prithee bring 
her to my cell this evening," he continued 
to Dame Tyler. 

" Shall I do so ?" said the dame, appeal- 
ing to her husband. 

" Ay, marry," he replied ; " wherefore 
not ? — the moon rises early." 

" Come with them, an thou wilt, brother," 
said the hermit to Wat. " Thou canst wait 
outside my cell." 

"Nay; I am not afraid!" rejoined the 
smith. " No one will molest them. As 



THE INSURRECTION. 143 

soon as the moon hath risen — and that will 
he about the ninth hour — you may expect 
them, father." 

" I shall not detain them long," replied 
the hermit. "I have not much to say — 
but it must be said to-night." 

" I hope you mean not to reprove me for 
any fault T have committed, father ?" said 
Editha. 

" You will learn in good time, daughter," 
replied the hermit. " At the ninth hour I 
shall expect you. The taper burning in the 
window of my cell will guide you through 
the gloom. You need have no fear. There 
are no evil things near my abode. All good 
saints have you in their keeping !" 

With this valediction, he pursued his way 
to^the priory. 

They did not overtake Chaucer till he had 
entered the village, and was close by the 
smith's habitation. 

" I am now going to supper at the inn," 



144 MERRY ENGLAND. 

he observed to Wat. " When I have finished 
my meal, I should like to see you again." 

" I will be with your worship in an hour," 
replied the smith. 

" Shall I tell you how I shall pass the 
time while you are at supper ?" said Editha, 
playfully, to the poet. 

" Profitably, I am sure," he replied. • 
" Very likely in reading your mass-book." 

" Of a sooth, I shall pass the time pro- 
fitably," she replied, with an arch look. 
" But it will be in reading your ' Court of 
Love.' " 

And, with a gay laugh, she retreated to 
her father's dwelling. 

Chaucer watched her till she disappeared, 
and then went on to the hostel. 




XVII. 




MYSTERIOUS TRAVELLERS ARRIVE AT THE 
HOSTEL. 

f]N the principal room there were 
several guests, most of whom rose 
to return the poet's salutation as 
he entered. 

A cover had been laid for him on a small 
table near the window, which was still left 
open, and to this pleasantly-placed table the 
host conducted him with some little cere- 
mony, for Master Baldock was rather proud 
of his distinguished guest. 

" I hope the trout may not be overdone," 
he said, in an apologetic tone ; " for your 
worship hath stayed a little beyond your 
time, and the cook could not take them out 

VOL. i. 10 



146 MERRY ENGLAND. 

of the frying-pan. 'Twould be a thousand 
pities if they were, for finer fish never came 
out of the Darent." 

He would have run on in this strain, had 
not Chaucer cut him short ; and when the 
trout were placed before the poet, he pro* 
nounced them excellent. 

" Never did I taste better fish," he said, 
as he swallowed a deep draught of the Gras- 
coigne vintage. 

Having begun thus satisfactorily, he con- 
tinued his repast with deliberation. 

The room, as we have said, was well-nigh 
filled with guests, some of whom were 
supping, while others were quaffing Gaillac 
or Osey out of tall drinking-cups. 

But there was more company outside than 
within the room. The benches in front of 
the window at which Chaucer was seated 
were occupied by villagers, who had been 
enjoying the sports on the green, and were 



THE INSURRECTION. 147 

j 

now indulging in copious draughts of ale 
and metheglin. 

Large flagons of these beverages were set 
on the long narrow tables before them, and 
were speedily emptied, and as speedily re- 
plenished. 

The revelry was somewhat noisy, but it 
was quite good-humoured. The minstrels, 
who had played at the May-pole, were 
among the company, enlivening them with 
their strains, and now and then with a song. 

Chaucer very much enjoyed the scene, and 
the uproarious merriment that occasionally 
arose did not in the slightest degree disturb 
him. 

But he did experience some annoyance 
from an ill-favoured fellow, with red locks, 
and an unpleasant expression of counte- 
nance, whose eye was constantly upon 
him. 

On inquiring who this individual was 

10—2 



148 MERRY ENGLAND. 

from the host, he learnt that he was Shaxton, 
the tax-collector. 

To return to the guests in the room. 
Among them at the next table to Chaucer 
sat Messer Benedetto ; and as the Lombard 
merchant and the poet were previously ac- 
quainted, a good deal of conversation 
naturally took place between them. 

But their discourse was on general topics. 
Messer Benedetto made no allusion to the 
object of his visit to Dartford; nor did 
Chaucer mention what had brought him 
thither. 

Even when the host spoke of Shaxton, 
Messer Benedetto did not care to own that 
the impudent tax-collector was in his em- 
ploy. 

Later on, however, when Wat Tjlev 
made his appearance, the Lombard merchant 
turned away, and began to talk to those on 
his other side. 



THE INSURRECTION. 149 

The burly smith did not enter the room, 
but stationed himself near the window ; and 
thus placed, he could converse as freely with 
the poet as if he had been inside. 

Shaxton made another attempt to listen 
to their discourse ; but Wat's angry looks 
soon drove him away. 

It had already become dusk, when some 
excitement was caused by the arrival of 
three well-mounted travellers, who came 
from the direction of Kochester. 

They reined in their palfreys when they 
reached the inn, and gazed into the door- 
way in quest of an attendant to take their 
orders". 

So muffled up were these persons in their 
hoods, and so enveloped in their mantles, 
that little could be discerned either of feature 
or figure ; but they seemed young, and 
certainly, from the haughtiness of their 
manner, might be presumed to be noble. 



150 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Before they could alight, the host went 
out to them, and, with many obsequious 
bows, expressed his deep regret that he could 
not offer them a lodging, inasmuch as his 
house was quite full. 

" We do not require a lodging," replied 
one of them, who appeared to be the chief 
of the party, in a haughty tone. " We 
merely need a draught of wine." 

" That you can have, and of the best, 
noble sirs," replied Baldock. "Gascoigne 
or Ehenish, Gaillac or Osey. Will it please 
you to alight ?" 

The horseman, however, declined ; but 
bade him bring a flagon of good Gascoigne 
wine. 

" Stay !" cried another of the party. 
" Where can I find a smith ? My horse 
hath cast a shoe." 

" The smith can be readily found, for he 
is here at this moment," replied Baldock. 



THE INSURRECTION. 151 

" But I cannot answer that he will do the 
job — 'tis somewhat late, and he may have 
closed his smithy." 

" I will pay him double — nay, treble. I 
would not have my charger lamed for a 
hundred crowns," cried the other. 

" I will tell him what you say," replied 
the host, hurrying off. 

Presently he returned with a large flagon 
of wine and a drinking cup. 

" Wat Tyler, the smith, will attend you 
anon, noble sir," he said, filling the cup, and 
offering it to the one whom he took to be 
the chief of the party. 

" Here is he, to speak for himself," added 
Baldock, as the stalwart smith could be seen 
making his way towards them through the 
villagers. 

At this intimation, two of the party turned 
away their horses' heads, while the third 
pushed forward to meet the smith. 



152 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Your horse wants a shoe, I understand?" 
said Wat. 

"Ay," replied the other. "Name thy 
fee." 

" A groat for every nail, and three groats 
for the shoe," replied "Wat. " My smithy is 
close at hand ; I shall be ready by the time 
you have drunk a cup of wine." 

So saying, he strode off. 





XVIII. 

THE SMITH AT THE SMITHY. 

jN arriving at the smithy, Wat threw 
open the door, and divesting him- 
self of hood and surcoat, and 
pulling up the sleeves of his jerkin, seized 
the bellows with a vigorous arm, and soon 
blew up a flame in the forge. 

None of his men were there, but he did 
not need their aid, and in a few minutes 
the glowing iron was ringing on the 
anvil. 

By this time he expected that the young 
noble who had commanded his services 
would have appeared ; but, seeing nothing 
of him, he paused in his task to listen. 

No sound was heard except the distant 



154 MERRY ENGLAND. 

shouts and laughter of the revellers at the 
hostel. 

He did not, however, doubt for a moment 
that the nobleman would come, and con- 
trolled his impatience as well as he could. 

But five minutes more elapsed, and he 
then resolved to wait no longer. 

" I will not shoe his horse now if he will 
give me a golden mark for the job !" he 
muttered. " These nobles think that a base 
mechanic must needs bide their pleasure; 
but this springal shall find his mistake — 
pest on them all !" 

With this he quenched the iron he had 
heated, resumed his hood and surcoat, 
and prepared to shut up the smithy. 

The moon had now risen above the trees 
near the priory, and, by the light her beams 
afforded, he could plainly perceive a small 
party of horsemen galloping towards him 
across the broad, green area. 



THE INSURRECTION. 155 

At first he fancied these must be the 
young nobles he had expected, but he 
quickly changed his opinion. As the party 
drew nearer, he could not doubt, from their 
garb and accoutrements, that they were the 
Outlaw and some of his band. 

He had scarcely recovered from the sur- 
prise into which he was thrown by their 
unexpected appearance when they came 
up. 

" What brings thee here to-night ?" he 
called out, in an angry voice, as Jack Straw 
reined in his black steed at the door of the 
smithy. " Say what thou hast to say, and 
begone. Many eyes are upon 'thee," he 
added, pointing to the assemblage at the 
hostel. 

" By St. Nicholas ! thou shouldst thank, 
not blame me, seeing that I have come to 
aid thee," rejoined the Outlaw. " Where is 
thy daughter ?" 



156 MERRY" ENGLAND. 

" My daughter ! what of her ?" cried the 
smith. " Ah ! my mind misgives me !" 

" Is she safe within thy dwelling ?" de- 
manded the Outlaw. 

" She is gone with her mother to the 
hermitage in the wood," replied Wat, trem- 
bling with anxiety. " Fool that I was to 
allow her to go there at such an hour, but I 
dreamed of no peril." 

" Answer me one more question," said 
the Outlaw. " Hath there been a young 
noble here with two attendants ?" 

" He came to the inn not half an hour 
ago, and he, and those with him, have since 
disappeared," replied Wat. 

" I know where they are gone," said the 
Outlaw. " This daring noble means to carry 
off thy daughter, but I trust I am in time to 
rescue her. Thou art the dupe of a clever 
stratagem, Wat, which might have suc- 
ceeded had I not chanced to hear of it." 



THE INSURRECTION. 157 

" I see it all now !" cried the smith, al- 
most frenzied with rage and anxiety. 
" That false hermit ! but he shall pay dearly 
for his treachery ! Tarry not another in- 
stant ! To the rescue ! — to the rescue !" 

The Outlaw did not require more urging, 
but dashed off with his followers to the 
wood. 




SIP 


B^7 


158 






gai™ 




HO^fS** 



XIX. 



THE HERMITAGE. 




DITTIA and her mother set out for 
the hermitage without the slightest 
misgiving. 

They could entertain no suspicion of Friar 
Grawin, who was well known to them, and 
who bore a high reputation for sanctity. 
Nor were they at all alarmed by the idea of 
a walk at so late an hour through the 
wood. 

Familiar with the path that led to the 
cell, they could track it as readily in the 
gloom as in broad daylight, and had no fear 
whatever of molestation. 

The walk through the wood proved de- 
lightful, as they had anticipated ; and before 



THE INSURRECTION. 159 

they reached their destination, the moon had 
risen, and showed them the hermit's solitary 
abode, situated in the midst of a clearing. 

With the moonbeams shining upon it, 
the hermitage looked the picture of seclusion 
and peace. It was nothing more than a 
hut, rudely constructed by the recluse's own 
hand, with timber he himself had felled on 
the spot. The roof was thatched and over- 
grown with moss. 

Near the door was placed a crucifix, com- 
posed of pieces of a pine-tree nailed to- 
gether. 

Not far from the cell there was a clear, 
gushing spring, which was of great benefit 
to the anchorite, and had probably deter- 
mined him in the choice of the spot. 

He was standing at the door of his cell 
when the pair arrived, and came forth to 
give them his benediction ; after which he 
took them inside. 



160 MERRY ENGLAND. 

A taper lighted up the little apartment 
into which they were ushered. The furni- 
ture consisted of a rudely fashioned table, on 
which stood an hour-glass, and three or four 
stools of equally rough workmanship. 

In one corner was a small crucifix, and in 
an inner room was the pallet on which the 
anchorite stretched his limbs. 

Bidding his visitors be seated, the hermit 
took a small casket from his gown, placed 
it on the table, and thus addressed 
Editha :— 

" I have a singular circumstance to relate 
to you, daughter," he said. " This evening, 
while I was reciting the Credo, there came a 
messenger to my cell ; and, opening the 
door, said to me, ' Arise, holy father ! Go 
to the smith's daughter, Editha, and bid her 
come to thy cell an hour after sunset.' 
' Wherefore should I do this ?' I demanded, 
in surprise. ' Thou art a stranger to me, 



THE INSURRECTION. 161. 

and mayst have some evil design. I will 
not bear thy message to the damsel/ ' Dis- 
miss thy fears,' said the man. ' No ill will 
befall her. On the contrary, she will receive 
a gift. In proof whereof, I now deliver to 
thee this casket ; which I charge thee to 
place in her own hands.' ' But why make 
so much mystery?' I rejoined, hesitating to 
take the casket. ' "Why not deliver it to her 
thyself?' ' I do mine errand,' replied the 
man ; ' and if the noble lady from whom I 
come chooses to act thus, 'tis not for me to 
disobey her. I am a servant, and must do 
as I am bidden.' ' Since thou comest from 
a lady, that alters the case,' I said. ' But 
may I not know her name ?' ' I am enjoined 
to secrecy/ said the man ; ' but thou shalt 
learn her name hereafter.' " 

"You shall learn it now, good father," 
cried Editha, who had listened with great 
interest to the narration. " 'Tis the Princess 

vol. i. 11 



162 MERRY ENGLAND. 

of Wales ! None but her Grace could have 
sent me this rich gift." 

" She has sent it in a roundabout way," 
observed Dame Tyler, who was not alto- 
gether free from suspicion. " Besides, she 
has already made you one present." 

" Here is the casket, daughter," said the 
hermit, presenting it to the young damsel. 
" "When I learnt that it came from a noble 
lady, I no longer hesitated ; but took it, and 
promised to fulfil the messenger's injunc- 
tions." 

" I cannot find words to express my obli- 
gations to you, holy father," said Editha. 
" But the casket is unfastened. Let us see 
what it contains." 

And as she spoke, she opened the little 
bos, and took out a chain of pearls. 

" Pearls !" she exclaimed, holding them 
up. " Look, mother, how beautiful they 
are! 



THE INSURRECTION. 163 

" Beautiful, indeed !" cried Dame Tyler, 
gazing at them with admiration. 

" In good sooth they are costly orna- 
ments !" said the hermit, holding up the 
taper, so that he could see them better. 

" They are too costly for me !" said Editha, 
with a sigh. 

" Nay ; you must needs wear them, since 
they have been sent you by the Princess," 
remarked her mother. 

" But how know I she has sent them to 
me ?" said the damsel. " 'Tis a mere guess. 
This chain puzzles me." 

" Keep it till you hear more about it," 
said Dame Tyler. 

" I will keep it till I have consulted the 
Lady Prioress," observed Editha, replacing 
the pearls in the box. 

"Ay, the Prioress will give you good 
counsel," said the hermit. " But I see not 
why you should not wear them." 

11—2 



164 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Nor I," rejoined Dame Tyler. " Mean- 
while, I will take care of the casket." 

And she secured it in her pocket. 

Just then a tap at the little window of 
the cell startled them all. 




XX. 



SHOWING WHO SENT THE CASKET. 




OLY Mary! what is that?" ex- 
claimed the anchorite. 
He then called out, in a voice 
loud enough to be heard by the person 
outside, "Who wants the hermit of 
the wood? I open not my door to a 
stranger !'' 

" 'Tis the messenger who brought the 
casket this e'en," replied a voice. " Hath 
the damsel any message for me to my noble 
mistress ?" 

" Thou mayst enter," said the hermit, un- 
barring the door. 

"Nay; let the damsel come forth to me/' 
rejoined the man. 



166 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Having no apprehension, Editha complied 
with the request. 

But as she issued forth, and looked about 
for the messenger, she perceived two or three 
mounted figures, partly concealed by the 
trees, and would have instantly retreated, 
had not a strong arm seized her, and, de- 
spite her cries, dragged her off. 

In another instant a scarf was twined 
tightly round her arms, so as to prevent any 
struggles. 

Thus bound, she was lifted from the 
ground, and placed in front of a horseman, 
who seemed to be the chief of the party. 

Alarmed by her outcries, the hermit and 
her mother would have come to her assis- 
tance, had they not been prevented by an 
armed man, who planted himself at the door 
of the cell. 

" Eelease me !" cried the terrified damsel 
to the horseman, whose arm was round her 



THE INSURRECTION. 167 

waist as he sustained her in front of his 
saddle. 

" Eelease you ? — not I !" he rejoined, in 
an exulting tone. " I am too well pleased 
with the prize I have gained to part with 
you. I told you this morn you should be 
mine, and I have kept my word." 

" Ah ! it is he !" she cried, recoiling 
from him as far as possible, but he held her 
fast. 

" You are completely in my power, 
damsel," he said. 

" My father will hear my cries, and deliver 
me," she rejoined. 

" Count not upon your father's aid, 
damsel," laughed Sir John Holland, for it 
was he. " I have taken care to prevent 
any interference on his part. The un- 
suspecting smith is at work at his forge. 
My plan has been well contrived and well 
executed. Ha, ha !" 



168 MERRY ENGLAND. 



" Heaven will defeat your wicked design, 
I nothing doubt !" she returned. 

And she renewed her outcries, calling 
upon St. Ursula, St. Agatha, St. Julia, and 
all saints who succour distressed damsels, to 
protect her. 

Paying no attention to her cries, and 
believing they were unheard, except by 
those who could render no assistance, Sir 
John speeded along the narrow road through 
the wood, intending to turn off as soon as 
he came to an opening he had noted on the 
right. 

Somewhat in advance rode Sir Osbert 
Montacute, while behind came two well- 
mounted and well-armed attendants. 

On a sudden Sir Osbert stopped, and 
after listening for a moment, rode quickly 
back to his leader, and said — 

"There is danger in front, my lord. 
Horsemen are approaching. I heard them 
distinctly." 



THE INSURRECTION. 169 

" Are you quite sure ?" demanded Sir 
John. 

" Quite sure ; and as far as I can judge, 
there are five or six in the company." 

Though they conferred in a low tone, 
Editha overheard what passed, and hoping 
there might be a chance of rescue, renewed 
her outcries. 

They were immediately answered by the 
advancing party. 

" Confusion !" exclaimed Sir John 
Holland. " We must fly !" 

And turning his horse's head, he galloped 
back in the direction he had come, followed 
by the others. 



XXI. 



THE RESCUE. 




ITHOUT resorting to violence, it 
would have been impossible to 
silence the affrighted damsel; 
and, guided by her cries, the pursuers ad- 
vanced with increased rapidity, and seemed 
to gain on the flying party. 

Sir John and his attendants had dashed 
past the hermitage, and entered another 
path that led deeper into the wood ; but 
finding themselves close pressed, though 
they had not yet seen their pursuers, they 
agreed to separate, and Sir John, abruptly 
quitting his attendants, plunged into the 
thicket. 

Not without difficulty did he force his 



THE INSURRECTION. 171 

way through the underwood ; but he 
deemed himself secure, for his fair captive 
had become insensible. 

He had not, however, penetrated far into 
the wood, when the crashing of branches 
announced that one of his pursuers was at 
hand, and a fierce voice exclaimed, " Turn 
thee, vile robber and desolator, and deliver 
up the maid thou hast stolen. Stop, I say. 
Thou canst not escape me." 

Sir John wheeled round instantly at the 
summons and drew his sword. 

He had gained a small open patch, on 
which the moonlight fell, so that he was 
fully revealed to his pursuer, who burst 
forth next moment from the surrounding 
trees. 

So wild and fantastic was the appearance 
of the horseman, that Sir John gazed at him 
and his sable steed with wonder, not un- 
mingled with superstitious terror. 



172 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Kecovering himself instantly, he aimed a 
blow at the Outlaw, which, had it taken 
effect, would have terminated that daring 
individual's career ; but the other nimbly 
avoided the stroke, and wresting the young 
noble's sword from his grasp, seized him by 
the throat, crying out — 

" Yield the damsel to me, or I will slay 
thee and take her !" 

"Never!" exclaimed Sir John. 

And by a vigorous effort he succeeded in 
freeing himself from the Outlaw's grasp, and 
assailed him with his dagger. 

In the conflict that ensued, either by his 
master's hand or by that of the Outlaw, Sir 
John's charger received a mortal wound in 
the neck, and as the noble animal sank to 
the ground, the still inanimate damsel 
was snatched from her captor by the Out- 
law. 

Before Sir John could disengage himself 



THE INSURRECTION. 173 

from his fallen steed, his successful antago- 
nist was gone. 

But he heard the sound of a horn, winded 
hy the Outlaw to recall his band. 




XXII. 



EDITHA DISTRUSTS HER DELIVERER. 




EANTIME, the Outlaw, being well 
acquainted with the intricacies of 
the wood, had easily regained the 
narrow path leading to the village, and pur- 
sued it leisurely, in the expectation of being 
rejoined by his band. 

As he gazed at the beautiful head now 
reclining upon his shoulder, evil thoughts 
crossed him, and he could scarcely make up 
his mind to relinquish the rich prize he had 
gained. 

"The maid has fallen into my hands," 
he thought. "Why should I not retain 
her, and make her my bride? But no; 
that would cause a difference 'twixt me and 



THE INSURRECTION. 175 

her father, and I must not quarrel with 
him now." 

His gaze was fixed upon the fair face 
with a passionate admiration, when Editha 
opened her eyes and encountered his ardent 
glance. She was almost as much affrighted 
as she had previously been while in the 
power of the young noble. 

As soon as she understood what had hap- 
pened, she thanked him for delivering her, 
but besought him to set her down. 

" Nay, I must carry you to your father, 
fair damsel," he said ; "or I shall lose all 
credit with him for the slight service I have 
rendered you. Besides, you have scarcely 
strength to walk." 

" Perhaps not," she replied, resigning her- 
self unwillingly to her disagreeable position. 
" But you will heighten my gratitude if you 
will take me home quickly." 

She then inquired anxiously concerning 



176 MERRY ENGLAND. 

her mother, but he could give her no in- 
formation. His band, however, coming up 
at the moment, he despatched one of them 
to the hermitage. 

This done, he set off at a gallop, and soon 
reached Wat Tyler's dwelling. 

The smith was standing at his door, in a 
state of the greatest disquietude ; and as he 
received his daughter from her deliverer, he 
clasped her to his heart. 

" Thank Heaven, you are safe !" he cried. 
"But where is your mother?" 

" You will see her presently," replied the 
Outlaw. " You need have no uneasiness re- 
specting her. She is in no danger." 

"And what of that false friar?" cried 
the smith, stamping on the ground with 
rage. 

" Be not angered with the good hermit, 
father," said Editha. "You suspect him 
unjustly. He has been duped by this 



THE INSURRECTION. 177 

wicked young noble. I will tell you all 
anon." 

"Go in, then, child," said Wat, much 
pacified by this assurance. " I must confer 
with you ere you depart," he added to the 
Outlaw. 

" Will it be safe to enter your dwelling ?" 
demanded the other. 

"Perfectly," replied Wat. "All the 
village has now retired to rest." 

Thereupon the Outlaw sprang to the 
ground, and, giving his steed to one of 
the band, entered the cottage with the 
smith. 



^m^yo^^M 



VOL. I. 12 




XXIII. 

A SUDDEN QUARREL. 

HE room was dimly lighted by a 
lamp, which revealed its low 
raftered roof, large fireplace, with 
the remains of a wood fire still burning on 
the hearth, and simple furniture, such as 
might be expected in a tenement of the 
kind. 

But there were several pieces of armour 
hung up against the walls — a hauberk, bras- 
sarts, vanbraces, gorget, greaves, a basinet, 
and a buckler ; and these, with some offen- 
sive arms — as a gisarme, a pole-axe, a martel 
de fer, a couple of swords, a cross-bow, and 
a long-bow, gave a peculiar character to the 
room. 



THE INSURRECTION. 179 

It was not, however, surprising to find 
the weapons in Wat Tyler's dwelling ; for it 
must be recollected that he was an armourer 
as well as a smith. 

Nothing could be said properly to belong 
to Editha. She had her own little room, and 
it looked towards the garden. 

Thither she had now retired, and kneeling 
before a little image of the Blessed Virgin, 
poured forth thanks for her fortunate delive- 
rance. 

Wat Tyler's first business was -to resort 
to a cupboard, whence he produced a flask 
of wine and a couple of drinking-horns, and 
placing these on the table, he sat down with 
his confederate. 

After they had solemnly pledged each 
other, the smith said, in a grave tone, and 
with a look that announced that his reso- 
lution was taken — 

"Brother, after this outrage, thou wilt 

12—2 



180 MERRY ENGLAND. 

not wonder that I am determined no longer 
to delay the rising. The signal shall be 
given to-morrow." 

" I am glad to hear it !" cried the Outlaw. 
" Twenty thousand men are ready to rally 
round our standard as soon as it is raised. 
But in what manner will the signal be 
given i 

"I have not decided as yet," replied 
Wat. "But bring all the men you can 
muster to Dartford Brent by noon to- 
morrow. By that time I shall have arranged 
my plans, and be ready for action. My 
design is to proceed first to Canterbury, in 
order to release John. Ball. By the time 
we arrive there, we shall have collected all 
our forces. Should we meet with resistance, 
we will sack the city; but I believe the 
inhabitants will receive us well. At any 
rate, we will despoil the Archbishop of his 
treasures ; and when we have got all we 



THE INSURRECTION. 181 

can, we will commence our march to Lon- 
don. A memorable march it shall be. 
Not a mansion, not a castle, shall be un- 
vi sited." 

" Your thirst for vengeance is awakened, 
I perceive, brother," said the Outlaw. 

" And will not easily be allayed," replied 
"Wat. "These tyrannous nobles, who have 
so long oppressed us, who grind us to the 
dust, and steal our wives and daughters, 
shall feel our power. We will exterminate 
them. Drink another cup to their destruc- 
tion !" 

" Willingly," replied the Outlaw, empty- 
ing the horn which had been filled for him. 
" The hour of retribution is not far dis- 
tant." 

" It has been too long delayed," said 
Wat. "Had this attempt succeeded, I 
should have for ever blamed myself for my 
sloth." 



182 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" 'Twill serve as a pretext for the rising," 
observed the Outlaw. 

" Hark ye, brother," he continued, leaning 
his elbow on the table, and looking into 
Wat's face as he spoke ; " I have a pro- 
position to make to thee, and I doubt not 
thou wilt readily assent to it. I have con- 
ceived a love for thy daughter. Thou shalt 
give her to me as a wife." 

Wat stared at him in astonishment, as if 
doubting whether he heard aright. 

"How say st thou?" demanded the Out- 
law, after a pause. 

"We will talk of this hereafter," rejoined 
the smith. "Thou hast other matters to 
think of now." 

" !Nay ; I will not be put off thus," said 
the Outlaw, peremptorily. " I must have 
thy promise." 

" I grieve to refuse thee," said the smith ; 
" but I must answer, ' No !' " 



THE INSURRECTION. 183 

" Give me thy reason for refusal," cried 
the Outlaw, controlling himself with diffi- 
culty. 

" I have no reason that I care to give," 
replied the smith, bluntly. 

"Having imperilled my life for the 
damsel, I have a claim to her," cried the 
Outlaw, with a fierce look. 

" Thou hast a claim to her gratitude, but 
nothing more," rejoined Wat Tyler. 

" By St. Nicholas ! she shall be mine," 
cried the Outlaw, springing to his feet and 
drawing his sword. "And since I am 
treated with this indignity, I will take her. 
I have but to wind my horn, and my men 
will come to my assistance." 

" Not all of you shall take her from me," 
cried Wat. " Thou art worse than the 
young noble." 

And, stepping quickly back, he seized a 
sword that was hanging against the wall. 



184 MERRY ENGLAND. 

They were glaring fiercely at each other, 
neither liking to commence the attack, when, 
Editha, who had heard the disturbance, 
came forth from the inner room. 

" Away with thee, girl !" exclaimed Wat. 
" Thou art not wanted here. Gro back into 
thine own room, and make fast the door." 

" No ; I will not quit you, father," she 
cried, rushing up to him. "What is the 
cause of this sudden quarrel ?" 

" Thou art the cause of it, damsel," 
replied the Outlaw. 

" I ?" she exclaimed. 

" Thou hast caused the quarrel, and thou 
canst end it with a word," he continued. 
" Wilt thou share my fortunes ? — wilt thou 
be my wife? Say 'yes,' and not twenty 
fathers shall keep thee from me." 

" If she consents, thou shalt have my 
consent also," remarked Wat. 

*' Thou dost hear, damsel?" cried the 
Outlaw. 



THE INSURRECTION. 185 

" In refusing thy demand, for such it 
would seem to be," replied Editha, scarcely 
attempting to conceal the aversion with 
which he inspired her, " my father has done 
well. I am much beholden to thee for the 
great service thou hast rendered me; but 
thou wilt cancel the obligation if thou dost 
press thy suit." 

" Enough ! I have been moonstruck," 
cried the Outlaw, sheathing his sword. 
" Thy pardon, damsel. I would not have 
thee hate me, though thou canst not love 
me. Thou wilt not think worse of me for 
this, brother," he added to Wat.' " The fit 
is past, and will not return." 

And he extended his hand to the smith, 
who grasped it heartily, and their recon- 
ciliation was complete. 

Just then there was a knock at the door, 
and next moment it was partly opened, and 
one of the Outlaw's followers thrust in his 
head. 



XXIV. 

MESSER BENEDETTO IS CAPTURED BY THE 
ROBBERS. 




E have just stopped a mounted 
traveller, captain," said the 
robber, addressing his leader. 
" Whence comes he," demanded the Out- 
law. 

" Only from the inn," replied the robber. 
" From the inn — art sure ?" 
" Quite sure," returned the robber. " We 
saw him start. Shall we detain him ?" 

" It may be Messer Benedetto, the rich 
Lombard merchant," said Wat to the 
Outlaw. " If so, he would be a great 
prize to us at this moment." 



THE INSURRECTION. 1S7 

" Let him be brought in," said the Out- 
law to his follower. 

" Betire, daughter," said Wat to Editha, 
"and come not forth again, unless I sum- 
mon thee." 

As she disappeared a portly personage 
was pushed in through the outer door, 
which was immediately closed behind him. " 

" 'Tis he — 'tis the Lombard merchant," 
observed Wat, in a low tone to his con- 
federate. 

" Why am I thus hindered on my jour- 
ney?" inquired Messer Benedetto, much 
alarmed by the appearance of the Outlaw. 
" You mean me no harm, I trust ?" 

"You must give an account of yourself, 
Messer Benedetto, before I can permit you 
to proceed on your journey," said the Out- 
law. "I am an officer of justice." 

" I should have thought otherwise," 
observed Benedetto. " Thou lookst as if 



188 MERRY ENGLAND. 

thou wouldst avoid all officers of justice. 
But how have I incurred suspicion?" 

" What is your motive for setting out at 
this late hour from the inn ?" demanded the 
Outlaw, in an authoritative voice. 

"Simply the desire to arrive betimes in 
London to-morrow," replied Benedetto. 
* " But you intended to sleep at the inn," 
observed Wat. " You must have changed 
your mind suddenly." 

"There is nothing wrong in that, me- 
thinks," rejoined Benedetto. " It occurred 
to me that I had some important business 
to transact to-morrow, which I had for- 
gotten." 

" Humph !" exclaimed Wat, shrugging 
his shoulders, incredulously. " You have not 
omitted to leave special instructions with 
your tax-collector, Shaxton, I'll be sworn !" 

" I have not troubled myself about him," 
replied Benedetto. 



THE INSURRECTION. 1S9 

" It is not prudent to travel without an 
escort," said the Outlaw. " You may fall 
into the hands, of robbers. There are many 
depredators about. For a trifling fee, I 
and my men will see you safely on your 
road." 

" But what surety have I that you are not 
leagued with robbers ?" said Benedetto. 

" I leagued with robbers !" exclaimed the 
Outlaw, indignantly. " Have I not already 
told you I am an officer of justice ? I will 
escort you freely for a mile ; but if I go 
further, I and my men must be paid." 

" I gladly accept your offer," said Bene- 
detto. " Am I at liberty to depart ?" 

" Assuredly," replied the Outlaw. " I 
have no desire to detain you, now that I am 
satisfied you have no ill design. Thou wilt 
see me to-morrow, friend, at the appointed 
hour," he added, with a significant look at 
the smith. " Good night !" 



190 MERRY ENGLAND. 

He then went forth with Messer Bene- 
detto, and called for the merchant's horse. 

As it was brought, he gave some orders to 
his men in a low voice. 

Almost immediately afterwards, the self- 
styled officer of justice and his unsuspecting 
companion were riding together side by side 
past the priory and on the road to London. 

Any fears that "Wat Tyler might have 
entertained as to the safety of his wife were 
set at rest by her appearance as soon as the 
Outlaw and those with him had departed. 




XXV. 

THE HOUR APPROACHES. 

jOTWITHSTANDING the agita- 
i tion and excitement of the pre- 
vious night, Editha attended 
matins, as usual, at the priory. 

After the service she had an interview 
with the Lady Superior, and told her what 
had occurred. 

The good Prioress could scarcely repress 
her emotion as she listened to the recital. 
At its close she said — 

"You have, indeed, escaped a great 
danger, my dear child ; but as another at- 
tempt may be made by this daring young 
noble, you must take refuge for a time 
within these walls. Here you will be safe, 



192 MERRY ENGLAND. 

for, unscrupulous as he is, he will not dare 
to commit a sacrilege." 

" If my father will grant me permission, 
I will gladly avail myself of your offer, holy 
mother," said Editha, in accents of the 
deepest gratitude. 

"Your father cannot refuse you, 
child," rejoined the Prioress. " He will 
understand the peril to which you are ex- 
posed as well as I do. Your mother, also, 
will perceive that precautions must be 
taken. Come to me early in the day. All 
shall be ready for you." 

Accompanied by Sister Eudoxia, who was 
sent with her by the Prioress, Editha then 
returned to the village. 

On the way thither they met the hermit, 
who was going to offer explanations to "Wat, 
but Editha told him they were unnecessary, 
as her father was perfectly satisfied he had 
been imposed upon. 



THE INSURRECTION. 193 

Relieved by this assurance, the good man 
went back to his cell. 

It was a beautiful morning, and, en- 
livened by the sunshine, the village pre- 
sented a bright and cheerful aspect. 

But to those who could understand them, 
there were indications that a storm was 
gathering, which might ere long burst 
■forth. 

Some groups were collected on the green, 
^nd those composing them had sullen coun- 
tenances and lowering brows. 

Wat Tyler was haranguing one of these 
assemblages, and as he was posted on the 
stump of a tree, his burly frame could be 
distinctly seen above the heads of his 
auditors. 

That his speech was inflammatory might 
be guessed from the excited gestures and 
murmurs of those who listened to it. At 
one time their murmurs rose to a roar of 

vol. i. 13 



194 MERRY ENGLAND. 

indignation, but the ebullition was checked 
by Wat. 

Soon afterwards he quitted his post, and 
his hearers dispersed, but not till they had 
promised to be ready for the signal. 

Drawn forth by the beauty of the morn- 
ing, Chaucer had strolled out upon the 
green, and watched from a distance the as- 
semblage just described. He had easily 
distinguished Wat Tyler, and quite com- 
prehended the purport of his harangue. 
Haying heard ©f the attempt made over- 
night to carry off Editha, he did not wonder 
at her father's indignation. 

From the menacing look of the concourse 
as they dispersed, Chaucer was inclined to 
think they would soon re-assemble, and 
that a disturbance would then infallibly 
take place. 

While he was thus reflecting, he saw 
Wat Tyler coming towards him, and ad- 
vanced to meet him. 



THE INSURRECTION. 195 

" You have heard of the outrage done 
me ?" said the smith, after a salutation had 
passed between them. 

" I have," replied Chaucer ; " and I per- 
ceive you are already taking steps to avenge 
it. But beware lest you proceed too far." 

" As well might you attempt to arrest 
the bolt of heaven in its course as stay me 
now," rejoined the smith, fiercely. " Be 
warned by me, Master Geoffrey Chaucer. 
Unless you mean to join the rising, set 
forth upon your journey without delay. I 
will not answer for your safety." 

" Have you thought over what I said to 
you respecting the Duke of Lancaster ?" 
demanded Chaucer. " Bise in his name, 
and I will stay with you." 

" We are not for any faction, but for the 
establishment of our rights," rejoined "Wat. 
"Were John of Gaunt here in person, he 
would not obtain a single follower. But I 

13—2 



196 MERRY ENGLAND. 

again urge your immediate departure. 
Blame me not if harm befalls you." 

" Is the outbreak so near at hand ?" asked 
Chaucer. 

" Question me not — depart in peace !" 
rejoined the other. 

Chaucer, however, manifested very little 
uneasiness. 

"I will not depart till I have bidden 
adieu to thy fair daughter, and congratulated 
her on her escape." 

" Come with me, then," cried Wat. " By 
this time, she must have returned from the 
priory." 




XXVI. 



THE SIGNAL. 




S they walked on, a man, noticeable 
for his insolent deportment and 
ill-favoured countenance, was seen 
to enter the smith's cottage. 

" Is not that Shaxton, the tax-collector ?" 
remarked Chaucer. 

" Ay, 'tis he," rejoined the smith, moodily. 
" I shall have a word with him when he 
comes forth. Bide here for a moment, I 
pray you, sir." 

Suddenly, a loud scream was heard from 
the cottage, and caused Wat to start for- 
ward ; but before he could reach the door, 
his wife burst forth. 



198 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" What has happened ? Speak, woman !" 
he vociferated. 

" The villain has insulted our daughter !" 
she rejoined. 

"Ha!" ejaculated Wat, with a roar like 
that of a lion. 

And flying to the smithy, the door of 
which was standing open, he snatched up a 
heavy hammer. 

Just as he reappeared, armed with his 
formidable weapon, Shaxton came forth from 
the cottage, and they stood face to face. 

Appalled by the smith's terrible expres- 
sion of countenance, the caitiff recoiled. 

But his audacity did not entirely forsake 
him, and he exclaimed — 

" In the King's name, I charge thee to 
let me pass, fellow ! I have but demanded 
my lawful tax — the damsel is over age !" 

" Thou liest, villain !" cried Wat. 

And lifting the hammer with both hands, 



THE INSURRECTION. 199 

he brought it down with tremendous force 
on the head of the miserable wretch, crush- 
ing him to the earth. 

As Shaxton dropped lifeless to the ground, 
Dame Tyler rushed into the cottage with a 
•shriek ; while Chaucer, horrified at the 
occurrence, remained transfixed to the spot. 

Next moment, several other witnesses of 
the incident came up. 

" Thou hast done well, Wat !" thev cried. 
" The villain deserved death !" 

"T have struck the blow for freedom !" he 
rejoined. 

And rearing aloft the blood-stained ham- 
mer, and setting his foot on the body of the 
wretch he had slain, he shouted, in a sten- 
torian voice, " Liberty i" 

The cry awakened a hundred echoes, 
Shouts of "Liberty!" resounded on all 
sides. 

The signal had been given, and answered. 



200 MERRY ENGLAND. 

As if by magic, some two hundred insur- 
gents appeared before the smith's dwell- 
ing. 

They were all provided with weapons of 
various kinds — clubs, pole-axes, gisarmes,. 
scythe blades, or blades like a hedging-bill,, 
glaives, pikes, swords, two-handed swords, 
broad-bladed daggers, bows, cross-bows, and 
slings. Some few wore parts of armour — old* 
hauberks, leather-jacks, and skull-caps ; but 
these were the exceptions. 

Mark Cleaver, the butcher, was armed 
with a falchion, witli which he hacked off' 
Shaxton's head, and stuck it on a pike. 

As he held it up, a ferocious shout arose- 
from the beholders. 

At the commencement of this tumultuous 
scene, Chaucer endeavoured to make his 
escape ; but he was captured by Elias Liri- 
pipe and Grouthead, each of whom was pro- 
vided with a sword, besides smaller weapons. 



THE INSURRECTION. 201 

They detained him, till their leader's plea- 
sure should be ascertained. 

Meanwhile, Wat had entered his dwelling, 
and hastily donned a breastplate and skull- 
cap ; arming himself, at the same time, with 
a sword and dagger. 

While thus employed, he called for his 
daughter ; but she came not. However, he 
learnt from his wife, who appeared from the 
inner room, looking terribly frightened, that 
Editha had flown with Sister Eudoxia to 
the priory. 

" It is well," observed Wat. " I meant 
to send her thither. Do thou take refuge 
there likewise." 

" Nay ; I will not quit this cottage !" she 
rejoined. " Oh, Wat !" she added, grasping 
his arm, and striving to hold him back, 
" thou art going to thy destruction !" 

" I cannot turn back, if I would !" he re- 
joined, sternly, and with an expression such. 



202 MERRY ENGLAND. 

as she had never before seen in his counte- 
nance. '*' My work is already begun ! A 
week hence, no name in England will be so 
much dreaded as mine ! Fare thee well !" 





XXVII. 

THE INSURGENTS MARCH OUT OF DARTFORD. 

|HEN Wat came forth, he found 

that a fully- equipped steed had 

been brought him by one of the 

minstrels, who had thrown off his disguise. 

As he sprang into the saddle, a loud shout 

greeted him. Waving his sword to the 

assemblage, he called out — 

" Brothers ! let us march to deliver our 
country from oppression ! Our cry will be, 
' St. George for Merry England !' " 

" Ay, England will soon be ' Merry Eng- 
land' once more," responded several voices. 
" I much fear not," thought Chaucer. 
The poet then besought his captors to 



204 MERRY ENGLAND. 

take him to their leader, and they complied ; 
but Wat, who had now assumed a tone 
and look of authority, refused to liberate 
him. 

" 'Tis your own fault that you are a pri- 
soner, Master Chaucer," he said. " I shall 
detain you as a hostage." 

" At least let me have my horse," said 
the poet. 

" Pledge me your word that you will not 
attempt to escape, and the request shall be 
granted — not otherwise," rejoined Wat. 

The pledge being given, he continued — 

" We shall halt for awhile near the inn, 
and then your horse shall be brought you." 

" Now, follow me !" he vociferated, put- 
ting himself at the head of the insurgents. 

Shouting loudly, and brandishing their 
weapons, the whole party then began to 
march towards the centre of the village. 

About twenty paces in front of the 



THE INSURRECTION. 205 

mounted leader strode Mark Cleaver, bear- 
ing Shaxton's head on the pike. 

A sort of body-guard to Wat was formed 
by four individuals, who, from their strange 
arms and accoutrements, presented a very 
grotesque appearance. 

Two of these were Crispin Curthose, the 
shoemaker, who had put on an old piece of 
body armour of Edward the Second's time, 
and Peter Crust, the baker, who was fur- 
nished with a pair of gauntlets, a battered 
helmet, and a pole-axe ; the other two were 
Elias Liripipe and Josbert Grouthead. 

Behind marched Chaucer, with a guard on 
either side of him. 

The progress of the insurgents was inten- 
tionally slow, for they felt sure their num- 
bers would be increased. 

Nor were they disappointed. Partly from 
fear, partly from goodwill to the cause, the 
villagers received them enthusiastically. 



206 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Ere long, another hundred men had joined 
the party ; but as most of these were un- 
armed, they were sent to collect all the 
weapons of every kind that could be found 
in the village, with a tolerably satisfactory 
result. 

"When the insurgents halted opposite the 
inn, Baldock, who was expecting their ar- 
rival, stepped forward, and saluting the 
leader deferentially, offered him and his fol- 
lowers the best liquors his house could fur- 
nish. 

"Thou dost not expect payment, Bal- 
dock ?" said Crispin Curthose. 

" Payment — no !" quoth the host ; " I 
am too happy to supply you." 

" Bring a flask of malvoisie, then, and four 
drinking-cups," cried Curthose, authorita- 
tively. 

" Your worship shall be obeyed," replied 
Baldock, bowing. 



THE INSURRECTION. 207 

" Call me not ' worship,' " said Curthose. 
"I am one of the people. Henceforward 
there will be no distinctions. All men will 
be equal. The shoemaker will be as good as 
he for whom he worketh." 

"Or rather, no more shoes and jerkins 
will be made," said Liripipe. 

" And no more bread will be baked — at 
least by me," said Peter Crust. 

"Then we must go barefooted, and un- 
covered, and I shall soon be bareboned," ob- 
served Baldock. " Since all are to be equal, 
and I may not have enough for the whole 
assemblage, will it please you to drink wine 
or mead ?" 

" Beshrew thee for a knave !" cried Grout- 
head, fiercely. "We have drank ale and 
mead long enough. Naught but the choicest 
wines will serve our turn now. Bring the 
malvoisie without more ado." 

" Go, broach a cask of ale, Baldock — that 



208 MERRY ENGLAND. 

will suffice," interrupted Wat Tyler, autho- 
ritatively. " And, hark ye !" he added ; 
*' let Master Chaucer's horse be brought 
forth at once from the stable." 

"Hath Master Chaucer joined you?" 
cried the host, in surprise. 

" Not of his own free will," said the poet. 
u Bear record of that, good Baldock." 

The host hurried off to execute the orders 
he had received ; and fearing that his present 
customers would help themselves if there 
was any stint, he caused them to be abun- 
dantly supplied with ale — a cask being 
quickly broached for that purpose, as sug- 
gested by Wat. 

Chaucer's horse was likewise brought from 
the stable, and the poet felt much more at 
ease when he was again in the saddle. 

After half an hour's delay, during which 
there were further additions to the insurrec- 
tionary party, Wat Tyler became impatient 



THE INSURRECTION. 209 

to set off; and he was therefore well pleased 
when a mounted messenger galloped into 
the village, and informed him that his 
brother chief awaited him, with a large body 
of men, on Dartford Brent. 

On receiving this satisfactory intelligence, 
Wat immediately gave the word to march, 
and the party set forth in the same order as 
before ; but making rather more noise, in 
consequence of the strong ale they had 
drunk. 

All the old men, women, and children, 
who were left in the village, bade them 
adieu. The priests belonging to St. 
Edmond's Chapel likewise came forth to 
look at them, but bestowed no blessing on 
the expedition. 

Mark Cleaver still continued in front, 
but, on crossing the Darent, he planted the 
pike, on which the wretched collector's head 
was fixed, in the centre of the little wooden 

vol. i. 14 



210 MERRY ENGLAND. 

bridge, and there it remained for many 
a day, a ghastly memorial of what had 
occurred. 

Shaxton's body was cast into a ditch, for 
the clergy refused it Christian burial. 





XXVIII. 

THE MARCH TO ROCHESTER. 

S soon as Wat Tyler and his 

party appeared on the brow of 

Dartford Hill, a loud shout arose 

from another body of insurgents, who were 

waiting for them at a short distance on the 

plain. 

At the same time, the outlaw, who was 
at the head of this second party, galloped 
forward to meet Wat, and offer him his con- 
gratulations. 

As the two leaders rode on together, 
they held a brief council, during which they 
decided to march on at once to Rochester, 
where Jack Straw affirmed they were certain 
to be well received by the inhabitants, and 

14—2 



212 MERRY ENGLAND. 

must necessarily obtain a large accession of 
force. 

This being agreed upon, as soon as the 
two bodies of insurgents had met and fra- 
ternized, they set off across the plain, 
following the course of the old Roman Road, 
known as the Watling Street. 

Jack Straw's party was not so numerous 
as that of his brother chief, but several of 
the men w T ere mounted, and this was a 
great advantage, since they could act as 
emissaries, Two of them, indeed, were 
sent on to Rochester, and others were 
despatched to different little villages on the 
road, to inform the inhabitants that the 
rising had taken place. 

The Outlaw had a prisoner, for whom he 
expected a large ransom. 

This was Messer Benedetto. 

Instead of escorting him on the road to 
London, he had taken him into the forest, 



THE INSURRECTION. 213 

where the luckless Lombard merchant was 
compelled to pass the night, and he was now 
guarded by two of the band. To add to his 
disquietude, he had just heard of Shaxton's 
direful end. 

Under these circumstances, it was some 
little comfort to him to meet with a friend ; 
and when the two insurgent parties com- 
bined their forces, he and Chaucer were 
allowed to ride together. 

It was a strange sight to see this wild 
rout of peasants, armed and accoutred in 
the strange manner described, and com- 
manded by leaders wild as themselves, sweep 
like a dark ominous cloud, across the sunny 
plain ; and those who watched the course 
of the cloud could not doubt that it boded 
•destruction. 

Ever and anon came other peasants, 
armed with scythes, to swell the ranks, and 
these recruits were received with shouts. 



214 MERRY ENGLAND. 

No one gazed at it, no one even thought 
of it, and yet the prospect from that plain 
on that brilliant day was enchanting. 
There, at the foot of the hill, was the broad, 
winding river, glittering in the sunshine,, 
with the picturesque Essex shore. There 
were Greenhithe and Swanscombe, South- 
fleet, and Northfleet, yet none looked 
towards them, unless it might be Chaucer 
and Benedetto. 

Ere long, however, the bright prospect- 
was completely lost to sight, for the insur- 
gents plunged into a forest so dense and 
intricate, that none but the Outlaw and 
his band could have guided them safely 
through it. 

So thick were the trees, that the sun- 
beams could not penetrate between the 
branches, and the wood was sombre even 
on that splendid day. 

For nearly two hours the insurgents were 



THE INSURRECTION. 215 

involved in the wood, and when they came 
forth, Eochester, with its towering castle, 
then in its full strength and grandeur, lay 
beneath them, about a mile off. 

Here the two chiefs ordered a halt till 
their emissaries returned; but they were 
soon made easy in regard to them, for as 
they looked towards the town, a party of 
horsemen was seen to cross the bridge over 
the Medway, and ascend the hill on which 
the insurgents were stationed. 

With this troop were the two messengers. 

Satisfied, therefore, that no hostile design 
was intended, the insurgents marched on to 
meet their confederates, and were enthu- 
siastically welcomed, 

Hothbrand Corbrigge, the leader of the 
party, lauded Wat Tyler for the bold step 
he had taken, and assured him that the 
people of Eochester were all favourable to 
the cause. 



216 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Fear not to enter the town," he said ; 
"but come with us, and we will make 
you all heartily welcome ; and since, as 
we understand, you intend to proceed to 
Canterbury to-morrow, many of us will go 
with you." 

"But what of the constable of the 
castle ?" said Wat. " Sir John de Newtown 
is devoted to the King ; and when he sees us 
enter Eochester, he will suspect our design, 
and demand that we be delivered up to 
him." 

" Sir John de Newtown is a brave knight," 
replied Hothbrand ; " but he hath had too 
much experience of the people of Eochester 
to trouble them, unless they molest him. 
While you are under our safeguard, he will 
allow you to tarry within the town as long 
as you list, and to depart peaceably." 

" On our return from Canterbury, when 
we have received all the reinforcements we 



THE INSURRECTION. 217 

expect, we will summon the constable to 
surrender the castle," said the Outlaw. " If 
he refuses, we will besiege him." 

"We will help you," rejoined Hothbrand. 
"And though liochester Castle is deemed 
impregnable, it can be taken by surprise, as 
we will prove to you." 

They then descended the hill, and pro- 
ceeded towards the town. 




XXIX. 




FROM ROCHESTER TO HARBLEDOWN. 

HE approach of the insurgents was 
watched by armed men from the 
walls and towers of the castle; 
but as Hothbrand rode between the two 
rebel leaders, and as the townspeople were 
preparing to give them welcome, no attempt 
to interfere was made by the garrison. 

At that time, the bridge across the 
Medway was built of wood, though, a few 
years afterwards, it was superseded by a 
stone bridge that endured to the present 
century. 

The earlier bridge, with which we are 
concerned, was defended by a strong wooden 
tower and great gates ; but the tower 



THE INSURRECTION. 219 

being now occupied by friends, and the 
gates thrown wide open, the insurgents 
marched into the town triumphantly, and 
were hailed by the inhabitants as deliverers, 
of the country. 

Well-lodged and feasted, they made them- 
selves merry ; but the leaders took care to 
prevent their followers from committing 
any excesses. 

While their captors were feasting and 
revelling, Chaucer and Benedetto were 
locked up in a tower. However, they were 
well supplied with eatables and wine. 

At night, a great meeting was held in 
the market-place, at which it was resolved 
that a party under the command of Hoth- 
brand should proceed on the morrow to 
Maidstone, and after collecting all the 
auxiliaries they could in that town, should 
march to Canterbury, and join Wat Tyler 
and his host. 



220 MERRY ENGLAND. 



Accordingly, next morning, soon after 
daybreak, Hothbrand, attended by some 
thirty horsemen, set off on his mission. 

Somewhat later, the populace began to 
assemble, and great numbers having agreed 
to accompany the insurgents to Canterbury, 
the two leaders at length sallied forth, at 
the head of a vast horde, and took the way 
to Sittingbourne. 

The Eochester men greatly outnumbered 
those of Dartford, but there was no rivalry 
or jealousy among the two parties, both 
being bound in the same confederacy, and 
though the new recruits had captains of 
their own, they all acknowledged Wat Tyler 
and Jack Straw as their leaders. 

Most of the Eochester men were on foot, 
but some few were on horseback. An im- 
portant addition had, however, been made 
to the rebel force by a band of archers. 

Had it not been for these, Sir John de 



THE INSURRECTION. 221 

Newtown, the constable of the castle, would 
have attacked them, as they quitted the 
town. 

The two prisoners, who had hoped they 
might be left behind, were taken on. 

Nothing particular occurred during the 
march to Sittingbournej but on the arrival 
of the insurgents at that ancient town, they 
were enthusiastically received by the inha- 
bitants, and the two leaders and the nume- 
rous captains were feasted at the famous old 
hostel, the " Eed Lion." 

On this occasion, Chaucer and his fellow 
captives were allowed to partake of the 
feast. 

Their forces being largely increased at 
Sittingbourne, the insurgents next proceeded 
to Faversham, where they halted for the 
night, and took possession of the abbey, to 
the great discomfort of the monks. 

Next morning they were joined by Hoth- 



222 MERRY ENGLAND. 

brand with, three hundred men on horseback 
from Maidstone. 

Ever since the outbreak the weather had 
been splendid, and the day on which the 
rebel host set out from Faversham to Can- 
terbury was quite as fine as those that had 
preceded it. 

As they went on, more peasants joined 
them from Ospringe and other places, 
" leaving all their business," says the good 
old chronicler Holinshed, " letting plough 
and cart stand, forsaking wife, children, and 
houses." 

The insurgents then went a little out of 
their way to mount Boughton Hill, from the 
summit of which a magnificent prospect was 
obtained, including not only the Swale and 
the Isle of Sheppey, with a glittering ex- 
panse of sea, but the ancient city towards 
which they were marching. 

From this eminence, the golden angel, 



THE INSURRECTION. 223 

which then crowned the great lofty spire of 
the cathedral (the cathedral then had a 
spire, be it noted, and was regarded with 
much reverence by pilgrims), could be dis- 
tinctly seen ; and as the insurgent leaders, 
who were not devoid of superstition, gazed 
at it, they thought that the figure had a 
flaming torch in its hand, and beckoned 
them on to burn and ravage. 

From Boughton Hill the vast forest of 
Blean extended almost to Canterbury, and 
having satiated themselves with the splendid 
view we have described, the insurgents took 
a narrow road that led through the wood, 
and did not reappear till they reached 
Harbledown. 

The venerable pile now burst upon them in 
all its grandeur. But the aspect of the golden 
angel on the spire seemed changed. Frowns 
clothed its brow, and instead of beckoning 
them on, it signed to them to retire. 



224 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Such, at least, was the notion of some of 
those who gazed at it. 

Part of the old walls on this side of the 
city, together with the west gate, had been 
recently rebuilt by Simon de Sudbury, then 
Archbishop of Canterbury, so that they 
formed a striking contrast to the ancient 
habitations near them. 

While the insurgents were marching 
towards the city, though still under cover of 
the wood, a splendid cavalcade of nobles, 
knights, and dames, attended by an escort 
of armed men, issued from the gate just 
mentioned, quite unconscious of the danger 
they were exposed to. 

It was the Princess of Wales and her 
train, returning from the pilgrimage. They 
had not gone very far when a loud shout 
startled them, and the rebel host burst from 
the wood. 



XXX. 




THE REBEL CHIEFS HOLD A CONFERENCE WITH 
THE PRINCESS. 

T the sight of the insurgents, Sir 
John Holland, who was near the 
Princess, urged her to ride back 
to the city as fast as she could ; but, with 
extraordinary spirit, she refused, saying — 

" I will speak to these men. I am not 
afraid of them. They will do me no harm." 

" You know not what you do, madam !" 
cried Sir John, who had recognised the two 
insurgent leaders, and well knew he had no 
mercy to expect from them. " You will 
sacrifice us all. What can we do against 
that infuriated rabble ?" 

" Leave them to me !" replied his mother, 
vol. i. 15 



226 MERRY ENGLAND. 

undauntedly. " I feel sure I can pacify 
them, but not if you are with me, for you 
are the special object of their dislike. My 
ladies will stay with me." 

" We will," they cried, pressing towards 
her. 

" Fly, instantly, I command you !" cried 
the Princess, authoritatively, to her son. 
" You will only endanger my safety ! Take 
all the nobles and knights with you, but 
leave the armed escort with me." 

" You hear what the Princess says, my 
lord ?" exclaimed Sir John. " Shall we 
obey her ?" 

" We must !" replied Sir Osbert Monta- 
cute. 

Most reluctantly did Sir John, with the 
whole of the nobles, knights, and esquires, 
ride back towards the city, leaving the 
courageous Princess undefended, except by 
the armed escort. 



THE INSURRECTION. 227 

Sir John and his party did not, how- 
ever, enter the city, but drew up about a 
bow-shot from the west gate, to await the 
result. 

Meantime, the summit of the gate was 
crowded with armed men, and others ap. 
peared on the watch-towers, but none of 
them showed any disposition to take part 
against the rebels. 

Surrounded by her ladies, with her con- 
fessor, her physician, her almoner, her pages, 
and all her personal attendants behind her, 
the Princess calmly awaited the approach of 
the insurgents. 

"When they came up, the two leaders mo- 
tioned back their followers, and advanced 
towards her. 

Awed by her majestic looks and deport- 
ment, both the fierce men felt compelled to 
show her a certain deference. 

" Why do I see you in this warlike array, 

15—2 



228 MERRY ENGLAND. 

my good friends ?" demanded the Princess, 
in a firm, yet conciliatory tone. 

" That which I hinted to your Grace at 
Dartford hath come to pass," rejoined Wat 
Tyler. "The people have risen to obtain 
their rights. Nor will they retire till their 
just demands shall be granted by the King, 
your son." 

" I cannot confer with men in open rebel- 
lion against their Sovereign," said the Prin 
cess. " Lay down your arms, and I will 
willingly listen to you, and represent your 
grievances to the King." 

These words, pronounced in a loud voice, 
were followed by murmurs by those who 
heard them. 

"Princess," said Wat Tyler, sternly, 
" this is idle talk. Having taken up arms, 
we shall not lay them down till our object 
be attained. Of that be sure. Knowing 
you are a good and gracious lady, and 



THE INSURRECTION. 229 

mean the people well, we have consented to 
this conference. But 'tis useless to prolong 
it, since it is plain it can come to nothing. 
Were it our pleasure, we could detain you ." 

" Detain me !" exclaimed the Princess. 

" Alarm not yourself, madam ; we have 
no such intent. You are free to pass on 
with your ladies, your personal attendants, 
and your escort. Tell the King what you 
have seen and heard. That is all we ask." 

" Your Grace cannot re-enter Canterbury," 
said the Outlaw, seeing her glance in that 
direction. 

" May I not take my retinue with me ?" 
she inquired. 

" No," rejoined Wat Tyler. " And if Sir 
John Holland falls into our hands, we will 
put him to death !" 

"You will not advance your cause by 
cruelty," said the Princess. " A word ere I 
depart. You have a prisoner with you, I 



230 MERRY ENGLAND. 

perceive — Master Geoffrey Chaucer. Have 
you fixed upon his ransom ?" 

" Ay ; a thousand crowns," replied Wat 
Tyler. 

" There is double the sum in this purse," 
said the Princess. " Take it, and let him 
come with me." 

As Wat received the richly-embroidered 
purse from the hand of the Princess, he told 
the poet he was free. 

Chaucer could only express his gratitude 
at the moment by a profound obeisance to 
the gracious lady who had effected his libera- 
tion. 

Encouraged by what had taken place, 
Messer Benedetto thus besought the 
Princess — 

" I pray you intercede for me, gracious 
madam. I am willing to pay a heavy 
ransom !" 

"Tis Messer Benedetto, the Lombard 



THE INSURRECTION. 231 

merchant," said the Outlaw. " He is rich 
enough to pay a thousand marks for his 
ransom ; and, by St. Nicholas ! I will not set 
him free for less." 

"How say you, Messer Benedetto?" 
asked the Princess. " Will you pledge 
your word to me that you will pay the 
amount?" 

" I will, gracious madam," he rejoined, 
" provided I be allowed to depart with your 
Highness." 

" Enough !" cried the Outlaw. 
And the merchant was forthwith released, 
and took up a position beside Chaucer at 
the rear of the Princess's attendants. 

Hiding in front, and calling out authori- 
tatively to the peasants to stand back, the 
two leaders forced a passage for the Princess 
and those with her through the insurgent 
host. They were aided in the difficult task 
by Hothbrand and some others. 



232 MERRY ENGLAND. 

The intrepid lady showed no signs of fear 
at the scowling glances fixed upon her, or at 
the various weapons bristling around her ; 
but her damsels did not display quite so 
much courage. 

Even the confessor, the physician, and 
the pages were greatly alarmed. 

The armed escort glared fiercely at the 
threatening crowd, and shook their fists at 
them. More than once a conflict seemed 
imminent, but it was prevented by the exer- 
tions of Hothbrand. 

When Wat Tyler and the Outlaw had 
conducted the Princess safely through the 
tumultuous horde, they retired, and she rode 
off at a quick pace with her attendants. 

At the same time, Sir John Holland, and 
the nobles and knights with him, who had 
witnessed the scene just described, turned 
round, and dashed through the west gate. 





XXXI. 

SIR JOHN HOLLAND AND HIS COMPANIONS 
TAKE REFUGE IN THE ARCHBISHOP'S PALACE. 

[0 sooner were they inside, than Sir 
John called to the guard to close 
the gate, and sound to arms ; but, 
to his astonishment and rage, the guard 
refused to obey the order, saying they would 
not close the gate against friends and bro- 
thers. 

" Friends and brothers !" exclaimed Sir 
John, furiously. " They are rebels and 
traitors ! Would ye deliver the city to 
them ? Do my bidding instantly, or I will 
cause you to be hanged for treacherous vil- 
lains, as ye are !" 

But the guard remained perfectly unmoved 
by the young noble's anger and threats. 



234 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Meantime, several citizens had come up, 
and one of them called out to the young 
nobles — 

" Begone, if you would save your lives ! 
Hear you not yon shouts? — see you not yon 
people hurrying hither ? If you are caught 
you will be slain, or delivered to your ene- 
mies ! Fly, while there is yet time !" 

" My lord, it is true !" cried Sir Osbert. 
" A large concourse is coming along the 
street, and they are evidently friends of the 
rebels. If we stay here, we shall be caught 
between two fires." 

" Forward, then, in the King's name !" 
cried Sir John, drawing his sword. " We 
will hew our way through the rebellious 
rascals if they oppose us !" 

With this, he struck spurs into his 
charger, and, followed by his companions, 
galloped along the street. 

Such was the impetuosity of their career, 



THE INSURRECTION. 235 

that the citizens, though many of them were 
armed, made way, fearful of being trampled 
under foot. 

Still maintaining their furious pace, and 
carrying terror with them, Sir John and his 
party rode past the cathedral to the other 
side of the city. 

On reaching the east gate, where they 
meant to make an exit, they found it shut 
and strongly guarded. 

Cross-bowmen were on the summit, and a 
shower of iron bolts would have been 
launched against them had they not with- 
drawn. 

They then rode to the Burgate, but it was 
likewise closed ; and doubtless all the other 
gates were shut. 

Hitherto everything had betokened that 
the people were hostile to the young nobles 
and friendly to the insurgents, who by this 
time must have entered the city. 



236 MERRY ENGLAND. 

The peril, therefore, was very great, and 
a place of refuge must be instantly found. 
There were several monasteries, but the 
priors might be unwilling to receive them. 

In this emergency, Sir Osbert Montacute 
proposed that they should return to the 
Archbishop's palace, where the Princess of 
Wales had been lodged during her stay at 
Canterbury, and Sir John approving of the 
suggestion, they galloped off at once to the 
palace. 

It was a magnificent edifice, built by 
Lanfranc, and had been inhabited by Becket, 
and being surrounded by high walls, was 
capable of defence. In fact, it had been 
more than once maintained against the 
turbulent citizens. 

When they stopped at the arched en- 
trance, which still exists in Palace Street, 
the porter immediately summoned old 
Michael Siward, the seneschal, who, on 



THE INSURRECTION. 237 

learning that the city was beset by rebels, 
and that the populace were friendly to them, 
was filled wdth indignation. 

" Would that his Grace were here !" 
he exclaimed. "He would speak to the 
people, and bring them to their duty. But 
I will do the best I can for your protection. 
Enter, I pray you, noble sirs." 

Thereupon the gate was thrown open, 
and made fast again as soon as the whole 
party had ridden into the courtyard. 

" You are safe now, I trust, Sir John," 
said Siward. " I cannot think that the 
rebels will dare to attack the palace ; but 
should they do so, we will defend it to the 
last." 

After warmly thanking the seneschal for 
his zeal in their behalf, Sir John and his 
companions dismounted, and their horses 
were taken to the stables, which were at the 
further end of the courtyard. 



238 MERRY ENGLAND. 



By this time most of the household — 
several of whom were armed — had assembled 
in the courtyard, and after giving them some 
orders, Siward asked Sir John if he should 
conduct him and his friends to the great 
hall. 

" I thank thee, no, good friend," replied 
Sir John. " We will remain here for the 
present to see what betides. To judge from 
the shouting and noise in the street, the 
rebels must have discovered that we have 
taken refuge in the palace, and are coming 
hither to demand that we be delivered up to 
them." 

" Should the audacious demand be made, 
my reply will be that your lordship and 
those with you are under the safeguard of 
the Archbishop," said the seneschal ; " and 
since his Grace would never yield you up, 
neither will I. If they be not content with 
that response, they shall have a where- 



THE INSURRECTION. 239 

withal to satisfy them," he added signifi- 
cantly. 

Sir John and the others laughed heartily 
at this speech of the stout old man. 

" I doubt not we shall be able to hold out 
against them," pursued the seneschal ; " but 
come what will, I engage that your lordship 
shall never fall into their hands." 

" I have perfect faith in thee, my good 
friend," said Sir John. 

" Then you will not think I am deserting 
my post if I leave you for awhile," saicf 
Siward. "The cathedral must not be ne- 
glected. Should those sacrilegious villains 
gain an entrance, they would not hesitate 
to carry off the treasures of the shrine." 

" Thou art right," cried Sir John. " Go 
see that all needful precautions are taken to 
protect the shrine." 



XXXII. 




FRIAR NOSROCK AND THE BAN-DOGS. 

FTEE reiterating his orders to the 
household, all of whom promised 
implicit obedience to his injunc- 
tions, the seneschal hurried off to the back 
of the palace, and unlocking a door in the 
walls, entered the cloisters, through which 
he quickly passed, thus pursuing the precise 
course taken by the sainted Becket when he 
fled from the murderous knights. 

In another moment Siward was in the 
splendid north transept, and gazing anxi- 
ously down the magnificent nave, but beheld 
only a few priests and monks pacing along 
the aisles, with here and there a devotee 
kneeling at a shrine — nothing to alarm him. 



THE INSURRECTION. 241 

He then turned towards the choir, but no 
irreverent intruders could be distinguished ; 
and satisfied he was in time to prevent any 
desecration of the sacred pile, he went 
round and caused all the doors to be locked, 
strictly enjoining the vergers to allow no 
one to enter the cathedral, and to send out 
all persons then within the building through 
the cloisters. 

Having taken these precautions, he re- 
paired to the chapel of the Holy Trinity, 
where was the shrine of St. Thomas a Becket, 
the riches of which he feared would excite 
the cupidity of the rebels. 

Many pilgrims were kneeling on the 
well-worn pavement before the shrine ; but 
he did not disturb them, his object being to 
see Friar Nosrock, a monk, who occupied a 
watching-chamber above the chapel. 

The window of this chamber commanded 
Becket's gorgeous shrine, and Friar Nos- 

vol. i. ]6 



242 MERRY ENGLAND. 

rock's business was to see that none of the 
priceless jewels adorning it were appro- 
priated by pretended pilgrims, and so well 
did he perform his office, that not a single 
gem had been stolen. 

The vigilant monk was provided with a 
dozen ban-dogs — huge and fierce mastiffs — 
which he could let loose should any noc- 
turnal attempt be made at depredation 
upon the shrine. 

Moreover, he had the means of ringing 
an alarm-bell. 

In Friar Nosrock's chamber an illustrious 
prisoner had been confined — namely, King 
John of France. 

The sudden manner in which Siward 
entered his chamber somewhat startled the 
monk. 

" What wouldst thou, brother ?" he 
asked. 

"I am come to warn thee to look well 



THE INSURRECTION. 243 

after the shrine," replied the seneschal. 
" The cathedral is in danger." 

" The cathedral in danger ! Holy Thomas ! 
From whom ?" exclaimed the monk, horror- 
stricken. 

" From rebels and traitors," replied 
Siward. " An insurrection hath broken 
out among the peasantry. They have 
come to Canterbury in great numbers, and, 
instead of driving them hence, the foolish 
citizens have admitted them." 

" 'Tis all John Ball's doing!" cried 
Friar Nosrock. " He has stirred up the 
people to this point. The Archbishop ought 
to have hanged him." 

" Very true," said Siward. " The Wick- 
liffites are numerous in the city, I fear, and 
will take advantage of this outbreak to do 
all the mischief they can. The rebels are 
threatening the palace, where Sir John 
Holland and several young nobles and 

16—2 



244 MERRY ENGLAND. 

knights, who accompanied the Princess in 
her pilgrimage, have taken refuge." 

" Only this, very morn I beheld the Prin- 
cess kneeling before the shrine," said the 
friar. " I trust her Grace hath escaped the 
ribald crew ?" 

" Ay, she has got off, but her son and his 
companions are in some danger, as I have 
told thee. I must now go back to the 
palace, and see to its defence. Do thou 
take care of the shrine." 

" Rely on me, good master seneschal," 
replied the monk. " Should the rebels 
come here, I will let loose the ban-dogs, 
and I warrant thee they will make havoc 
among the ribalds. They had better con- 
tend with a legion of fiends than with 
those fierce hounds," he added, with an ill- 
suppressed laugh. 

" Hark thee, holy brother," said Siward. 
" We may be driven by numbers from the 



THE INSURRECTION. 245 

palace. In that event we shall seek refuge 
in the cathedral. Wilt thou give Sir John 
Holland and his friends a lodging in thy 
chamber ?" 

" Willingly," replied the monk. 

Well satisfied with the promise, the sene- 
schal departed. 




XXXIII. 




THE HOSTEL IN MERCERY LANE. 

EANWHILE the whole of the in- 
surgents had entered the city; 
and though strict orders were 
given by the leaders that the different par- 
ties of which the host was composed should 
keep together, the tumultuous peasantry 
could not be restrained, but spread about in 
every direction. 

The main body, however, of the rebels, 
headed by Wat Tyler and the Outlaw, 
marched along the High Street, amid the 
shouts of the populace, who were quite as 
enthusiastic in their demonstrations as the 
people of Eochester had been. 

The first object of the leaders was to 



THE INSURRECTION. 247 

liberate John Ball, and with that view they 
were proceeding to the barbican ; but they 
were spared the trouble, for before they 
reached the centre of the city, loud shouts, 
coming from the opposite direction, in- 
formed them that the monk was free ; and 
they presently beheld him riding on a mule, 
at the head of a vast multitude. 

With him, on horseback, were a brewer, 
named Eichard Basset, and his son, Conrad, 
both Wickliffites, who had accomplished his 
liberation. 

A joyous meeting took place between the 
monk and his confederates, and after they 
had exchanged greetings and congratula- 
tions, John Ball, who was anxious to address 
the people, proposed that they should repair 
to the Kush Market. 

Intimation to this effect having been 
given, the vast concourse began to move 
towards the appointed spot. To reach it 



248 MERRY ENGLAND. 

they had to proceed along a picturesque 
thoroughfare, called Mercery Lane, which 
was full of shops and stalls where, amongst 
other matters, leaden brooches, stamped 
with the mitred head of the martyred saint, 
Thomas a Becket, were sold to the pilgrims. 
In Mercery Lane was situated the large 
hostel, rendered ever famous by Chaucer, 
and known as the " Chequers of the Hope." 

Built of massive timber, this vast cara- 
vanserai contained a long upper chamber, 
approached by stairs from the outside, and 
known as " The Dormitory of the Hundred 
Beds." So numerous were the bands of 
pilgrims to the shrine of St. Thomas, that 
not a bed was ever unoccupied. 

Besides this grand dormitory, accounted 
a wonder at the time, the vast building had 
a refectory to correspond, and a spacious 
court, into which the pilgrims could ride on 
their arrival in the city. 



THE INSURRECTION. 249 

While the shouting concourse poured 
down Mercery Lane to hear John Ball's 
address, Curthose, Liripipe, Mark Cleaver, 
Grouthead, Peter Crust, and others of the 
Dartford men, who now exercised a sort of 
authorit}' - in the insurgent army, turned 
into the court of the " Chequers." 

The place was crowded with pilgrims, all 
of whom were much alarmed by what was 
going on ; but the Dartford men soon dis- 
covered the host, Nicholas Chilham, and 
told him, in a peremptory tone, that they 
meant to lodge at the "Chequers" that 
night, and should require the whole of the 
hundred beds for themselves and their 
comrades. 

In vain Master Chilham protested that 
the entire dormitory was engaged. That 
mattered not to the Dartford heroes. They 
must be accommodated. All the other 
guests must turn out, and seek quarters 



250 MERRY ENGLAND. 

elsewhere. Moreover, Master Chilham 
must provide a good supper for a hundred 
persons. 

Fearing he might have a whole host 
quartered upon him if he refused, the land- 
lord promised compliance. 

At the farther end of the Eush Market 
stood a large cross, painted and gilt, and, 
stationing himself in front of it, with an 
insurgent leader on either side, John Ball 
proceeded to address the concourse, which 
entirely filled the place. The assemblage 
was partly composed of insurgent peasants, 
partly of citizens. 

It was in one of those fierce and inflam- 
matory harangues which he had previously 
found so successful that the monk attempted 
to justify the outbreak, by showing that 
the people had been treated like slaves, and 
were forced to throw off the yoke ; but his 
chief attack was directed against the Arch- 



THE INSURRECTION. 251 

bishop of Canterbury, and he declared that 
neither the King nor the kingdom ought to 
submit to any episcopal see. Above all, no 
bishop or other ecclesiastic ought to hold 
an important civil office. 

" As Chancellor of England," he vocife- 
rated, " Simon de Sudbury has betrayed his 
Sovereign, and violated the rights of the 
people, and he therefore deserves death." 

" He shall die the death of a traitor !" 
cried Wat Tyler, in a loud voice. " Would 
we had him here !" 

" We will behead him, and make thee 
Archbishop in his stead !" shouted several 
persons to John Ball. 

" Were it in your power to make me 
Pope of Eome, I would refuse," rejoined the 
monk. " Like my master, John Wycliffe, 
I have ever preached the abolition of the 
ecclesiastical hierarchy, and my actions shall 
not belie my words." 



252 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Violent cries then rose from the assem- 
blage, and many persons called out, " Let 
us sack the cathedral !" 

" Hold !" exclaimed Wat Tyler, in a sten- 
torian voice. " I forbid you to enter the 
cathedral for any such purpose." 

Some murmurs arose ; but they instantly 
ceased, as Wat continued, " Since you want 
pillage, you shall have it. The Arch- 
bishop has robbed the people, and 'tis meet 
that his palace should be plundered. Go 
thither !" 

" To the palace ! to the palace !" shouted 
a hundred voices. 

At this juncture, Conrad Basset, the 
brewer's son, called out, " Sir John Holland 
and the party of young nobles and knights 
in attendance on the Princess of Wales 
have taken refuge in the palace. What 
shall we do with them?" 

" Slay them !" cried Wat. " They are a 



THE INSURRECTION. 253 

brood of vipers that ought to be 
crushed !" 

Prepared to execute this ferocious man- 
date, the concourse hurried back through 
Mercery Lane, and proceeded to the palace. 




XXXIV. 



THE SIEGE OF THE ARCHBISHOP S PALACE. 




OUT) blows, dealt against the gates 
of the Archbishop's Palace, warned 
those in the court that the re- 
bellious concourse were endeavouring to 
break in, whereupon Siward, who had just 
returned from the cathedral, accompanied 
by half a dozen of the household, armed 
with crossbows and pikes, mounted to the 
top of a turret that flanked the walls, and 
called out to the assailants to be gone. 

But as the insurgents took no heed, the 
cross-bowmen shot their bolts at them, and 
three or four were stricken down. 

This occasioned a pause ; but in another 
minute the attack was renewed, and huge 



THE INSURRECTION. 255 

stones were hurled against the gate, but 
being of stout oak, it resisted all their efforts. 
Again the cross-bowmen endeavoured to 
drive back the assailants, but they them- 
selves had now become the mark for some 
archers, who were mingled with the multi- 
tude, and were obliged to seek a less exposed 
position. 

Siward alone remained on the top of the 
turret, and as the shafts flew quickly past 
him, he tranquilly adjusted his cross-bow, 
and smote a man who was planting a scaling- 
ladder against the wall. 

At this juncture, the two insurgent 
leaders appeared among the concourse, and 
John Ball, who was with them on his mule, 
forced his way through the throng towards 
the gate, and, holding up his hand to enjoin 
a brief suspension of hostilities, thus bespoke 
the brave old seneschal. 

" I know thee well, Siward," he said ; 



256 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" and would not thou shouldst come to 
harm. It must be plain to thee that thou 
canst not hold out against this determined 
multitude. Open the gates, therefore, and 
let us in ; and I will undertake that thy life, 
and the lives of all the household, shall be 
spared." 

" Aught more ?" inquired Siward, in a 
taunting tone. 

"Ay, this," cried Wat Tyler, who had 
now come up. " We require that Sir John 
Holland, and the party of licentious young 
nobles, who have taken refuge here, be deli- 
vered up to us, that justice be done upon 
them." 

" "Pis not for thee and thine to judge 
them," said Siward, scornfully. " Now hear 
me ! I am left in charge of my master's 
house, and never will surrender it to robbers ; 
neither will I deliver up noble and valiant 
gentlemen to be murthered by vile ribalds !" 



THE INSURRECTION. 257 

The extreme boldness with which these 
words were uttered kept the hearers quiet, 
and the seneschal went on with unabated 



courage- 



" As to thee, thou renegade priest," he 
said, addressing John Ball, " who hast 
stirred up all this mischief, I would his 
Grace had hanged thee ! But I will put it 
out of thy power to do further ill !" 

And, as he spoke, he raised his arbalest 
quickly to his shoulder, and let fly a bolt at 
the monk, which struck his cowl, but did 
not injure him. 

" Thou wert not born to kill me!" laughed 
John Ball, as he took out the iron-headed 
dart. 

Next moment, a flight of arrows passed 
over the turret where the seneschal had 
stood, but he was gone. 

Redoubled efforts were now made by the- 
insurgents to take the palace. 

vol. i. 17 



258 MERRY ENGLAND. 

As it seemed a waste of time to batter 
against the door, scaling-ladders were planted 
against the high embattled walls, and up 
each, of these half a dozen men climbed ; 
hut no sooner did they reach the embrasures, 
than they were hurled back. 

The defending force, among whom were 
Sir John Holland and the young nobles, 
were fully prepared for them, and for some 
time not a single assailant was able to set 
foot on the battlements. 

But it was quite clear the place could not 
hold out against such a host, and it behoved 
those inside to provide for their safety by a 
timely retreat, for no one thought of a 
surrender. 

Accordingly, when the battlements had 
been cleared of the few who had gained 
them, and the swarm of fresh assailants had 
been shaken off the ladders, advantage was 
taken by Siward, who had previously ap- 



THE INSURRECTION. 259 

prized them of his design, to hurry off Sir 
John Holland and his party to the cloisters. 

Thither they were followed by the whole 
household, for no one desired to be left to 
the mercy of the rebels ; and, the door being 
made fast behind them, they all sought 
shelter in the cathedral — the entrance from 
the cloisters being carefully secured. 

The seneschal alone returned to the palace, 
being determined not to leave it till the last. 

It being quickly discovered that the de- 
fenders had retired, the assailants therefore 
sprang upon the battlements, and, shouting 
to their friends that the palace was won, 
proceeded to throw open the portal, and in 
another minute the rebel leaders rode into 
the court. 

No restraint being put upon them by their 
leaders, the insurgents rushed into the 
palace, and commenced the work of destruc- 
tion and spoliation. 



260 MERRY ENGLAND. 

*•■ Determined, however, to prevent the de- 
secration of the cathedral, Wat Tyler placed 
a strong guard at the entrance to the clois- 
ters, giving the men strict injunctions to 
allow no one to pass without his express 
order. 

He then dismounted, and accompanied 
by John Ball and the outlaw, entered the 
great hall of the palace — a noble apartment, 
with a richly-carved screen, a fine gallery, 
and a grand oak ceiling. Moreover, the hall 
was adorned by several fine paintings. 

In this magnificent banqueting-hall kings 
had been entertained with almost regal 
splendour and hospitality, and in it the 
Princess of Wales dined daily with her suite 
during her stay at the palace. 

Alas ! it was now invaded by a furious 
throng, who, having hastily ransacked the 
other apartments, were piling the valuables 
on the tables, or throwing them on the 



THE INSURRECTION. 261 

floor, in order to carry them off more 
readily. 

Here were great silver flagons and cups, 
pieces of plate, rich vestments, curtains and 
tapestry, torn down from beds and walls ; 
coffers, chests, chairs, and pieces of furni- 
ture, that could be carried off, and a hundred 
articles besides, that cannot be enumerated. 

" The Chancellor got this chair too cheap," 
cried one of the plunderers. 

" Ay ; he made us pay for it, as he did for 
this silver drinking-cup," added another. 
" Ours they are by rights, and we will have 
them." 

On a dais, at the upper end of the hall, 
and covered by a rich canopy, was the Arch- 
bishop's throne. In order to proclaim his 
authority, Wat Tyler marched thither, and, 
ascending the platform, seated himself on 
the throne, while John Ball took a place on 
his right, and the Outlaw on his left. 



262 MERRY ENGLAND. 

From this elevated spot the three leaders 
surveyed the lawless proceedings of the 
throng, but did not choose to interfere. 

While they were thus gazing around, they 
perceived that a prisoner had just been 
brought into the hall. 

It was the seneschal, who had been seized 
by Conrad Basset while endeavouring to pre- 
serve some valuables from the plunderers. 

When he was recognised, the crowd would 
have laid violent hands upon him, but Con- 
rad kept them back, insisting that he should 
be taken before Wat Tyler for judgment. 

His arms being fastened behind his back 
by a belt, so that he could offer no resistance, 
the prisoner was dragged to the upper end 
of the hall, amid the threats and outcries of 
the assemblage. 

A terrible sight greeted him. There, in 
the Archbishop's throne, sat Wat Tyler, 
leaning upon his sword, with his foot on a 



THE INSURRECTION. 263 

stool. Beside him were the rebel monk and 
the Outlaw. 

With such judges, Siward knew that his 
doom was sealed; nevertheless, he main- 
tained a firm demeanour. 

Conrad and his captors now stepped back, 
and left him standing alone. 

At this moment, the wild uproar hitherto 
prevailing in the hall suddenly ceased. 
Amid this awful hush, Wat Tyler's stern 
voice was heard. 

" Thou art Michael Siward, seneschal, or 
steward, to Simon de Sudbury, art thou 
not ?" demanded the rebel leader. 

" I am chief officer of the household of 
his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, 
who is likewise Lord High Chancellor of 
England/' replied Siward, boldly. 

" Then thou art servant to one who has 
plundered the people," said Wat Tyler, yet 
more sternly. " Thy master will have to 



264 MERRY ENGLAND. 

give us an account of the revenues of Eng- 
land, and of the large sums he has levied 
since the King's coronation." 

" The Chancellor will render no account 
to such vile wretches as you !" rejoined the 
steward. " Were his Grace in your power — 
which, thank Heaven, he is not — he would 
treat you with as much scorn as I do. 
Wreak your vengeance on me, if you will, 
but rest assured that a day of retribution 
will arrive." 

" Thou speakest boldly, Siward," said 
John Ball. " Such a man as thou art might 
be of service to our righteous cause. Bear 
testimony against thy master, and thy life 
shall be spared." 

" I will testify with my latest breath,'* 
replied Siward, " that a better man doth not 
exist than the Lord Chancellor; nor do I 
believe that the affairs of the realm were 
ever more wisely or more justly administered 
than by his Grace." 



THE INSURRECTION. 265 

" We will hear no more !" cried Wat 
Tyler, in a furious tone, and starting to his 
feet as he spoke. " Take the false knave 
hence, and let him die as a traitor !" 

" Traitor to whom ?" demanded Siward. 

" To the people," rejoined John Ball. 

The seneschal was then hurried out of 
the hall and taken to the court, where he 
was told to prepare for instant death. 

Turning from the bloodthirsty throng 
around him, and trying to shut his ears to 
their furious cries, the brave old man cast 
a look upwards at the golden angel on the 
spire, which was visible from the spot, and 
murmured a prayer. 

A large billet of wood served the purpose 
of an executioner's block, and Si ward's head 
was severed from the trunk by a ferocious 
ruffian, provided with a sharp, two-handed 
sword. 

This tragical incident did not interfere 
vol. i. 18 



266 MERRY ENGLAND. 



with the business of the insurgents, and 
might have been forgotten if they had not 
been reminded of it by the head of the 
ill-fated seneschal, which was fixed on the 
palace-gate. 

Viands sufficient to furnish forth a ban- 
quet were found in the great kitchen of the 
palace; and the cellars being broken open, 
yielded an -abundant supply of wine. 

Thus the rebel leaders, and a considerable 
number of their followers, were enabled to 
feast in the hall, while the rest continued 
the work of destruction and pillage. 



end or VOL. I. 



MEERY ENGLAND. 



MERRY ENGLAND: 



NOBLES AND SERFS. 



BY 



WILLIAM HARRISON AINSWORTH, 

AUTHOR OP 



" In order that gentlemen and others may take example and correct wicked 
rebels, I will most amply detail how this business was conducted." 

Froissabt. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. III. 



LONDON : 
TINSLEY BROTHERS, 8, CATHERINE STREET, STRAND, 

1874. 

\_Right of Trantlalion r nerved by the Author.] 



lONDOU: 

SAVILl, EDWAEDS AND CO., PBINIEES, CHAND08 STEEET 

COTEKT GABDE1T. 



CONTENTS 



or 



THE THIRD VOLUME. 



BOOK III. — continued. 

BLACKHEATH. 

PAGE 

V. ELTHAM PALACE IS SUBRENDERED TO THE 

REBELS 3 

vi. sir john holland is reprimanded ... 18 

til. the quarrel between the king and sir 

john holland 25 

viii. how sir john de newtoun delivered wat 

tyler's message to the king .... 36 

ix. sir lionel de courcy and his daughter ark 

brought prisoners to eltham .... 45 

x. how conrad was prevailed upon to abandon 

the rebel cause 54 

xi. what befel catherine de courcy in the 

TOWER 60 

XII. THE INTERVIEW AT ROTHEEHITHE .... 66 

XIII. HOW CATHERINE WAS FOUND IN THE SUB- 
TERRANEAN PASSAGE 79 



BOOK IV. 

THE SAVOY. 

I. JACK STRAW'S CASTLE 91 

II. HOW THE HOSPITAL OF ST. JOHN OF JERUSALEM 

WAS PILLAGED AND BURMT 100 



VI CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

III. HOW LAMBETH PALACE WAS BURNT .... H2 

IV. EDITHA'S MISSION TO WAT TYLER .... 120 

V. THE MEETING OF THE REBEL LEADERS AT 

LONDON BRIDGE 133 

VI. HOW WAT TYLER SAT IN JOHN OF GAUNT'S 

CHAIR 141 

VII. HOW MESSER BENEDETTO WAS BEHEADED AT THE 

STANDARD AT CHEAPSIDE 154 

BOOK V. 

SMITHFIELD. 

I. A NIGHT OF TERROR 165 

II. HOW WAT TYLER ENTERED THE TOWER. . .169 

III. WAT TYLER'S PROPOSAL TO THE KING . . .174 

IV. HOW THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY AND THE 

LORD HIGH TREASURER WERE BEHEADED ON 
TOWER HILL 182 

V. CATHERINE DE COURCY TAKES REFUGE IN DART- 

FORD PRIORY 196 

VI. HOW THE OUTLAW WAS SLAIN BY CONRAD 
BASSET ; AND HOW CONRAD WAS KNIGHTED 
BY THE KING 203 

VII. THE KING AGREES TO HOLD A FINAL CON- 
FERENCE WITH WAT TYLER AT SMITHFIELD 209 

VIII. WAT TYLER IS AGAIN WARNED BY FATHER 

GAWEN 215 

IX. THE FATE OF THE REBEL LEADER .... 223 
X. AN EARLY GRAVE 236 



BOOK III. — continued. 



BLACK HEATH. 



/0 VOL. III. 



MEEKY ENGLAND; 



OB, 



NOBLES AND SEBFS. 



V. 

ELTHAM PALACE IS SURRENDERED TO THE 
REBELS. 




j]Y this time the sun had risen, and 
with a splendour that gave 
assurance of a glorious day. 
Eoused hy the enlivening beams, the 
whole host was speedily astir. Where all 
had been silent as the grave a short time 
before, thousands of voices were now heard. 
On returning to his tent, Wat Tyler 
mounted his steed, and accompanied by 

1—2 



MERRY ENGLAND. 



Conrad Basset and Frideswide, both of 
whom were on horseback, began to inspect 
the host. 

Descrying John Ball at a distance, he 
joined him, and found that he was about to 
preach to the assemblage. 

Externally the monk was unchanged. 
He was still a barefooted friar — still wore 
a grey gown and tied a cord round his waist. 

He had brought with him a portable 
pulpit from Eochester, and this pulpit, 
which was more than twenty feet high, 
being placed in a convenient spot, he 
quitted his mule and ascended it, while 
Wat Tyler, and those with him, stationed 
themselves below. 

From this elevated stage the monk could 
survey the whole host, and he looked 
around for a few minutes till a general 
silence prevailed, and then commenced his 
discourse. 



BLACKHEATH. 



Possessing a stentorian voice, he made 
himself heard at a considerable distance, 
and as he justified the proceedings of the 
insurgents, he was listened to with atten- 
tion, and even applauded. 

At the close of his sermon, he called on 
the assemblage to join in prayer ; and the 
injunction being reiterated in every direc- 
tion, the entire host knelt down. 

Nothing could be more striking than the 
spectacle afforded by the vast kneeling 
multitude ; but the effect of a hymn, 
subsequently sung, and in which thousands 
of rude, untutored voices joined, was sublime. 

Having finished their devotions, the 
peasants began to prepare for their morning 
meal, and numerous fires were lighted, at 
which provisions were cooked. 

Meanwhile the leaders proceeded to the 
tent in which Sir John de Newtoun was 
confined; but having satisfied themselves 



6 MERUT ENGLAND. 

that he was safe, they did not care to 
question him. 

A conference was then held between Wat 
Tyler and the monk, and some changes 
were made consequent upon the departure 
of the Outlaw. 

Conrad Basset was appointed to the 
command of a battalion, and Hothbrand 
had a similar command bestowed upon him 
by Wat Tyler, who promoted all his own 
favourites. 

It must be mentioned that a strong 
feeling of jealousy had arisen of late 
between the two rebel chiefs, and Wat Tyler 
by no means regretted the absence of one 
whom he had begun to regard as a rival. 

So much had to be done, and so many 
delays occurred, that two or three hours 
elapsed before the army was ready to march. 

At length, however, it set forth. 

Ill-disciplined, tumultuous, and scarcely 



BLACKHEATH. 



to be controlled by its leaders, the host was 
imposing from its magnitude. 

Though no halt took place in Dartford, 
and though the men marched quickly, 
upwards of an hour elapsed between the 
appearance of the head of the first division 
on the brow of the hill, and the descent of 
the last battalion. 

The men were armed, as we have pre- 
viously stated, with every description of 
weapon — scythes, flails, and reaping-hooks in- 
cluded ; but gisarmes, long pikes, and brown 
bills predominated. Banners of St. George 
and pennons were borne by each company. 

Wat Tyler rode at the head of the army, 
and no noble could have assumed a 
haughtier deportment than did the rebel 
leader. He scarcely deigned to notice the 
respectful salutations of the villagers, and 
responded with a proud gesture to Baldock's 
profound obeisance. 



8 MERRY ENGLAND. 

However, he gave strict orders that the 
Priory was not to be injured ; and while 
he placed a guard at the gates to enforce 
obedience to his commands, his wife rushed 
forth, and endeavoured to throw herself at 
his feet, but she was kept back. 

The onward march of the insurgents was 
characterized by its customary atrocities. 
Several habitations were plundered at Cray- 
ford and Bexley, and their owners put to 
death. 

Although Wat Tyler had told his brother 
chief that he would not stay to besiege 
Eltham Palace, he sent Conrad Basset to 
summon the garrison to surrender, threaten- 
ing to put them to the sword if they 
refused. 

Anticipating a determined resistance, the 
young leader was greatly surprised when 
the demand was complied with. 

On the very first summons the gates 



BLACKHEATH. 9 



were thrown open, and Conrad, accompanied 
by Frideswide, rode into the court with a 
large force, and took possession of the place. 

It then appeared that only a very slender 
garrison was left there; Sir Eustace de 
Valletort, and all the other knights and 
esquires with him, having received orders 
from the King to join him, without delay, 
at the Tower. 

The satisfactory intelligence was instantly 
conveyed to Wat Tyler, who had halted, 
with his division of the army, in the park ; 
and he at once repaired to the palace. 

Deeming that a royal residence would 
tend to further his ambitious schemes, he 
took immediate measures to prevent the 
place from being plundered or destroyed ; 
and feeling he could rely upon Conrad to 
carry out his injunctions, he committed the 
charge of the palace to him. 

Everything now seemed propitious to the 



10 MERRY ENGLAND. 

rebel leader. He had got rid of a rival, who 
might have offered dangerous opposition to 
his plans, and he had possession of a palace, 
wherein he might execute his designs. 

Moreover, the sudden flight of Sir Eustace 
de Valletort and the knights proved conclu- 
sively that the royal party were full of 
alarm. 

Before leaving the palace, and conducting 
his army to Blackheath, where the camp 
was to be formed, Wat Tyler sent for Sir 
John de Newtoun, and received him with 
all the haughtiness of a monarch in the 
great banqueting-hall. 

Seated in a regal chair, with Conrad and 
Frideswide standing behind him, the rebel 
leader thus addressed the captive knight, 
who regarded him with looks full of wrath, 
being highly indignant at the surrender 
of the palace : — 

" I am about to send thee to the Tower 



BLACKHEATH. 11 



as my messenger to the King. On thy 
honour and life thou wilt return with his 
Majesty's answer, be it what it may ?" 

"I have already said it," replied the 
knight, sternly. " What wouldst thou have 
me state to the King ?" 

" First, thou wilt tell him that his royal 
manor of Eltham is in my hands. Add 
thereunto that if my demands be not con- 
ceded, I will next seize the Tower !" 

" That menace will be derided !" rejoined 
Sir John, scornfully. " With all thy host, 
thou wilt never take the Tower !" 

"Three days ago," said Wat Tyler, 
" thou wouldst have declared that Rochester 
Castle was impregnable — yet I took it !" 

"The castle was betrayed," cried Sir 
John. " But to thy message." 

" Say to the King that he ought not to 
regard me as an enemy," rejoined Wat. 
" All I have done has been in his service." 



12 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" This is mere mockery !" cried the 
knight. "I will bear no such message." 

" Ever since the young King's accession 
to the throne," continued Wat, " the realm 
has been infamously governed. Not by his 
Majesty, but by his uncles and the Council. 
They must be dismissed. The commonalty 
have been grievously wronged by the nobles 
and the clergy. There shall be no nobles 
— no clergy. Moreover, the Archbishop 
of Canterbury must render a strict account 
of his ministry as Chancellor." 

" To whom ?" demanded Sir John. 

" To me," replied Wat Tyler. " Tell the 
King I have much to lay before him which 
I cannot confide to thee. I must confer 
with him alone." 

" That can never be," rejoined Sir John. 

" Deliver my message, nevertheless," said 
Wat Tyler. " Mark well my words : I 
alone can save the King from the peril in 



BLACKHEATH. 13 

which he is placed. Without my help he 
may lose his crown." 

So much significance was given by the 
rebel leader to the latter part of his speech, 
that Sir John could not help pondering 
upon it. 

" The interview can take place here," 
pursued Wat Tyler, after a brief pause ; 
" but it must be in private." 

" And think you his Majesty will trust 
himself with you ?" exclaimed Sir John. 
" Your folly and audacity astound me !" 

" He will be safer with me than with his 
uncles," rejoined the rebel leader. "But I 
will consent that the Princess, his mother, 
shall be present at the interview." 

Whatever he thought of this proposition, 
Sir John made no remark, but contented 
himself with saying — 

" I will deliver thy message to his Ma- 
jesty. 



14 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" That is all I require from thee," re- 
joined "Wat Tyler. " Thou wilt bring me 
an answer to Blackheath, where I shall be 
with my army." 

Then turning to Conrad, he added, " Let 
him be taken by a strong guard to Green- 
wich. There let a boat be procured to 
convey him at once to the Tower." 

Thereupon Sir John de Newtoun with- 
drew, accompanied by Conrad, who presently 
returned, having given the necessary direc- 
tions respecting him. 

"Wat Tyler then quitted the palace, and 
took Frideswide with him, knowing he 
could trust her to convey secret messages 
to Conrad. 

When the insurgents emerged from the 
park, Blackheath lay before them, and they 
had only to descend the woody slopes to 
reach the extensive plain. 

Like Editha, Wat Tyler paused for a 



BLACKHEATH. 15 



moment to gaze at the great city in the dis- 
tance, but with far different emotions. 

Unable to repress his exultation, he 
raised himself in his saddle, and, stretching 
out his hand towards the distant structures, 
exclaimed aloud, caring not that his words 
were overheard by Erideswide, who was 
close behind him — 

" That city will soon be mine !" 

He then rode down the hill-side, and was 
followed by the multitude. 

Never before, never since, has Blackheath 
beheld a host like that gathered upon it 
then. Never was wilder excitement than 
the insurgents displayed when they first 
caught sight of London. 

As each company reached the brow of 
the hill, the men gave a great' shout, and 
then rushed headlong down, spreading tu- 
multuously over the plain. 

"When all had descended, a muster took 



16 MERRY ENGLAND. 

place, and it was then found, as nearly as 
could be computed, that they numbered 
ninety thousand. 

This, with the division stationed at 
Eltham, and the Essex army, commanded 
by the Outlaw, raised the insurgent forces 
to nearly a hundred thousand men. 

Well might Wat Tyler deem such a force 
irresistible. 

Immediately after the muster, and before 
the vast assemblage could disperse, John 
Ball caused his lofty pulpit to be reared in 
the midst of them, and commenced one of 
his fiery harangues. 

He told his listeners, who were attentive 
as ever, that their march was over — that 
they were at the gates of the doomed city, 
and had only to enter and destroy all nobles 
and wicked-doers within it, and seize upon 
the wealth which had been wrung from the 
people. 



BLACKHEATH. 17 



"Nineveh was a great city," he said, 
" an exceeding great and proud city, but it 
was not spared. Neither shall great and 
proud London be spared, by reason of its 
iniquities !" 

The fierce and terrific shout that arose at 
the close of his address, and seemed to 
shake the vault above, showed that all who 
heard him were ready to execute his orders. 




VOL. III. 



VI. 




SIR JOHN HOLLAND IS REPRIMANDED. 

HE utmost consternation prevailed 
among the loyal and wealthy citi- 
zens of London when it became 
known that the royal palace of Eltham was 
occupied by the rebels — that ninety thou- 
sand Kentish peasants, under the command 
of Wat Tyler, were quartered on Black- 
heath— that another large army of Essex 
men, commanded by the redoubted Outlaw, 
was encamped on Hampstead Heath — in a 
word, that the City was completely in- 
vested, and that no reinforcements could be 
obtained from any quarter. 

Nothing daunted by this alarming in- 
telligence, and by the knowledge he had 



BLACKHEATH. 19 



acquired that there were upwards of thirty 
thousand persons in the City favourable to 
the rebel cause, Sir William Walworth 
caused the gates of London Bridge to be 
closed and strongly guarded, shut all the 
City gates, and got together a great 'number 
of valiant and notable burgesses and men- 
at-arms, on whose loyalty he could depend. 

Meanwhile, active preparations were 
made for the defence of the Tower by Sir 
Simon Burley and Sir Eustace de Valle- 
tort, to whom the command of the royal 
fortress was entrusted. 

The garrison having been somewhat re- 
inforced, now consisted of six hundred 
men-at-arms, and the like number of 
archers ; but still the two experienced com- 
manders, and almost all the nobles and 
knights with them, wetre full of anxiety, 
because they feared that some of the men 
were inclined to take part with the rebels. 

2—2 



20 MERRY ENGLAND. 

The only person apparently free from 
uneasiness at this critical juncture was the 
young King. Whether his indifference was 
affected or not, it sorely displeased the two 
commanders, who rebuked him; but he 
answered their reprimands with great 
petulance. 

"I shall not feign an alarm I do not 
feel," he said. "What can I do? You 
take measures for the defence of the Tower 
without consulting me ; and you are right, 
since I am inexperienced." 

"My liege," said Sir Eustace de Valle- 
tort, gravely, " your indifference has an ill 
effect on the soldiers." 

" It ought to cheer them, because it 
proves that I do not despair of suc- 
cess," said the King. " It will be time 
enough to look despondent when we are 
beaten." 

" I hope we shall not be beaten, my 



BLACKHEATH. 21 



liege," said Sir Eustace. "Nevertheless, 
we must be prepared for the worst." 

" I am prepared for whatever may 
happen," said Eichard. "But 'tis useless 
to continue this discourse. Should you 
think fit to consult me on any matter, you 
will find me with the Princess." 

Eaising the tapestry that masked a side 
door, he proceeded towards his mother's 
apartments. 

As he went out his councillors regarded 
each other with an indefinite expression, 
wherein anger and grief were blended. 

" Why should we strive to preserve his 
crown, 'since he values not?" cried Sir 
Simon, bitterly. 

"Nay, we must not desert him now/' 
rejoined Sir Eustace. " But I would that 
some of his ill-advisers were removed." 

Just as the words were uttered, Sir John 
Holland entered the room. 



22 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" I thought the King was here," he ex- 
claimed, looking round. 

"His Majesty has just gone to the 
Princess's apartments," replied Sir Simon. 

" I will follow him thither," cried the 
young noble. 

" Stay, my lord," said Sir Eustace. " I 
would fain have a word with you." 

Something in Sir Eustace's tone dis- 
pleased the young noble excessively; but 
he stopped. 

"My lord," said Eustace, bluntly, "I 
pray you to excuse what I am about to say. 
I should be well pleased if you did not hold 
so much light and frivolous discourse with 
his Majesty. 'Tis out of place at this 
juncture." 

" I am of the same opinion, my lord," 
added Sir Simon Burley, with equal blunt- 
ness. " Such levity is ill-timed. Avoid it, 
I pray you." 



BLACKHEATH. 



23 



" 'Sdeath !" exclaimed Sir John, fiercely. 
" Am I to be tutored by you, my lords ? 
Am I to ask you in what terms I must 
address the King, my brother? I trow 

not !" 

" If you are really devoted to the King, 
my lord," said Sir Eustace, " and desire to 
maintain his authority, you will not divert 
his thoughts from the serious matters that 
demand his consideration, by follies and 
frivolities. If you cannot or will not do 
this, 'twere best you left the Tower !" 

" How ?" exclaimed the young noble. 
" Leave the Tower ?" 

" Such is my order, as one of the Coun- 
cil !" said Sir Simon. 

" And think you I will obey the order ?" 
cried Sir John, furiously. 

" You must 1" rejoined Sir Simon, sternly. 
" I am chief in authority here, and I deem 
your presence highly prejudicial to the 



24 MERRY ENGLAND. 

King ! Unless you exercise greater dis- 
cretion, I will send you hence, and some 
others with you !" 

" You dare not do it, Sir Simon !" cried 
the haughty young nobleman, inflamed with 
rage. 

"Betract those expressions, my lord, or 
I will order your instant arrest !" said Sir 
Simon. 

Infuriated as he was, Sir John felt he 
could not brave the Councillor's authority. 
He therefore forced himself to say^he had 
been too hasty ; but without waiting to see 
whether his apology was accepted, he raised 
the arras and passed out, as the King had 
done. 




VII. 




THE QUARREL BETWEEN THE KING AND SIR 
JOHN HOLLAND. 

N an ante-chamber which commu- 
nicated with his mother's apart- 
ments, Richard found Editha. 
She was alone, and stationed in the deep 
recess of a bay-window, that looked upon 
the palace garden, and upon the broad 
river, flowing past the outer walls of the 
fortress. So pre-occupied was she, that she 
did not notice the King's entrance. 

In this pensive attitude she looked so 
charming, that Richard remained riveted to 
the spot. 

Already, the charms of the lovely damsel 
had made an impression upon his youthful 



26 MERRY ENGLAND. 

t 

heart, very different from any he had pre- 
viously experienced. Although he had 
fancied himself in love with various Court 
damsels, who had spread their lures for him, 
he had never been touched so sensibly as by 
Editha's simple graces. 

The novel sensation of being really in 
love, surprised, and perhaps did not alto- 
gether please J him ; but the very efforts he 
made to overcome the growing passion 
increased it. 

As yet he had breathed no word of love 
to the fair damsel ; but his ardent looks had 
revealed the state of his feelings as plainly 
as if he had given utterance to them. 

And how was Editha affected by the 
discovery she had made, that the King 
was enamoured of her ? Alas ! she dis- 
covered, at the same time, that she loved 
him. 

To indulge such a passion she knew 



BLACKHEATH. 27 



would be fatal to her, |and she strove to 
stifle it. In vain ; it over-mastered her. 

She was thinking of the King as she 
looked out of the bay-window at the garden 
and the river; and when she turned and 
beheld him, she uttered a slight cry. 

" Surely I do not alarm you !" he said, 
advancing towards her, and taking her 
hand. 

"I was startled at the moment," she 
replied. " I knew not your Majesty was in 
the room." 

" I had been here for a few moments," 
he said. " I was looking at you ; thinking 
how beautiful — how very beautiful you 
are! 

" Oh, my liege !" she exclaimed, blushing 
deeply. 

" I adore you, Editha !" he cried, pas- 
sionately. " You must be mine ! I cannot 
live without you !" 



28 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" My liege, I implore you," she ex- 
claimed, attempting to withdraw her hand ; 
but he retained it. 

" Editha," he cried, " I never loved till I 
beheld you, and I can love no other as I 
love you ! You are my life — my soul ! I 
cannot exist without you !" 

" I pray you let me go, my liege !" she 
cried, trembling. "I must not listen to 
such words from you !" 

" Nay, by my faith I will not release you, 
Editha, till you promise to requite my 
love." 

" It would be sinful in me to make any 
such promise, my liege. I can never be 
your bride, and other than your bride I will 
never be. That no one has ever inspired 
me with such feelings as I entertain for 
your Majesty I will own." 

" Then you confess you love me ?" cried 
Eichard. 



BLAOKHEATH. 29 



"I could not behold your Majesty un- 
moved," she rejoined. " But our Blessed 
Mother will give me strength to conquer 
my feelings. I will die rather than swerve 
from my duty. Suffer me, I implore you, 
to retire." 

But the King would not relinquish her 
hand. Abashed by his ardent gaze, she 
cast down her eyes. 

Just then the door communicating with 
the corridor opened, and Sir John Holland 
came in. 

He started on beholding the King and 
TSditha standing together in the bay-window, 
and turned very pale. 

" Pass on, my lord !" cried Eichard, seeing 
he felt inclined to pause. 

But, to the King's surprise and dis- 
pleasure, Sir John came forward, and, 
controlling himself as well as he could, 
said — 



30 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Your Majesty may not be aware that I 
have a prior claim to this damsel." 

"A prior claim?" ejaculated Eichard, 
looking at her. 

"'Tis false!" cried Editha, indignantly. 
" He is hateful to me. I pray your Ma- 
jesty to deliver me from his further perse- 
cutions." 

" Eeassure yourself, fair damsel," said the 
King. " He shall trouble you no more." 

But the young noble, who stood in very 
little awe of his royal brother, rejoined, in 
a half-defiant tone, " I do not intend to re- 
sign her, even to your Majesty." 

" Presume not too much on my good 
nature," said Richard. 

And he signed to him to leave the room. 

But Sir John Holland did not obey. 

" This damsel is mine, I repeat," he said. 
" If I go, she shall come with me." 

" Do not let him approach me, my liege," 



BLACKHEATH. 31 



implored Editha, clinging to the King for 
protection. 

" Back, on thy life !" exclaimed Eichard, 
drawing his sword, as his brother advanced. 
"By St. Paul ! I will have her, if I take 
her by force !" cried the young noble, draw- 
ing likewise. 

Fearing some terrible catastrophe might 
occur if this unnatural quarrel were carried 
further, Editha threw herself between the 
brothers. 

For a moment they glared fiercely at each 
other, but no blow was struck, when Sir 
Simon Burley and Sir Eustace de Valletort 
suddenly entered. 

Amazed at the sight they beheld, they 
both rushed forward, and seizing Sir John 
Holland, instantly disarmed him. 

" Are you mad, my lord, that you dare to 
raise your hand against the King?" cried 
Sir Eustace. "Know you not that you 



32 MERRY ENGLAND. 

have placed your life in jeopardy by the 
rash act ?" 

Sir John made no reply. 

Sir Simon flew to the door ; and calling 
the guard, ordered them to arrest the young 
noble. 

This was done. 

"Take him to the Beauchamp Tower," 
added Sir Simon ; " and let him be confined 
in a prison-chamber." 

" Must this be, my liege ?" cried Sir 
John. 

Fearing the King might relent, Sir 
Eustace interposed. 

" My liege," he said, " the offence is too 
serious to be passed without punishment." 

Thus admonished, Eichard turned away, 
and his brother was removed. 

As he was taken forth, Sir Eustace re- 
marked to Editha, " I must look to you for 
an explanation of this scene." 



BLA.CKHEATH. 33 



" I am the unfortunate cause of it," she 
replied. " The quarrel was concerning me." 

" I feared as much," said the knight, in 
an undertone. " You have but escaped one 
danger to fall into another. Tou love the 
King ?" 

" Alas ! yes !" she ejaculated. " Yet fear 
me not." 

" One person alone can protect you — the 
Princess," said Sir Eustace. " Gro to her at 
once. Tell her all." 

" I will," replied Editha, earnestly. 

And she quitted the room unperceived by 
the King, who was conversing with Sir 
Simon in the bay-window. 

Scarcely was she gone than the Lieu- 
tenant of the Tower entered from the cor- 
ridor. His looks proclaimed that he brought 
important tidings. 

" My liege," he said, with an obeisance 
to the King, " Sir John de Newtoun, some- 

VOL. III. 3 



34 MERRY ENGLAND. 

while Constable of Eochester Castle, has 
just arrived at the Tower. He is the bearer 
of a message from the rebel leader, "Wat 
Tyler, and craves an audience of your 
Majesty. Will it please you to receive 
him ?" 

"Ay, marry, good Master Lieutenant," 
replied the King. " I am curious to hear 
this insolent knave's message. Sir John 
hath been a prisoner of the rebels ever 
since they left Eochester, as I understand- 
How hath he been treated by them ?" 

" He does not complain of ill-treatment, 
my liege," replied the Lieutenant. " But 
he says he hath been compelled to pledge 
his word to the rebel leader to bring back 
an answer from your Majesty." 

" He shall have answer ; but it must be 
well considered," replied the King. " Call 
a Council forthwith in the great chamber 
in the White Tower, and summon to it his 



BLACKHEATH. 35 



Grace of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, 
and the other lords. "When they are assem- 
bled, we will hear Sir John de Newtoun's 
message. 'Tis a grave matter, and must be 
gravely discussed." 

"I am glad to hear your Majesty say 
so," cried Sir Simon, approvingly. " Act 
up to the counsel of those devoted to you, 
and you will have nothing to fear." 

The Lieutenant then departed, to execute 
the King's behests. 

" 'Tis meet the Princess should hear the 
message, my liege," said Sir Simon. " Her 
advice is ever judicious. Shall we solicit 
her Highness's attendance ?" 

" Nay ; I will go to her myself," said 
Richard. " Come with me, I pray you." 

Followed by the two commanders, he 
proceeded to his mother's apartment. 



3—3 



VIII. 




how sir john de newtoun delivered wat 
tyler's message to the king. 

N that unrivalled chamber in the 
uppermost story of the White 
Tower, wherein royal councils had 
been constantly held since the days of 
William Eufus, an audience was given by 
the King to Sir John de Newtoun. 

Stretched from pillar to pillar on either 
side of the immense apartment, heavy cur- 
tains of arras materially diminished its 
width, but heightened its splendour. 

Men-at-arms thronged the galleries ; hal- 
berdiers were stationed at the principal 
entrance of the council-chamber ; and ushers, 



BLACKHEATH. 37 



pages, and various officers of the household 
were assembled within. 

Beneath a canopy of state at the upper 
end of the room, and on raised chairs, sat 
the King and the Princess, his mother. 

On his Majesty's right were placed the 
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord of St. 
John's, the Baron de Vertain, and the Baron 
de Grommegines. 

On the left, and near the Princess, sat Sir 
Simon Burley, Sir Eustace de Namur, and 
Sir Henry de Sauselles. 

The whole assemblage looked extraordi- 
narily grave, and Eichard had never before 
worn an aspect so serious. 

None of his light companions, who made 
a jest of everything, were present — Sir John 
Holland, as we know, being confined in the 
Beauchamp Tower. 

As soon as the King and the Council 
were seated, Sir John de Newtoun was 



38 MERKY ENGLAND. 

ushered in ceremoniously by the Lieu- 
tenant. 

After Sir John had made a profound 
obeisance to the King, who received him 
very graciously, he said, in accents that 
plainly bespoke his trouble — 

"My gracious liege, I received the 
honour of knighthood from that flower of 
English chivalry, the very redoubted prince, 
your father. Ever loyal and faithful to 
your illustrious grandsire, Edward III., I 
have ever been loyal and devoted to your- 
self. What, then, must be my feelings, 
when I am forced to bear a message to 
your Majesty from villains who have taken 
up arms against you? I deserve to be 
thrust from your royal presence with scorn. 
And if you send me back unheard, to be 
put to an ignominious death by those rebels 
and traitors, I cannot complain. Eeturn I 
must! My word, never yet broken, is 



BLACK.HEATH. 39 



pledged to the rebel leader, and my wife and 
children are detained by him as hostages." 

"Bise, good Sir John," cried Eichard, 
much touched at his affection. " Deliver 
your message without fear. However deep 
may be our displeasure with these presump- 
tuous rebels, we hold you excused." 

" My liege," said Sir John, much relieved 
by the assurance, " I must again pray you 
to hold me excused, if I employ language 
that may sound disrespectful. But I have 
no option. Wat Tyler, the leader of the 
rebellious peasants, hath sent me as his am- 
bassador to request that your Majesty will 
come to Eltham Palace — now, alas ! in the 
arch-rebel's hands — to confer with him on 
various matters." 

" Go to him !" cried Eichard, angrily, 
while indignant murmurs arose from the 
whole Council. " Doth the insolent knave 
expect compliance on our part ?" 



40 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" He does, my liege," replied Sir John. 
" He has the audacity to demand that the 
conference between your Majesty and him- 
self shall take place in private. He will not 
allow any of your Council to be present." 

Fresh murmurs arose from Sir Simon 
Burley and the others. 

" The reason he assigns for this outrageous 
demand, my liege," continued Sir John, " is 
that he has certain propositions to make 
which can only be discussed by your Majesty 
and himself. Should your Majesty agree to 
the interview — as he doubts not you will 
— he will send a sufficient guard to conduct 
you from Greenwich to Eltham, and will 
guarantee your safety." 

" And doth the madman imagine that we, 
the guardians of the King, would allow his 
Majesty to place himself in the hands of 
such a miscreant ?" cried Sir Simon. 

" I would not for a moment advise any 



BLACKHEATH. 41 



such insane step as that proposed," ob- 
served Sir John ; " but I am bound to say- 
that I do not think that Wat Tyler medi- 
tates treachery." 

" I should not fear to hold a conference 
with him," said Richard. 

" 'Tis a snare to get you into his power, 
my liege !" cried the Princess. " Think not 
he would keep faith with you !" 

All the Council were of the same opinion. 

" If your Majesty really desires to have 
an interview with Wat Tyler," said Sir 
Eustace de Valletort, " it can be managed in 
this wayj but in no other, without danger 
to yourself. Send a message by Sir John de 
Newtoun that you will meet him at your 
manor of Eotherhithe to-morrow morning. 
Descend the river in your barge, and, on 
arriving at the appointed spot, keep close 
to the shore. On seeing your Majesty ap- 
proach, the rebel leader, attended only by 



42 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Sir John de Newtoun, can ride up to the 
bank, and the conference can take place. 
Sir John will keep strict watch upon Wat 
Tyler's movements, and, at a sign from him, 
the barge can be instantly rowed off." 

"We like the plan," rejoined Eichard. 
And no objection being raised to it by the 
Council, he added to Sir John de Newtoun, 
" Take back our answer to Wat Tyler. Tell 
him he must come forward unarmed, and 
attended only by you. He may do so with- 
out fear. We will descpnd the river in our 
barge to-morrow morn. If we find him not 
at Eotherhithe, we shall forthwith return." 

" I will deliver your message, my liege," 
said Sir John; "but I doubt if the pre- 
sumptuous knave will be satisfied. He is 
so puffed up with success, that he fancies he 
can dictate terms to your Majesty. Should 
he not appear at Eotherhithe, the fault will 
not be mine." 



BLACKHEATH. 43 



" Understand this, Sir John," said Sir 
Simon Burley, " though it forms no part of 
your answer to Wat Tyler: the whole of 
the Council will attend the King to Eother- 
hithe. They do not desire to take any 
part in the conference ; but since they are 
responsible for his Majesty's safety, they 
cannot allow him to leave the Tower without 
them." 

All the Council concurred in this opinion. 

" I trust I may be allowed to accompany 
the King, and take one of my damsels with 
me ?" said the Princess. 

"Undoubtedly, your Grace," replied Sir 
Simon. 

" Who is to be left in command of the 
Tower during your absence?" demanded 
Eichard. 

" The Lieutenant. We can perfectly con - 
fide in him," rejoined Sir Simon. 

The King signified his approval ; and all 



44 MERRY ENGLAND. 

being settled, Sir John de Newtoun took 
leave. 

He was conducted by the Lieutenant to 
the private stairs at St. Thomas's Tower, 
where his boat awaited him. 

Crossing the river, he made the best of 
his way to Blackheath ; and, being provided 
with a pass, he had no difficulty in pene- 
trating through the rebel host to the tent of 
the leader. 




IX. 




SIR LIONEL DE COURCY AND HIS DAUGHTER 
ARE BROUGHT PRISONERS TO ELTHAM. 

N flying from Canterbury, Sir Lionel 
de Courcy had proceeded with his 
daughter, and all his servants 
and retainers, to a large mansion which 
he possessed in the neighbourhood of 
Maidstone. 

Two days after his arrival, he was at- 
tacked by a large party of insurgent 
peasantry, and, after an obstinate defence, 
his retainers were put to the sword, and the 
old knight and his lovely daughter were 
carried off as prisoners, and delivered to 
Wat Tyler at Blackheath, to be dealt with 
as the rebel leader might deem fit. 



46 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Aware of the outrage inflicted upon Con- 
rad Basset by Sir Lionel, and being willing 
to afford the young rebel commander an 
opportunity of avenging the wrong done 
him, Wat Tyler refused all offers of ransom, 
and sent the captive knight and his daughter 
to Eltham, under the charge of Frideswide 
and a guard. 

As neither Sir Lionel nor Catherine had 
been told that Conrad was commander of 
the rebel garrison quartered at the palace, 
they were greatly astonished when brought 
into his presence, and the old knight was 
struck with dismay. 

Guarded by Frideswide, who marched 
beside them with a two-handed sword on 
her shoulder, they were led to the great 
banqueting-hall, where Conrad was seated 
in a royal chair. 

On beholding him, Catherine cast down 
her"eyes ; but Conrad hardly looked at her. 



BLACKHEATH. 47 



With a feeling of gratified vengeance, he 
enjoyed the confusion into which the old 
knight was thrown. 

As to Frideswide, who stood beside the 
prisoners, she already hated Catherine for 
her beauty, and, with jealous quickness, 
watched her every look. 

After regarding the old knight steadily 
for a few moments, Conrad exclaimed, in a 
voice of bitter mockery — 

" You are welcome to Eltham, Sir 
Lionel ! The tables are turned since we last 
met. Then you were in power ; now I am 
master !" 

Sir Lionel made no reply to this speech ; 
and Conrad called for a scourge, which was 
brought him. 

"At length I have an opportunity of 
requiting thee for the injury thou hast done 
me !" he said. 

And he raised the scourge to strike the 



48 MERRY ENGLAND. 

old knight, who regarded him sternly, when 
Catherine flung herself upon her knees be- 
fore the vindictive young man, and besought 
him to spare her father. 

" Do not humiliate him thus, I implore 
you, Conrad !" she exclaimed. 

"Why should I forbear to strike him?" 
cried Conrad, fiercely. " He had no con- 
sideration for me !" 

" Desist, girl !" exclaimed the old knight, 
haughtily. " You appeal to one who has 
no sense of honour. I am unarmed, and a 
prisoner. The shame will be to himself, 
should he strike me." 

" I was held by thy servants, when struck 
by thee, or thou hadst not been living 
now," rejoined Conrad. 

"Had I the sword that bold woman 
bears upon her shoulder, thou wouldst not 
dare come near me !" cried Sir Lionel. 
" Nor would I long remain thy prisoner !" 



BLACKHEATH. 49 



" Give him thy sword," said Conrad to 
the Amazon. 

"Not I, by the Eood!" rejoined Frides- 
wide. " I will sooner put him and his 
daughter to death !" 

And roughly seizing Catherine, who was 
still on her knees before Conrad, she forced 
her to rise. 

" Help, Conrad !" shrieked Catherine. 
" Thou wilt not let me be murdered by this 
terrible woman !" 

" Eelease her !" cried Conrad. 

And at the word, Frideswide instantly 
relinquished her hold of the fair damsel, but 
looked like a young lioness robbed of her prey. 

" Oh ! she has hurt me !" exclaimed 
Catherine, clasping her bruised wrist. 

" Thou art fit only for a lady's bower," 
remarked Frideswide, contemptuously. 

" No more of this," said Conrad, authori- 
tatively, to the Amazon. 

VOL. III. 4 



50 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Then turning to the captive damsel, he 
added — 

" For your sake, Catherine, I am content 
to spare your father." 

There was a slight tenderness in his tone 
that did not escape Frideswide, and in- 
creased her secret anger. 

" I knew you would relent, Conrad !" 
cried Catherine, with a grateful look. " Be 
wholly generous, and set us free." 

" I will ask nothing from him !" said her 
father, proudly. * 

"And I will grant nothing more," re- 
joined Conrad. 

"You have granted too much already," 
muttered Frideswide, who looked sullen and 
displeased. "Shall I bestow them in a 
prison chamber?" 

" Oh ! no— no !" exclaimed Catherine. 

Conrad could not resist her imploring 
look. 



BLACKHEATH. 51 



"Pledge me your knightly word, Sir 
Lionel," he said, " that you will not attempt 
to escape, and neither you nor your 
daughter shall be placed in confinement." 

" What I would not do for myself, I will 
do for my child," said the old knight. 

And he gave the required pledge. 

" Conduct them to the State apartments, 
and let some one attend," said Conrad. 

But finding Frideswide unwilling to obey 
the order, he signed to the captives to 
follow him, and led them to an adjoining 
apartment, where he left them, without 
further speech. 

As he came forth, he found Frideswide 
standing near the door, and bade her, some- 
what angrily, begone. 

She did not obey; but, looking fixedly 
at him, said — 

" Thou still lov'st this damsel. I am 
sure of it; ami<£ ^ftUVVjSAjJJlJc will ensue. 



52 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Thou wilt yield to her entreaties, and 
desert the great cause. Sooner than that 
shall be," she added, with a look that left 
no doubt she would execute the threat, " I 
would kill her with my own hand." 

"Thou art mistaken," said Conrad, 
vainly essaying to pacify her. " The 
damsel is nothing to me now." 

" 'Tis false !" exclaimed ' Frideswide. 
" Think not to deceive me. I have told 
thee what I will do. Beware !" 

And she marched off, leaving him greatly 
irritated and perplexed. 

" Catherine must not be exposed to the 
rage of this jealous fury," he thought. 
" She shall be removed to some strong- 
room, where she can be carefully 
guarded. There is a tower in the west 
angle of the great court, in the lower 
chamber of which she might be placed. 
There she would be safe. It shall be so." 



BLACKHEATH. 53 



Having come to this determination, he 
gave orders that a repast should be forth- 
with served to the prisoners, and proceeded 
to the tower in question. 

As will have been surmised, it was the 
structure beneath which was the entrance to 
the subterranean passage; but of this cir- 
cumstance Conrad was ignorant. 

On examining the lower chamber of the 
tower, he thought it well adapted to the 
purpose required, and gave directions that 
it should be immediately prepared for Ca- 
therine's reception. 




X. 



HOW CONRAD WAS PREVAILED UPON TO 
ABANDON THE REBEL CAUSE. 




ESIEOUS of offering some explana- 
tion to the fair damsel before her 
removal, Conrad next repaired to 
the apartment in which she and her father 
were confined. 

They had just finished the repast provided 
for them, and rose from the table as he 
entered the room, to thank him for the at- 
tention shown them. 

Evidently Sir Lionel's feelings had under- 
gone a great change. He no longer regarded 
the young man haughtily, but, advancing 
towards him, said, in a frank but apologetic 
tone — 



BLACKHEATH. 55 



"Conrad Basset, I have wronged you; 
and I hasten to tell you so. Since I have 
been brought here, I have seen enough of 
you to satisfy me that your nature is noble. 
Pardon me, if you can." 

Surprise kept Conrad silent ; and he might 
have doubted that he had heard aright, if 
Catherine's looks had not shown him that 
the change in her father's sentiments had 
not been wrought by her. 

" Sir Lionel," he rejoined, " you have 
effaced the wrong done me. I will think of it 
no more. Had you said thus much a month 
ago, I should never have taken up arms 
against the King." 

" Why continue in rebellion against him ?" 
said the old knight. " I owe you a repara- 
tion, and will make it. Eeturn to your alle- 
giance, and you shall have my daughter's 
hand." 

" Alas, Sir Lionel," rejoined the young 



56 MERRY ENGLAND. 

man, in a troubled tone, the offer comes too 
late. I have gone too far to retreat." 

Catherine caught her father's arm, and 
whispered in his ear. 

" Have no fear," said the old knight, ad- 
dressing Conrad. "I will procure you a 
pardon from the King." 

" Were I to consent, I should become a 
double traitor," cried the young man. " Yet 
if I stay, I feel I shall yield." 

" Then you shall not go !" cried Cathe- 
rine. 

" Nay, do not detain me," he exclaimed, 
unable to tear himself away, and gazing at 
her passionately. 

" Stay ! stay ! or you will lose me for 
ever !" she cried, in accents that proved re- 
sistless. 

"You have conquered, Catherine!" he 
said. " For your sake I will become faith- 
less and forsworn to my confederates." 



BLACKHEATH. 57 



" Since you have thus decided, let us fly 
at once !" she cried. 

" Impossible !" he rejoined. " You must 
leave the palace secretly." 

" Secretly ! Are you not the commander?" 

" You are given in charge to me by "Wat 
Tyler," rejoined Conrad. " I cannot openly 
disobey his orders. Besides," he added, with 
a meaning look at Catherine, " you have an 
enemy who will watch jealously over you, 
and would assuredly prevent your depar- 
ture." 

"You mean that terrible woman who 
brought us here, and threatened me?" cried 
Catherine, trembling. " She frightens me. 
Do not let her come near me again." 

" I will place you where you will be per- 
fectly secure," said Conrad. " I came to tell 
you so. You must endure a few hours' soli- 
tary confinement in a strong-room." 

" I will endure anything rather than be 



5S MERRY ENGLAND. 

exposed to her malice," cried Catherine. 
" But will not my father be with me ?" 

" No, he must remain here," replied 
Conrad. "He is in no danger. To-night 
I will liberate you both, and accompany you 
in your flight. Are you prepared to proceed 
to the tower at once ? I will conduct you 
thither. No guard will be necessary to 
your removal." 

Catherine expressed her readiness to ac- 
company him. 

" Do not fear this separation from your 
daughter, Sir Lionel," said Conrad. "No 
harm shall befal her." 

" I commit her to your care," replied the 
old knight, confidently. 

Tenderly embracing his daughter, he 
consigned her, to Conrad, by whom she was 
forthwith conducted to the tower. 

As they crossed the court, they observed 
Frideswide among the spectators, but though 



BLACKHEATH. 59 



she cast a fierce and vindictive glance at 
Catherine, she offered no interruption. 

" There is that dreadful woman !" ex- 
claimed Catherine, shuddering. " I wish I 
had not seen her." 

Conrad endeavoured to reassure her, and 
would have thrown hack an angry look at 
Frideswide — hut she was already gone. 

Somewhat discomposed by this incident, 
he hurried on to the tower, and having 
placed the fair captive in the lower chamber, 
which, as we have stated, had been hastily 
prepared for her reception, he left her, and 
stationed a guard at the door, giving strict 
injunctions that no one should be admitted. 




XI. 




WHAT BEFEL CATHERINE T>E COURCY IN THE 
PRISON- CHAMBER. 

ATHEEINE had been for several 
hours in her prison-chamber, and 
began to find the long confinement 
excessively wearisome. However, she con- 
soled herself by the thought that her lover 
would soon be with her. 

Evening had come, and at night he had 
promised to liberate her and her father, and 
fly with them from the palace, and she 
doubted not he would keep his word. 

Occupied by such thoughts, she was 
striving to banish the apprehensions that 
naturally beset her, when she heard the key 



BLACKHEATH. 61 



turned in the lock, and started up joyfully, 
feeling certain it was Conrad. 

What was her terror, as the door opened, 
and Frideswide entered the chamber ! She 
would have shrieked, hut fright struck her 
dumb. 

Having closed the door, the dreaded 
Amazon strode towards her, while the poor 
girl shrank back as far as possible. 

Frideswide's aspect, however, was not so 
fierce and menacing as it had been. On 
the contrary, she tried to assume a good- 
natured look, but the expression was ill- 
suited to her countenance. 

"Be not afraid, fair damsel," she said, in 
tones as soft as she could employ ; " I 
am come by Conrad's order to take you 
hence." 

"I will not accompany you," rejoined 
Catherine. " Nor do I believe he has sent 
you." 



62 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" You will change your opinion of me 
when I show you how easily you can 
escape," rejoined Frideswide. " I tell you 
I am sent by Conrad to set you free, and 
conduct you from the palace." 

As she spoke, she stooped down, and 
opened the large trap-door. 

Catherine watched her in astonishment. 

"There! Will you believe me now?" 
said the Amazon, pointing to the steps. 
" Beneath is a long underground passage, 
which has an outlet beyond the walls of the 
palace. I will guide you thither." 

" But we have no light," said Catherine, 
looking down uneasily. 

" A light is not needed," rejoined Frides- 
wide. " You will soon be out of the pas- 
sage, and at liberty." 

"1 will go with Conrad, but not with 
you," said Catherine. " Why has he not 
come himself?" 



BLACKHEATH. 63 



"Wat Tyler is expected at the palace," 
rejoined Frideswide. " Conrad has sent 
me to get you out of the way before his 
arrival. You need not fear for your father. 
He can pay a ransom." 

These assurances produced a certain im- 
pression upon Catherine ; but she could not 
overcome her dread of the Amazon, and 
again recoiled from her. 

Losing all patience, Frideswide seized 
her, and thrust her down the steps. 

The Amazon instantly followed, and 
shutting the trap-door, stifled the cries of 
her victim. 

An hour later Conrad entered the cham- 
ber. He had been alarmed by finding the 
door unguarded. But the worst apprehen- 
sions assailed him when he could nowhere 
perceive Catherine, but discovered Frides- 
wide in her place. 

The Amazon was standing in the centre 



64 MERRY ENGLAND. 



of the chamber, with her foot on the trap- 
door, and looked perfectly calm. 

"She thou seekest is not here," she 

said. 

"What hast thou done with her?" de- 
manded Conrad. 

" No matter. Thou wilt never behold 
her again." 

"Thou hast robbed me of one I loved 
better than life, remorseless woman !" cried 
Conrad, in a voice of anguish.; 

" The temptress is removed," rejoined 
Frideswide, sternly. " Thou wilt now con- 
tinue faithful to the cause." 

"Thou art a murderess, and deservest 
death!" cried Conrad, regarding her with 
abhorrence. 

" I have delivered thee from the sorcery 
by which thou wert bound," said Prides- 
wide. " By this time Wat Tyler must have 
returned to the palace. I can justify my- 



BLACKHEATH. 



65 



self before him for what I have done. Come 
with me !" 

And, seizing his hand, she dragged him 
from the chamber. 




VOL. III. 



XII. 



THE INTERVIEW AT ROTHERHITHE. 




TINNY was the day, and bright 
the river, as the royal barge con- 
veyed the young monarch from 
the Tower to Eotherhithe, to hold a con- 
ference with the rebel leader. 

Gorgeous was the burnished vessel ; yet 
those on board it did not seem bound on 
a voyage of pleasure. The oarsmen were 
arrayed in the splendid royal liveries, but 
they were all armed. Archers and men-at- 
arms took the places of pages and serving 
men. Gentlemen and esquires were armed. 
Armed, likewise, were all the members of 
the Council, except the Archbishop of 
Canterbury. Richard himself was clad in 



BLACKHEATH. 67 



chain mail, with, a hood and tippet of silk 
worked with the royal badge and devices, 
as was his richly embroidered surcoat. The 
sides of the gilded vessel were hung with 
shields, each bearing a noble cognisance, 
and from the stern floated proudly the 
royal standard. 

In the fore part of the barge, surrounded 
by his attendants, all glittering in polished 
steel, stood the young King, making a 
very gallant show. 

The Princess of Wales accompanied her 
son, and had hitherto been seated in the 
splendid saloon forming the interior of the 
vessel ; but as they were now approaching 
Eotherhithe, she came forward with Editha, 
who was her sole attendant. 

Ceasing to row, the oarsmen allowed the 
barge to glide gently down the river 
towards a point of the low bank on which 
two horsemen were stationed. 

5—2 



68 MERRY ENGLAND. 

With one of these personages the King 
and his attendants were well acquainted; 
but only the Princess and Editha knew the 
other. However, no one required to be 
told that this stalwart man-at-arms, mounted 
on a strong war-horse, with a sword by his 
side, a dagger at his girdle, and a mace 
attached to his saddle-bow, was Wat 
Tyler. 

The visor of the rebel leader was raised, 
so that his broad, masculine countenance 
could be fully distinguished. Though 
struck by his powerful frame and determined 
look, the observers were repelled by the 
extreme insolence of his demeanour, which 
was never for an instant abated during 
the intervew that ensued. 

About twenty yards behind the rebel 
leader, on the grassy bank, were stationed 
two other persons on horseback, who like- 
wise attracted the attention of the royal 



BLACKHEATH. 69 



party. These were Conrad Basset and 
Frideswide. The latter was armed with 
a two-handed sword, and carried a large 
triangular shield. 

Further off, where the ground began to 
rise, and was partly covered by timber, a 
large body of armed insurgents could be 
descried. This tumultuous host could 
not be kept in order by its captains ; but 
when the royal barge approached they set 
up a tremendous shout that startled all 
who heard it, and made those with the 
King apprehensive of treachery. 

However, the shouting soon ceased, and 
Eichard, who felt no alarm, caused himself 
to be taken near the shore to converse with 
the rebel leader. 

" Thou art Wat Tyler, I doubt not," he 
said. "I have come to confer with thee 
according to my promise. Speak ! I am 
willing to listen to thy petition." 



70 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" I have no petition to make," rejoined 
the rebel leader, haughtily. "I have 
certain propositions to offer for your 
Majesty's consideration and acceptance. 
But our conference must take place in 
private at Eltham, as I stated by the mouth 
of my ambassador, Sir John de Newtoun, 
who is here present. " 

"And dost thou think his Majesty 
will trust himself with thee ?" de- 
manded Sir Simon Burley. 

"Wherefore not?" rejoined "Wat Tyler. 
" I am captain of the vast host quartered at 
Blackheath, and I promise him my safe- 
guard. If I purposed to ensnare him, I 
could do so now. Should his Majesty 
disembark here, I will personally conduct 
him to Eltham." 

" What answer shall I return ?" said the 
King to those near him. 

" Reject the offer," rejoined Sir Simon. 



BLACKHEATH. 71 



" If thou dost mean me well," said 
Kichard to the rebel leader, " why cannot 
the conference take place here ?" 

"If it takes place at all, it must be at 
Eltham, as I have said," replied Wat Tyler, 
in a decided tone. " And mark me, my 
liege, if we come not to terms to-day, I 
will enter London with my whole army 
to-morrow. I swear it by St. Dunstan !" 

" You hear what he says, my lords," 
observed Eichard ; " and he can make 
good his words. He has an army strong 
enough to enter London. Moreover, as 
you well know, the citizens are disaf- 
fected." 

While they were conversing anxiously 
together Wat Tyler, who had noticed the 
Princess and Editha among the nobles, 
again called out — 

" My liege, I trust that the Princess, 
your mother, will assist at the conference, 



72 MERRY ENGLAND. 

and I will pray her Grace to bring my 
daughter with her." 

" Will you go with me, madam ?" asked 
Eichard. 

" Eeadily," she rejoined. " And I will 
take Editha with me, as he requests." 

"This must not be, my liege," said Sir 
Eustace de Valletort. "There is some 
treachery in the villain's proposal. You 
must not trust yourself with him, nor must 
the Princess." 

" Let me go and speak with him, gra- 
cious madam," cried Editha. " Perchance I 
may produce some effect upon him." 

"How say you, Sir Eustace?" said the 
Princess. " Shall we send her ?" 

" No, madam," replied the knight. " No 
one must go ashore." And he added, sig- 
nificantly, " This conference will soon be 
ended. Be not afraid. Wat Tyler will 
never enter London." 



BLACKHEATH. 73 







The words reached Editha's ear, and she 
trembled exceedingly. 

" No faith need be kept with the auda- 
cious villain," said the Archbishop of Can- 
terbury. "He hath sworn, if the King 
shall not accede to his demands, that he will 
destroy London. 'Tis meet that he be slain." 

"Since all the insurgents look to him, 
the rebellion may be ended by his death," 
said the Lord Treasurer. 

" We should be worse than traitors if we 
suffered him to escape," said Sir Simon 
Burley. "Ho, there, archers! make yon 
rebel your mark !" 

And at the order, the archers sprang up 
and made ready their bows. 

All had been over with Wat Tyler at that 
moment, and perchance the rebellion had 
been ended at the same time, if Editha had 
not uttered a slight cry, which she was 
utterly unable to repress. 



74 MERRY ENGLAND. 

This cry did not alarm the rebel leader, 
or cause him to change his position, but it 
caught the quick ear of Frideswide, who had 
listened to all that was said, and narrowly 
watched the proceedings on board the barge. 

She had noticed Sir Simon Burley's 
gesture, and the slight stir that followed 
when the archers appeared, and instantly 
divining their purpose, and dashing forward 
with lightning swiftness, she came up just 
in time to spread her broad shield before 
Wat Tyler, and guard him from the volley 
of arrows aimed at him. 

The rebel chief was unhurt, but a fatal 
shaft pierced the Amazon's breast, and she 
would have fallen backwards from her horse, 
if Conrad, who came up next moment, had 
not caught her. 

Her dying looks were fixed upon him she 
loved ; and, while gasping for breath, she 
said — 



BLACKHEATH. 75 



" Catherine still lives ! I deceived you — 
seek her in the subterranean passage 'neath 
the tower ! The key of the iron gates hangs 
at my girdle. Take it. Forgive me, Con- 
rad — for you I did this wicked act !" 

And she expired. 

Not without difficulty did Conrad sustain 
his inanimate burden, till he was relieved 
from it by a small party of insurgents, sent 
to him by Wat Tyler. 

Maddened with fears for Catherine, he 
then struck spurs into his steed, and dashed 
offtoEltham. 

Meanwhile, Wat Tyler had galloped off, 
till he got to a certain distance, when 
he turned round, and, shaking his hand 
menacingly, called out, in a stentorian 
voice — 

"Our next meeting — and it will not be 
long hence — shall take place in the Tower 
of London !" 



76 MERKY ENGLAND. 

Profiting by the means of escape unex- 
pectedly afforded him, Sir John de Newtoun 
quickly dismounted, and sought refuge in 
the royal barge. 

Seeing that the rebel leader had escaped, 
Sir Simon Burley ordered the oarsmen to 
row back to the Tower as swiftly as they 
could ; and the injunction was obeyed. 

But all those on board the barge heard 
the terrific and vengeful yell with which 
Wat Tyler was greeted when he returned 
to his followers, and told them of the attack 
made upon him. They would fain have 
hurried down to the river, in the hope of 
wreaking their vengeance on the instigators 
of the treacherous act, but Wat checked 
them. 

" Doubt not we will have ample ven- 
geance ere long," he said. " The Lord Arch- 
bishop and the Lord Treasurer were on 
board the barge ; and if they counselled not 



BLACKHEATH. 77 



the act, they might have prevented it. We 
will have both their heads !" 

" We will !" roared all the hearers. 

" We have nothing further to do here," 
pursued Wat Tyler. " We must return to 
Blackheath ; and, as soon as the army can 
be got together, we will march on London." 

" To Blackheath ! — and then to London !" 
vociferated the insurgents, brandishing their 
pikes and gisarmes. 

On their arrival at Blackheath they found 
the whole host in a state of the most furious 
excitement, a report already having arrived 
of the treacherous attempt on their leader. 

Wat Tyler took advantage of the excite- 
ment to get the army together, and this 
being speedily accomplished, the march 
commenced. 

Before setting out, Wat Tyler sent Hoth- 
brand with a message to his brother chief, 
who, it will be remembered, was encamped 



78 MERRY ENGLAND. 

with the Essex division of the insurgent 
army on Hampstead Heath, acquainting the 
Outlaw with his own design, and bidding 
him make a simultaneous attack on the 
north side of the city on the following day. 
Hothbrand set off on the errand at once, 
and galloping down to Greenwich, succeeded 
in procuring a bark to convey him and his 
steed to the opposite side of the river. 




XIII. 




HOW CATHERINE WAS FOUND IN THE SUB- 
TERRANEAN PASSAGE. 

O furiously rode Conrad, that he 
arrived at Eltham long before 
the news of Wat Tyler's intended 
march on London. 

Struck by his distracted manner, the 
guard at the barbacan feared some disaster 
must have occurred, but did no£ dare ques- 
tion him. 

Riding at once into the great quadran- 
gular court, he flung himself from his pant- 
ing steed, and hurried to the tower. 

Several armed men were standing near 
the door, and he ordered one of them to 
bring a lighted torch without delay, and 



80 MERRY ENGLAND. 

while the man went on the errand, he 
entered the chamber in which Catherine 
had been confined. 

Without much difficulty he discovered 
the trap- door, and had just succeeded in 
opening it, when the torch was brought 
him. 

Snatching it from the wonder-stricken 
man, and bidding him remain on guard 
within the chamber, and suffer none to 
enter, Conrad plunged down the steps, and 
gained the vault ; but he knew he should 
not find her there, and went on, his anxiety 
increasing each moment. 

At length he reached the first iron gate, 
and unlocking it with the key taken from 
Frideswide, he passed to the second gate, 
which was quickly thrown open. 

Again he hurried on, looking anxiously 
on either side of the passage ; but nothing 
save bare walls met his view. Fancying, at 



BLACKHEATH. 81 



length, that he perceived a retreating figure 
in the distance, he called out. 

But the person continued to flee from 
him. Quickening his pace, he soon became 
satisfied it was Catherine. Yes ! 'twas she ! 
she lived ! he was in time to save her ! 

Bewildered by terror, she ran on, scream- 
ing fearfully. 

Conrad's agony at this moment cannot 
be painted. He feared her senses were 
gone, and she fled so swiftly that he could 
not overtake her. 

At last, when he had almost begun to 
despair, her strength seemed suddenly to 
fail her, and she fell to the ground. 

In another instant he came up and raised 
her in his arms. As the dishevelled tresses 
seemed to blind her, he removed them from 
her face, but she regarded him with a wild 
and vacant stare, in which terror pre- 
dominated. 

vol. in. 6 



82 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Do you not know me, Catherine ?" he 
cried. " 'Tis I— J tis Conrad !" 

" No ; you are not Conrad !" she ex- 
claimed. "You are sent by that cruel 
woman to kill me. She had no pity in her 
breast ; but if you have any, leave me ! Let 
me die in peace !" 

" No ; you shall not die, Catherine !" 
he exclaimed. " I am come to deliver 
you! 

But the words, though passionately ut- 
tered, did not reassure her, and she still 
shrank from him. 

In this dire extremity, Conrad besought 
St. Catherine, St. Lucy, and all blessed 
saints to aid the distracted damsel. 

The appeal seemed to be answered. From 
this moment Catherine's senses began to 
return, and after gazing fixedly at him, she 
breathed his name. 

" Conrad !" 



BLACKHEATH. 83 



Filled with delight, he strained her to 
his breast. 

" You are just in time, Conrad !" she mur- 
mured, faintly, " Had you delayed much 
longer, you would have found me lifeless !" 

Shuddering at the thought, he pressed 
her still closer to his heart. 

" 'Tis not an hour since I discovered you 
were buried here, Catherine," he said, " and 
I flew to your rescue as fast as my steed 
would carry me. Had I been too late I 
would not have survived you. But the 
good saints who watch over you had pity 
on us both ! Have no more fear ! She who 
sought your destruction is gone, and when 
dying, repented her cruelty." 

" Then I forgive her !" cried Catherine ; 
" and may Heaven forgive her likewise ! 
But let us not stay longer in this dreadful 
place. Bear me hence, Conrad. I have not 
power to walk." 

6—2 



84 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Extinguishing the torch, he took her in 
his arms, and rapidly retraced the course he 
had pursued. 

Passing through the iron gates, which he 
had left open, he quickly gained the stone 
steps, and, mounting them, issued forth 
from the trap-door. 

Greatly astonished was the man left on 
guard when Conrad reappeared with his 
lovely burden; but he was not allowed 
to ask any questions, for Catherine had 
swooned, and Conrad instantly sent him in 
quest of some of the female servants who 
had been left in the palace. 

By the time the man returned with two 
of the Princess's handmaidens, Catherine 
had regained her sensibility, and did not 
require the restoratives brought by the 
damsels. 

Shortly afterwards she was taken to the 
Princess's own apartments ; and her new 



BLACKHEATH. 85 



attendants, who seemed greatly interested 
in her, promised to pay her every attention. 

Feeling now quite easy on Catherine's 
account, Conrad locked the gates in the 
subterranean passage, and kept the key in 
his own possession. 

Having caused the trap-door to be fas- 
tened down, he placed a guard at the door 
of the chamber, and then went in search of 
Sir Lionel de Courcy. 

During all this time the old knight had 
not attempted to quit the state apartments, 
and knew nothing of what had occurred, 
except that he had been informed that 
Conrad was gone to Blackheath to attend 
upon Wat Tyler. 

He was, therefore, surprised to see the 
young man, and still more surprised to hear 
what had brought him back. 

Needless to say that he listened to the 
recital of his daughter's imprisonment by 



86 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Frideswide with the most painful interest ; 
but since Catherine was now free, he could 
only rejoice, and thank her deliverer. He 
did so in the warmest terms, and embraced 
Conrad as a son. 

This explanation over, they deliberated 
long and anxiously as to the best course to 
be pursued in the present emergency. 

Flight would now be easy ; and as 
soon as Catherine had recovered from 
the shock she had sustained, she could 
be removed. But where could a place 
of refuge be found for her? The whole 
of Kent was in a state of insurrec- 
tion. ~No mansion, no castle was secure 
from the rebels. 

To Canterbury it was impossible to 
return. After much anxious considera- 
tion, they resolved to take her to the 
Dartford Priory. Sir Lionel was acquainted 
with the Lady Isabel, and felt certain 



BLACKHEATH. 87 



she would afford her an asylum. Thither, 
then, he proposed to send his daughter 
as soon as she could make the journey with 
safety. 

Sir Lionel strongly counselled Conrad 
not to abandon his post. 

"You have now," he said, "the command 
of a garrison of five hundred men who are 
likely to continue faithful to you. On no 
account quit them. Should any reverse 
happen to Wat Tyler, you can at once 
declare in favour of the King. By doing 
so at the right moment, you may materially 
aid the royal cause. Be guided by me. 
As soon as I have taken my daughter to 
the Priory of St. Mary I will return, and 
remain with you till something is decided. 
I do not for a moment despair of the royal 
cause. Though it may be beset by diffi- 
culties for a time, its ultimate triumph is 
certain. Nothing can be more fortunate 



88 MERRY ENGLAND. 

than that you are in possession of Eltham. 
By prudent management you may help to 
crush the rebellion ; and your reward will 
be proportionate to the service rendered." 

" My reward will be sufficient if I obtain 
your daughter's hand, Sir Lionel," replied 
Conrad. 



END OF BOOK THE THIRD. 



BOOK IV. 



THE SAVOY. 





1811 


SB 




^^^ 




sgnv-^N 







JACK STRAW S CASTLE. 




IKE a vulture looking down from a 
height on a plain covered with 
herds and flocks, the rapacious 
Outlaw gazed on London from the summit 
of Hampstead Hill. 

While trying to count the palaces, man- 
sions, halls, monasteries, churches, and hos- 
pitals, spread out before him, he thought 
only of the plunder they would yield. 

The fierce Goth at the head of his bar- 
barian host, did not gaze on Eome from the 
neighbouring hills with greedier eyes than 
did the insatiate marauder on the great 
city he had sworn to pillage. 

" Its wealthiest merchants shall deliver 



92 MERRY ENGLAND. 

up to me all their riches, if they would save 
their lives. On no other condition will I 
spare them. This I swear !" 

And while pronouncing the vow, he 
kissed the relic that he constantly wore 
upon his breast. 

At the time when the Essex insurgents 
were gathered on Hampstead Heath, there 
was a small tower on the highest point of 
the hill. 

Within this tower, once used as a beacon, 
the Outlaw had fixed his head-quarters. 
And though not a vestige of the original 
structure is left, the site is known, and the 
much frequented hostel now occupying the 
spot has acquired the designation of 
" Jack Straw's Castle." 

From the top of the tower floated the 
banner of St. Greorge, and near it stood the 
Outlaw. 

He had been there nearly three hours, 



THE SAVOY. 93 



and during the greater part of the time had 
been gazing at the doomed city — though he 
sometimes cast an anxious look in the direc- 
tion of Blackheath; the position of which 
was indicated by the hills adjoining that ex- 
tensive plateau. 

At the door of the tower stood the strong 
black steed, that had borne him safely 
through so many difficulties and dangers, 
fully equipped, and with the battle-axe at- 
tached to the saddle-bow. 

Around the tower, on the brow of the hill, 
on the gentle slopes, and in the numerous 
hollows, was gathered the immense host that 
acknowledged him as leader, and was ready 
to execute his commands, be they what they 
might. 

The presence of these wild, uncouth men, 
in their rough garb, and with their strange 
weapons, was little in harmony with the soft 
and tranquil character of the place. 



94 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Still the scene was very striking, and would 
have pleased a painter. Many of the insur- 
gents were lying upon the fragrant sod, bask- 
ing in the sunshine, for the day was hot. 
Others, seated round the brink of the hollows, 
watched their comrades, who were leaping, 
or wrestling, or amusing themselves with 
other pastimes. 

But by far the greater number were stand- 
ing on the numerous knolls, and looking to- 
wards the city, excited by desires of pillage 
and destruction, akin to those inflaming the 
breast of their chief. 

The Outlaw was still on the top of the 
tower — still occupied by the same greedy 
thoughts — when his attention was caught 
by a horseman riding quickly up the south 
side of the hill. 

At once he recognised Hothbrand. 

Evidently he was the bearer of a message 
from Wat Tyler, and the Outlaw awaited 



THE SAVOY. 95 



his arrival with impatience, but did not quit 
his own position. 

Several inquisitive insurgents crowded 
round Hothbrand, as he galloped on, but 
he refused to satisfy their curiosity, and 
halted not till he reached the foot of the 
tower. 

Saluting the chief, he then proceeded to 
deliver his message. 

"Wat Tyler greets thee well!" he said. 
"He is marching on London, and desires 
thee likewise to advance." 

" Thou bringst me good news, Hothbrand, 
and I thank thee for it !" replied the Out- 
law, joyfully. " Yet doth it surprise me, for 
I heard my brother was about to meet the 
King at Eotherhithe. The conference, I 
conclude, has come to nought ?" 

" To worse thao nought," replied Hoth- 
brand. " It had well nigh resulted in the 
death of the brother chief. A snare was laid 



96 MERRY ENGLAND. 

for him by the Council, and he narrowly 
escaped from it with life." 

"Now, by St. Nicholas, their treachery 
shall be speedily punished !" roared the Out- 
law. " Comrades, ye hear what our valiant 
lieutenant, Hothbrand, saith !" he cried, in 
a voice of thunder, to the throng gathering 
thickly around. " The Council have dealt 
treacherously with my brother, Wat Tyler, 
and have sought to slay him. Shall we not 
slay them ?" 

" Ay, marry !" responded the insurgents, 
brandishing their pikes and bills. 

" Hark ye, comrades !" cried Hothbrand, 
anxious to inflame them still further. " Wat 
Tyler believes the instigators of the perfi- 
dious design were the Archbishop of Canter- 
bury and Sir Robert Hales, the Lord High 
Treasurer. Both were in the barge with the 
King." 

" Both shall be put to death !" shouted 
the infuriated peasants. 



THE SAVOY. 97 



" You will not have your wish just yet, 
for they are safe within the Tower," said 
Hothbrand. 

Cries of angry disappointment arose from 
the throng. 

" Wherever they may be, they shall not 
escape us !" said the Outlaw. " As to the 
Lord High Treasurer, we can take ample 
vengeance on him. We will burn the 
Temple, which he governs, and destroy all 
the Chancery records. Moreover, we will 
burn the rich Priory of St. John of Jeru- 
salem, near Clerkenwell, of which he is 
Grand Master ; but we will first strip it of 
all its treasures. The revenues of that hos- 
pital are immense. Would we could collect 
them all ; but we will get what we can." 

This proposition, being in exact accor- 
dance with the wishes of the peasants, was 
received by them with acclamations. 

" Forget not that Sir Robert Hales hath 
vol. in. 7 



98 MERRY ENGLAND. 

a manor at Highbury," said Hothbrand. 
"You can discern the mansion from this 
spot. Yonder it stands amid the trees, 
about half a mile from Clerkenwell." 

"I see it plainly enough !" rejoined the 
Outlaw. " By my troth ! it is a stately 
mansion ; but it shall soon be levelled with 
the ground ! We will sack and burn it as 
we march to Clerkenwell." 

Placing his bugle to his lips he then 
sounded a loud and prolonged blast that 
echoed far and wide, and roused the entire 
host. 

As soon as he perceived that the men 
were in motion, he took down the banner, 
and, waving it aloft, pointed with his sword 
towards the city, shouting, " To London !" 

" To London !" repeated a thousand eager 
voices. 

Descending from the tower, he gave the 
banner to the man accustomed to bear it, 



THE SAVOY. 99 



and mounting his steed, put himself at the 
head of the host, calling out, " St. George 
for Merry England !" 

This evoked fresh cries. 

He then rode down the hill, attended by 
Hothbrand, and followed by the whole body 
of the insurgents. 

At that time the country between Hamp- 
stead and London was, for the most part, 
open, and the rebels marched on with very 
little interruption to the large park sur- 
rounding Sir Robert Hales's noble mansion 
at Highbury. 

Made aware of their approach by the 
hideous tintamar, the inmates of the man- 
sion fled, and hurried off to St. John's 
Priory, carrying the news with them. 

After being ransacked, the magnificent 
mansion was set on fire. 



7—2 



II. 




HOW THE HOSPITAL OF ST. JOHN OF JERUSALEM 
WAS PILLAGED AND BURNT. 

j|NE of the richest and most beautiful 
religious houses then existing near 
London was the Hospital of St. 
John of Jerusalem, at Clerkenwell. 

The Priory was founded about two centu- 
ries previously by Jourdain de Brisset, a 
wealthy Norman baron, and the Lady 
Muriel, his wife, and belonged to the 
Knights Hospitallers. 

Not far from the Priory stood a large 
Benedictine Nunnery, likewise founded by 
the before-mentioned pious and charitable 
personages. 

With the Nunnery the Outlaw determined 



THE SAVOY. 101 



not to meddle, and he gave strict orders to 
his followers that the holy sisterhood should 
in no way be molested, or their habitation 
injured. 

No murmurs were raised at the injunc- 
tion, for the insurgents were quite content 
that the Priory of St. John's should be 
given up to them. Permission to pillage 
and destroy this vast and magnificent 
edifice was sufficient to satisfy their ra- 
pacity, as well as their desire for 
vengeance. 

How tranquil looked, the grey and re- 
verend pile as the marauding host ap- 
proached it on that lovely summer e'en, 
bent on its plunder and destruction. 

Not far from it stood the Nunnery, look- 
ing equally calm and beautiful. 

Both were large and picturesque struc- 
tures, and both charmingly situated near 
a wide green, that took its name from 



102 MERRY ENGLAND. 

* 

a well of marvellous virtue arising within 
it. 

Yet those inside the Priory were far from 
tranquil. They knew that the Grand 
Master's mansion at Highbury was burnt, 
and felt sure from the threats uttered by 
the rebels that their own turn would come 
next. 

Preparations for defence were hastily 
made, but it was clear that the place could 
not hold out long. 

Geoffrey de Burgh, Prior of St. John's, 
had been a valiant warrior in his time, and 
all the brotherhood were Knights Tem- 
plars; but they had long ceased to bear 
arms, and devoted themselves solely to re- 
ligious exercises. All, however, were ready 
to take up the sword again, and die in 
defence of the Hospital. 

But the Prior hoped it would not come 
to such a pass, and persuaded himself he 



THE SAVOY. 103 



might be able to prevail on the leader of 
these lawless men to retire. Alas 4 he 
knew not with whom he had to deal. 

"When the Outlaw and Hotljbrand, , fol- 
lowed by a large band of insurgents, rode 
up to the magnificent gateway, they £oun4 
it shut, and were about to break down the N 
gate, when a noise was heard above, and 
the Prior and the holy brotherhood ap- 
peared on the battlements. 

Geoffrey de Burgh was well stricken in 
years, but he bore himself proudly, and 
had a bold and lofty look, and even though 
arrayed in his full ecclesiastical habits, he 
looked more like a warrior than a monk. 
His hood was thrown back so as fully to 
display his striking countenance. 

It may be proper to mention that the 
Prior was secretly armed, and that the 
whole of the knightly brotherhood wore 
armour under their gowns, and had swords 



104 MERRY ENGLAND. 

by their sides. To all appearance, however, 
they were in religious attire. 

" "What would ye ?" demanded the Prior. 
" "lis almost needless to inquire your pur- 
pose ; yet I would learn it from your own 
lips." 

"Our purpose, most holy father," rejoined 
the Outlaw, in a jeering tone, "is to take 
possession of this Hospital, to drive you and 
your brethren from it, to seize upon all your 
plate, jewels, and treasures, and then to 
burn down the edifice." 

"Your wickedness and audacity exceed 
all belief," exclaimed the Prior. 

"To this act of retributive justice," pur- 
sued the Outlaw, " we are moved by the 
treasonable attempt just made by your 
Grand Master upon the life of our leader. 
We will have vengeance." 

" Have ye no dread of the Church's 
most terrible anathemas ?" demanded the 



THE SAVOY. 105 



Prior. " Withdraw at once, ye sacrilegious 
wretches, or I will launch them upon 
you! 

" Pour out the whole vials of your wrath 
upon our head, an it please you, most holy 
father !" rejoined the Outlaw, in a tone of 
contemptuous indifference. "We are not 
likely to be turned from our purpose by 
denunciations ! But we have talked long 
enough. Cause the gates, I pray you, to be 
forthwith unfastened, or we will burst them 
open and enter !" 

" Thou wilt never enter, sacrilegious 
villain !" cried one of the brethren, stepping 
forward with an arbalest, which he had held 
concealed behind him. 

And he launched a bolt, but though it 
struck the Outlaw on the breast, it did him 
no injury. 

" Well shot !" he cried. " But thou didst 
not know that I wear a sacred relic on my 



106 MERRY ENGLAND. 



breast — to say nothing of my jerkin of 
cuirbouilly !" 

He then added, quickly, to those behind 
him, " Shoot, archers ! — shoot I" 

In immediate answer to the injunction, a 
volley of arrows winged their flight to the 
battlements ; but none were hit, the Prior 
and the brethren having sought shelter. 

The Outlaw then ordered his naen to 
burst open the gates, and the direction was 
speedily carried out. 

No sooner was the entrance free than 
the most eager among the rebels rushed 
tumultuously in, without waiting for their 
leaders ; but they were astounded to find a 
small party of knights m drawn up in the 
centre of the courtyard, sword in hand, and 
fully prepared to receive them. 

The Prior and the holy brotherhood had 
resumed their former accoutrements. 

Had the old warriors been provided with 



THE SAVOY. 107 



steeds they could easily have ridden down 
their assailants, and cut their way through 
the host outside. But flight being im- 
possible, they resolved to sell their lives 
dearly. 

Shouting his battle-cry as of old, Sir 
Geoffrey de Burgh, by the sweep of his 
sword, soon cleared the cro»vd near him, 
and performed prodigies of valour, lopping 
off heads, feet, arms, and legs as he went on. 

The knights who followed supported him 
with such energy that they forced the rebels 
to retire, and would probably have driven 
them out altogether had it not been for 
the Outlaw, who seeing how matters stood, 
dashed forward on his charger, and smote 
the old knight with his battle-axe. 

Close followed by Hothbrand, he struck 
down three or four other knights ; and the 
rebels, animated by the example of their 
leader, and reinforced, turned, and after a 



108 MERRY ENGLAND. 

short but terrific conflict, the whole of the 
Knight Hospitallers were slain. 

As the Outlaw, who was entirely unin- 
jured in the deadly strife, gazed around the 
court of the once peaceful Priory, now 
deluged with gore, and strewn with the 
bodies of peasants and noble knights 
mingled together, he exclaimed, in exulta- 
tion, " Amply is my brother avenged !" 

Through this scene of slaughter the in- 
surgents, who were thronging through the 
gateway as if for a fete, had to pass, but 
they heeded not the frightful spectacle. 

Receiving permission from their leaders 
to plunder the hospital, they spread them- 
selves in all directions ; rushing into the 
great hall, into the church, the chapel, the 
Prior's apartments, the refectories, the dor- 
mitories, everywhere ; seizing everything 
they could lay hands upon with an assiduity 
perfectly surprising. 



THE SAVOY. 109 



They seized all the plate, jewels, and or- 
naments that they could find in the church 
and the chapel ; the great gilt candlesticks, 

the gilt crosses, the gilt pix, the chalices, 
censers, cruets, and crysmatories. 

Entering the vestry, they purloined all 
the vestments they could discover in the 
ambreys and chests ; copes of red silk, full 
of imagery ; suits of white damask and 
baudkin ; copes with birds of gold ; copes 
with gold lions and silver unicorns ; chasu- 
bles of blue ; red palls for sepulture ; albs 
with apparel ; vestments of white damask 
with crosses ; altar fronts of blue velvet, 
embroidered with archangels ; great silver 
candlesticks, and silver lamps. 

Such was some of the treasure appro- 
priated by the rebels. 

How much else the sacrilegious villains 
carried off before the magnificent pile was 
set on fire cannot be stated. It is sad to 



.110 MEBRY ENGLAND. 

reflect upon the destruction they accom- 
plished. 

While this work of plunder was going on, 
such of the household as were able to escape 
took refuge in the Nunnery, where shelter 
was given them by the abbess. 

When every article of value had been 
carried off, the Hospital was fired in several 
places ; but at first the flames made slow 
progress, as if unwilling to destroy so fair 
an edifice. 

At night, the burning pile formed a grand 
and mournful spectacle. 

The lurid light of the conflagration fell 
upon thousands of wild figures gathered 
upon the green, and gave them a weird and 
fantastic appearance. 

The Outlaw and Hothbrand were sta- 
tioned on horseback before the entrance of 
the Convent, so as to prevent any harm 
from being done to that building. 



THE SAVOY. Ill 



Distracted with terror, with the red light 
reflected upon the walls, and gleaming 
through the windows of the Convent, with 
the hideous and appalling outcries of the 
miscreants ringing in their ears, the poor 
sisters passed a dreadful night. 

The burning Hospital formed a conspi- 
cuous object from the walls on the north 
side of the city, and struck terror into all 
beholders, most of whom believed that the 
Nunnery was likewise on fire. 

For seven days the fire continued, and 
even then the vast building was not entirely 
consumed. The great gateway was unin- 
jured, and still exists. 

After watching by the conflagration during 
the greater part of the night, the Outlaw 
snatched a few hours' repose on the green, 
after which he set off with his followers to 
meet his brother chief at London Bridge. 



III. 




HOW LAMBETH PALACE WAS BURNT. 

IMULTANEOITSLY with the ter- 
rible events previously narrated, 
"Wat Tyler's host had marched on 
to Southwark, causing havoc and desolation 
on the way thither. 

The suburbs on the Surrey side of the 
river, even then very extensive and con- 
taining very large mansions, palaces, and 
monasteries, beside other buildings, lay en- 
tirely at the mercy of the marauders, and 
very few of the noble edifices were spared. 

Winchester House, the palace of the 
Bishop of Eochester, the houses of the 
Abbots of Hyde, St. Augustine and Battle, 



THE SAVOY. 113 



and the residence of the Prior of Lewes, 
were plundered, and partly destroyed. 

All the prisons were broken open — the 
Marshalsea, the habitation of the Master of 
the Marshalsea, the King's Bench, the 
Clink, and the Compter ; and the prisoners 
being let loose, gave their best aid to their 
'deliverers in the work of destruction. 

Their ranks being thus reinforced by the 
worst malefactors, the rebels committed even 
greater outrages than before. 

On hearing of Wat Tyler's approach, the 
Lord Mayor caused the gates of London 
Bridge to be closed, and strongly guarded ; 
and being thus prevented from crossing the 
river, the insurgents contented themselves 
with doing all the mischief they could in 
Southwark. 

Their chief object being to pillage the 
archiepiscopal palace at Lambeth, they 
marched thither, and on the way destroyed 

vol. m. 8 



114 MERRY ENGLAND. 

all the small habitations on the Bankside, the 
occupants — most of whom were Flemings — 
being obnoxious to them. 

Originally built in 1188, by Archbishop 
Baldwin, the palace at Lambeth was repaired 
and greatly enlarged in 1250, about thirty 
years before the date of our story, by Arch- 
bishop Boniface, who rebuilt the whole of the 
north side, added the grand apartments, the 
library, the cloisters, the guard- chamber, and 
the tower, subsequently known as the Lol- 
lards' Tower. 

During its occupation by Simon de Sud- 
bury, the palace was kept up with great 
splendour. 

An ineffectual attempt was made by the 
guard to defend the palace, but they were 
quickly overpowered and slain, and the rebels 
bursting into the archiepiscopal apartments 
and the chapel, quickly stripped them, tearing 
the arras from the walls and the curtains from 
the windows, and pulling down the throne. 



THE SAVOY. 115 



All the time they were thus employed, 
they gave utterance to terrible denunciations 
against the Archbishop. Having completed 
their work of plunder, they set fire to the 
palace, and raised a most terrific shout when 
the flames began to rise. 

So loud was the shout, that it was heard 
at the Tower by the Archbishop himself, 
and caused his heart to sink within him. He 
knew it announced the slaughter of his faith- 
ful servants, and the spoliation and destruc- 
tion of his house. 

The calamity was hard to bear, but he 
bowed his head in resignation, murmuring 
only the words, " Fiat Voluntas Tua." 

Not only were the ears of the good Arch- 
bishop pierced by that terrific shout, but his 
eyes were blasted by the sight of the flames 
arising from his palace. 

Having mounted to the summit of the 
White Tower with the King, and the rest of 

8—2 



116 MERRY ENGLAND. 

the Council, to watch the proceedings of the 
rebels, he had tracked their desolating course 
along the Bankside, until they reached Lam- 
beth ; where, after he had been kept in a 
terrible state of suspense for awhile, his 
worst fears were realized. 

All forbore to address him, feeling they 
could offer no consolation. 

The Archbishop was still stunned by this 
heavy blow, when word was brought the 
Lord High Treasurer, who was standing 
near him, that his mansion at Highbury 
was burnt, the Hospital of St. John's 
plundered and in flames, and the Prior and 
all the holy brotherhood slain. 

Woful tidings these for the Grand 
Master. But he did not submit patiently 
to the decrees of Heaven, like the Arch- 
bishop. 

Stamping his foot with rage, and uttering 
a dire malediction against the rebels, he 
vowed revenge. 



THE SAVOY. 117 



The King and the Council gazed anxiously 
at each other, with looks that seemed to 
ask, " What further ill-tidings are in store ? 
and what will the morrow bring forth ?" 

As yet London Bridge was secure. 

But how long could it be maintained 
against the tremendous host which they 
beheld swarming upon the banks of the 
river, from the Church of St. Mary Overy 
to Lambeth ? 

The City was likewise safe. No gate had 
yet been forced. 

But who could answer that every entrance 
would not be thrown open on the morrow 
by the disaffected burgesses ? Never before 
was London in such a strait ! Never before 
were King, nobles, and knights in such 
fearful jeopardy ! 

As to the nobles, it seemed probable they 
would soon be exterminated by the com- 
monalty they had so long and so grievously 
oppressed. 



118 MERRY ENGLAND. 

In that event, the King would be left 
alone ; if, indeed, the rebels meant to spare 
Mm. 

A strange picture was presented to those 
who gazed from the summit of the White 
Tower, on that beautiful summer evening. 
Fire and sword had done their dreadful 
work on the banks of the Thames, and the 
smooth surface of the river was dyed with a 
ruddier glow than that of the setting sun. 

London Bridge, with its tall houses, 
towers, and gates, occupied by armed men, 
stood out like a huge black mass against 
the rosy western sky. 

But the flames of Lambeth Palace, and of 
the still burning habitations on the Bank- 
side, were reflected on the massive tower 
and lofty spire of St. Paul's, on West- 
minster Hall and Abbey, and on the Savoy, 
the magnificent palace of John of Gaunt, 
Duke of Lancaster. 



THE SAVOY. 119 



The embattled front of the last-named 
edifice, with its turrets and magnificent bay- 
windows looking upon the river, was so 
brightly lighted up that it seemed on fire, 
as if anticipating its approaching doom. 

In the north, the sky was reddened with* 
-the reflection of the burning Hospital of 
St. John of Jerusalem. 

The contemplation of this striking pic- 
ture, fraught, as it was, with beauty and 
terror, depressed the young King so much, 
that, afraid of betraying weakness, he 
hastily descended from the summit of the 
donjon; and, without waiting for the 
Council, proceeded to his mother's apart- 
ments in the Palace. 




IY. 



EDITHA S MISSION TO WAT TYLER. 




|HE Princess was conversing anxi- 
ously with Chaucer, who, it may 
be remembered, was a prisoner at 
the Tower at the time, when the King- 
abruptly entered. 

Eushing towards her with a distracted 
look, and regardless of those present, he 
exclaimed, "All is lost !" 

"What mean you, my son?" she cried, 
starting up. 

" Know you not that Wat Tyler is at the 
gates ?" he rejoined. " To-morrow he will 
enter London as a conqueror, and snatch 
the crown from my brow !" 

"Heaven forbid!" she ejaculated. "Much 



THE SAVOY. 121 



may be lost, but your crown, I trust, is 
safe." 

"You would not think so, madam," he 
cried, " if you had beheld the sight I have 
just witnessed — a countless host of rebels 
gathered on the banks of the Thames. Wat 
Tyler's name resounded on all sides. He is 
omnipotent. Advance he will ; I have not 
the power to drive him back !" 

Then, becoming aware of Chaucer's pre- 
sence, he added, quickly, " You have great 
influence with this powerful rebel, good 
Master Chaucer. Exert it now, and make 
me for ever beholden to you." 

" Alas ! my gracious liege, you mistake," 
rejoined the poet. " I have no influence 
with him ; but there is one person here 
present to whom he cannot refuse to listen — 
his daughter." 

Thus alluded to, Editha came forward, 
and, addressing the King, said — 



122 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"If your Majesty only expresses the 
wish, I will go to him at once." 

" The damsel cannot go alone, my liege," 
said Chaucer. " I am ready to attend her 
on the mission, which, perilous as it seems, 
may, perchance, prove successful." 

" I pray you let me go, sire," said Editha. 
" Something tells me I shall prevail with 
him." 

"Be it as you will," replied Eichard. 
" Should any harm come to you, I shall 
never forgive myself!" 

Then, taking her aside, he said, in a low, 
significant tone — 

" If you see "Wat Tyler, tell him there is 
nothing I will not grant." 

She made no reply, but looked at him 
fixedly. 

After a moment's pause Eichard went on — 

"Were he to ask me to make you my 
queen, I would assent." 



THE SAVOY. 123 



A flush came over her fair face ; but it 
instantly fled, and she replied, in a low, 
firm tone — 

" No, my liege, I will not delude him !" 

Ere Eichard could make any rejoinder, 
she turned to the Princess, and said — 

"Have I your Highness's permission to 
set out on this errand ?" 

" I am loth to give it," replied the Prin- 
cess. " Yet I cannot refuse. Promise to 
return to me, if you can." 

" Your Grace need not doubt me," she 
rejoined, earnestly. "No time should be 
lost. Are you ready to set forth, good 
Master Chaucer?" 

" On the instant," he replied. 

" I trust to see you back at the Tower," 
said Eichard. "But understand, you are 
no longer a prisoner !" 

While Editha withdrew to make some 
slight change in her attire, and put on a 



124 MEREY ENGLAND. 

hood, Richard sent for the Lieutenant, and 
bade him instantly prepare a boat to convey 
Chaucer and a companion across the river, 
on a secret mission. 

"Without asking questions, the Lieutenant 
proceeded to execute the command. 

Five minutes afterwards the gate beneath 
St. Thomas's Tower was thrown open, 
and a boat propelled by four vigorous 
oarsmen, and containing two persons, 
shot with lightning swiftness across the 
river. 

As it was now almost dark, the boat was 
not perceived, and Chaucer and Editha were 
safely landed at the wharf in front of St. 
Olave's Church, about a bow-shot below 
London Bridge. 

Their task accomplished, the oarsmen 
speeded back again. 

In another instant a dozen rebels, armed 
with pikes, rushed up to those who had just 



THE SAVOY. 125 



stepped ashore, and bade them give an 
account of themselves. 

" Who and what are you ? and whence 
came you ?" cried several threatening 
voices. 

"We are friends, and come from the 
Tower," replied Chaucer. 

" Friends ! and from the Tower ! That 
may scarce be," cried the foremost of the 
party. 

"'Tis true, nevertheless," rejoined Chaucer. 
" Take us to your leader." 

"Not till we have further questioned 
you," cried the man. 

But Editha, who had recognised his voice, 
removed her hood, and said — 

" Do you not know me, good Master 
Liripipe ?" 

"By St. Bridget!, it is Wat Tyler's 
daughter, Editha!" cried the person ad- 
dressed. 



126 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"Art certain?" observed Josbert Grout- 
head, who was near him. 

" As certain as I am that this is Master 
Geoffrey Chancer," replied Liripipe. 

" Nay ; an it be so, we must take them 
forthwith to "Wat Tyler," cried another. 

" I pray you do, good Master Curthose. 
You will be thanked for your pains," said 
Editha. 

" She knows me !" exclaimed Curthose. 
" It must be Editha. We will conduct the 
damsel to her father at once. He will be 
right glad to see her." 

"Where is your leader?" inquired Chaucer. 

" His head-quarters are at the ' Tabard/ 
in the High Street, close at hand," replied 
Curthose, whose manner was now completely 
changed. " Doubtless he is there now, 
since he hath only just returned from 
Lambeth." 

" Then pray conduct us to him without 



THE SAVOY. 127 



delay, for our business is most important," 
said the poet. 

Placing them in their midst, in order to 
protect them from the tumultuous crowd, the 
party proceeded towards the High Street. 
As they came forth from the back of St. 
Olave's Church, they cast a glance towards 
London Bridge, the gates of which were 
covered with archers and cross-bowmen. 
High Street was full of armed rebels, and it 
was with difficulty they could force their 
way along the crowded thoroughfare. "With- 
out the escort they could never have got on. 
Many sights attracted attention; but they 
were chiefly struck by the ruins of the two 
great prisons — the Marshalsea and the 
King's Bench. 

At length, after frequent stoppages, the 
party reached the " Tabard." 

The large courtyard of the hostel was full 
of armed men, carousing, and making a great 



128 MERRY ENGLAND. 

clamour ; but it appeared that Wat Tyler 
was in the principal guest-chamber with 
John Ball, discussing his plans over a flask 
of wine. 

On seeing Editha and Chaucer, who were 
brought in by Liripipe and the others, Wat 
Tyler started to his feet, but, instead of 
welcoming the young damsel with the affec- 
tion of a father, he uttered an angry excla- 
mation that seemed to bode ill for the 
success of her mission. 

Scarcely deigning to notice Chaucer, he 
snatched up a light, and ordered Editha to 
follow him into an inner room. 

Closing the door, he demanded, in a stern 
tone, why she had left the Tower. 

" You have interfered with my plans by 
coming hither !" he said. 

" I am sent by the King," she rejoined. 

" Seeks he to make peace with me ?" he 
demanded. 



THE SAVOY. 129 



"He does," she replied. "Will aught 
induce you to spare London, and retire ?" 

"No!" he replied. "Were the Council 
to sue to me in a body, I would not retire. 
I am master now ! London is at my feet ! 
I shall spare none of its nobles and rich 
men. But I shall not harm the King. I 
have other designs in regard to him. Thou 
shalt share his throne !" 

" And can you seriously indulge such a 
thought?" she said. 

" Seriously — ay ! Wherefore not ? He 
will be glad to espouse thee to save his 
crown." 

" But you do not deem it necessary 
to ask whether I will consent to such a 
scheme." 

" Tut ! Thou art not likely to object !" 

" You judge me by yourself, but you are 
mistaken ! I am not a fitting consort for the 
King !" 

vol. in. 9 



130 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Fitting or not, he shall wed thee !" 

" Dismiss these thoughts from your mind, 
I. implore you," she said. " I am not to be 
dazzled by the splendour of the offer made 
me, and reject it !" 

" Eeject it ! ha ! Do I hear aright !"' 
cried Wat Tyler, astounded. " You will 
wed whom I please !" 

" I have already expressed my fixed deter- 
mination, and shall abide by it," she rejoined, 
calmly but firmly. 

" Time will show," said Wat. "You must 
return at once to the Tower !" 

" Will you not listen to what I have to 
say?" she cried. 

"To what end?" he rejoined, sternly. "I 
will grant nothing ! Say to the King that 
he may expect me, ere long, at the Tower. 
And I will then propose my terms to him !" 

She made another effort to move him, but 
he continued inflexible, and took her back 



THE SAVOY. 131 



to the large room, where he had left Chaucer 
and the others. 

All looked surprised, but the rebel leader's 
aspect was so stern that none dared to ques- 
tion him. Not even John Ball made a 
remark. 

"Take back this damsel to St. Olave's 
Wharf," he said to the men ; " and find a 
boat to convey her to the Tower." 

" That will be difficult, if not impossible," 
said Liripipe. 

" No — a boat will be sent for her," said 
Wat. 

" I will go with her," cried Chaucer. 

" You can accompany her to the wharf," 
rejoined Wat Tyler ; " but you must return 
to me. You cannot re-enter the Tower." 

Deeming it useless to remonstrate, Chaucer 
did not make the attempt. 

Nothing more was said. The party went 
back as they came. 

9—2 



132 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Wat Tyler was right. No sooner did 
Editha appear on the wharf, than the boat 
that had brought her over shot swiftly across 
the river, and took her back to St. Thomas's 
Tower. 

Chaucer did not embark, and returned, in 
.a very melancholy frame of mind, to the 
" Tabard." 




THE MEETING OF THE REBEL LEADERS AT 
LONDON BRIDGE. 




VER since the outbreak of the in- 
surrection the weather had been 
uniformly fine ; and a morn more 
beauteous was never beheld than that which 
heralded the following day. 

Bright sunshine lighted up the quaint 
habitations, monasteries, convents, churches, 
and hospitals of old London. Bright sun- 
shine lighted up the old walls and gates of 
the City, thronged with armed men. It 
lighted up the battlements and gates of the 
Tower, likewise thronged with archers and 
cross-bowmen; St. Paul's, with its tower 
and spire ; and, above, the ancient Abbey. 



134 MERRY ENGLAND. 

On the opposite side of the river, all was 
ruin and desolation. Monasteries, mansions, 
prisons, churches, burnt or demolished; Lam- 
beth Palace still smoking. 

The whole of South wark was filled with an 
armed host ; and such was the terror of the 
inhabitants, that they were compelled to join 
the rebels. 

But we must now see what had taken 
place on the other side of London. 

At daybreak the Outlaw, flushed with suc- 
cess, appeared with his host before Bishops- 
gate, and sent Hothbrand forward to. sound a 
trumpet and demand admittance. 

This was refused by the guard, and 
bolts and arrows were discharged at the 
rebels. 

Thereupon the Outlaw commanded an im- 
mediate attack, but while this was going 
on, a party of disaffected citizens came up, 
and forcing away the guard, threw open the 



THE SAVOY. 135 



gate, and the insurgents marched into the 
City. 

The men were disposed to indulge in 
triumph, but their leader ordered them to 
march on quickly to London Bridge, in order 
to effect a junction with Wat Tyler ; and they 
proceeded thither accordingly, without meet- 
ing with any opposition. 

Already the north gates of the bridge were 
thrown open, and the insurgents were wel- 
comed enthusiastically by a large party of 
citizens favourable to the cause. 

On they marched through the narrow 
street formed by the tall habitations lining 
either side of the bridge, brandishing their 
weapons, and making a most terrific din. 

The gates on the Surrey side of the bridge 
had been thrown open, and here, in the open 
space, at the end of the High Street, a meet- 
ing took place between the rebel leaders. 

Wat Tyler, attended by John Ball, con- 



136 MERRY ENGLAND. 

gratulated the Outlaw on his success, and 
thanked him heartily for what he had done ; 
but his haughty manner did not altogether 
please his brother chief. 

Leaving the men to keep possession of the 
bridge, the three leaders proceeded to the 
" Tabard," where they breakfasted. 

As soon as their hasty meal was concluded,, 
Wat Tyler said to his brother chiefs, " Before 
we attack the Tower, we will prove to all 
that we belong not to John of Graunt by 
burning down his Palace of the Savoy. How 
say you, brothers ?" 

" I approve the step," replied the monk.. 
" It will convince the people that we mean 
not to be governed by the King's uncles." 

" Ay, marry will it !" said the Outlaw. 
" What a plunder we shall have," he added, 
with a ferocious laugh. " 'Tis said the Duke's 
palace contains more plate and treasure than 
any other mansion in England." 



THE SAVOY. 137 



" The palace must not be plundered," ob- 
served Wat Tyler, sternly and authorita- 
tively. 

" Not plundered !" exclaimed the Outlaw, 
in astonishment. 

" A proclamation shall be made that no 
man, on penalty of death, shall presume to 
convert to his own use anything within the 
Savoy Palace. All plate, vessels of gold 
and silver, and all costly ornaments, of which 
there are plenty, shall be broken in pieces." 

"This will cause great dissatisfaction 
among the men," observed the Outlaw. 

" It will prove to the citizens that we de- 
sire not private gain, but right and justice," 
said John Ball. " We are not robbers, but 
liberators." 

" The proclamation, I repeat, will give 
rise to much murmuring," said the Outlaw. 
" I like it not." 

" I have a task will suit thee well," ob- 



138 MERRY ENGLAND. 

served Wat Tyler to the Outlaw. " While I 
am engaged in the destruction of the Savoy, 
thou shalt demolish Newgate, and liberate 
the prisoners." 

" I should prefer the former task," grum- 
bled the Outlaw. " But no matter." 

" Thou shalt go with me, good Master 
Chaucer," observed Wat Tyler to the poet, 
who was present at the discussion, " and see 
justice done upon the Duke." 

" If I thought my voice would be listened 
to, I would implore you not to destroy 
the noble Palace of the Savoy," said the 
poet. 

"Thy supplications are vain," rejoined 
Wat Tyler, sternly. " The Duke of Lancaster 
is a traitor to the people. We will punish 
him." 

" Once again I say to you, the people have 
no better friend than John of GTaunt,'' cried 
Chaucer. 



THE SAVOY. 139 



" Go to !" said Wat Tyler. " I have heard 

enough in his praise. We will now set out. 

Five thousand men will suffice to accomplish 

the demolition of the Savoy. The rest shall 

remain to pull down Newgate, and keep the 

i 
King and the Council safely cooped up in 

the Tower." 

" Be it so/' replied the Outlaw. " When 
I have done with Newgate, I will look after 
the Lombard Street merchants. I have an 
account to settle with Messrs. Benedetto." 

" Do what you will," replied Wat Tyler. 
" But meddle not with the Tower till I return 
from the Savoy." 

They then went forth, and mounted their 
horses, which were kept ready for them in 
the courtyard of the " Tabard." 

They next proceeded along the High 
Street towards London Bridge — word being 
given to the enormous host that they were 
about to enter the City. Chaucer was pro- 



140 MERRY ENGLAND. 

vided with a horse, and rode beside Hoth- 
hrand. 

For nearly two hours a dense mass was 
constantly pouring over London Bridge. 

On the entrance of the rebel army into the 
City — partly from good-will, partly from, 
fear — the citizens gave them an enthusiastic 
welcome, and opened their houses and cellars 
to them. 

In a word, they hailed them as deliverers 
— whether sincerely or not may be ques- 
tioned. 

The three leaders proceeded together along 
Cornhill and Cheapside, to Newgate, where 
the Outlaw and Hothbrand, with a vast 
number of rebels, stopped to demolish the 
gate and prison ; while Wat Tyler and John 
Ball descended Ludgate Hill with five thou- 
sand men, and marched along Fleet Street to 
the Strand. 



VI. 



HOW WAT TYLER SAT IN JOHN OF GAUNT S 
CHAIR. 




RESENTLY they came in sight of 
the Savoy, the magnificent man- 
sion belonging to John of Gaunt, 
Duke of Lancaster, " to the which," saith old 
Holinshed, "in beauty and stateliness of 
building, with all manner of princely furni- 
ture, there was not any other in the realm 
comparable." 

Viewed either from the Strand or from the 
river, the ducal Palace of the Savoy presented 
a magnificent appearance, and its internal 
arrangements corresponded with its splendid 

exterior. 

Built about the year 1245 — nearly a cen- 



14? MERRY ENGLAND. 

tuiy and a half before the date of our story, 
by Peter, Earl of Savoy and Bichmond — 
the noble palace in question was transferred 
to the friars of Mountjoy, from whom it was 
purchased by Eleanor, Queen of Henry III., 
for her son Henr}^ Duke of Lancaster. By 
him it was greatly enlarged and beautified 
at an enormous expense. The palace was 
assigned as a residence to King John of 
Prance, while that unfortunate monarch 
was a captive in England, in 1357, and 
again six years later. It subsequently came 
into the possession of John of Gaunt, Duke 
of Lancaster, bv whom it was still further 
enlarged and greatly embellished. 

Such was this splendid palace when the 
rebels approached, bent on its utter demoli- 
tion. Not only was it magnificent, but full 
of rich furniture, arras, pictures, plate, 
jewels, and wine. In a word, it was the 
residence of the proudest and most powerful 



THE SAVOY. 143 



peer in England, who claimed, in right of 
his wife, daughter of Don Pedro, to be 
King of Castile. 

The Duke of Lancaster had a princely 
establishment, more numerous, more splen- 
did than that of the King. He had a high 
chamberlain, a vice-chamberlain, gentlemen 
ushers, gentlemen waiters, lords, knights, 
and esquires, gentlemen cupbearers, carvers, 
sewers, fifty yeomen ushers, grooms of the 
chamber, pages, doctors, a chaplain, an 
almoner, minstrels, yeomen porters, tall 
yeomen for the house, a steward, and a 
treasurer, making in all some three or four 
hundred persons. 

Such was the terror inspired by the rebels, 
that when the officers of this splendid estab- 
lishment heard that Wat Tyler had crossed 
London Bridge and was marching through 
the City, with the declared intention of de- 
molishing the palace, they abandoned all 



144 MERRY ENGLAND. 

thought of defending it, and fled in a body, 
leaving only half a dozen persons behind. 
These were the steward, the comptroller, 
and four tall and stout yeomen. Of neces- 
sity, they could offer no real resistance ; but 
they closed the great outer gates, and made 
fast all the doors. 

On arriving at the palace with his men, 
Wat Tyler gazed at it with admiration, and 
was so impressed by its grandeur that for a 
moment he thought he should like to keep 
it for himself. But he gave up the 
notion almost as soon as formed, and 
caused his proclamation to be read that 
no one, on pain of death, should secrete 
or carry off any part of the plate or orna- 
ments. 

"Doubt not," he cried, in a loud voice, 
" that the penalty will be inflicted !" 

As the rebels had heard of the flight of 
the household, they burst open the gates 



THE SAVOY. 145 



and doors very deliberately, and then rushed 
into the palace. 

Their entrance, however, was opposed by 
the steward and those with him ; but only 
for a moment. These brave and faithful 
individuals were instantly despatched. 

Among the first to enter the palace was 
Wat Tyler, as he desired to behold it in all 
its splendour before it became a wreck. 

But while he looked at the great oak 
staircase, with its sculptures and armorial 
bearings, its beauties were hidden by a 
crowd of savage-looking peasants mounting 
to the grand gallery above, which they 
speedily filled, tearing down the tapestry 
and destroying all the pictures and orna- 
ments. 

Scarcely had he entered the great banquet- 
ing-hall and noted its magnificent furniture, 
than it was invaded by another party, who 
were about to commence the work of de- 

VOL. III. 10 



146 MERRY ENGLAND. 

struction ; but "Wat Tyler authoritatively 
commanded them to desist, and taking his 
seat in John of G aunt's chair, and placing 
John Ball on his left, and Chaucer, whom 
he had compelled to follow him, on a seat 
below, ordered that all the valuables should 
be collected and placed on the table before 
him, that he might see them destroyed. 

This was done with the utmost expedition. 
All the chests and cupboards were emptied, 
and the great table, at which the Duke's 
retainers were wont to dine, was almost 
entirely covered with immense vessels of 
gold and silver, such as were displayed on 
solemn occasions, most of them beautifully 
graven, great silver bowls, flagons, goblets, 
and wine-pots of quaint device. 

To these were added all the ornaments 
that could be collected, chains, girdles, 
brooches, buckles, ornamented with dia- 
monds and other precious stones, embroidered 



THE SAVOY. 147 



mantles and apparel, and garments of gold 
and silver, making a most magnificent 
display. 

Chaucer groaned internally as lie beheld 
this mighty heap of treasure and rich ap- 
parel, so soon to be sacrificed. 

Wat Tyler then ordered a repast to be 
served, of which he and John Ball partook. 
The rebel leaders invited Chaucer to sit down 
with them, but though the poet complied, he 
ate nothing. 

Taking a large goblet from the heap, Wat 
caused it to be filled with choice Grascoigne 
wine from the Duke's cellars, and after he 
bad drunk a deep draught, he threw the cup 
down on the floor, and crushed it with his 
foot. 

Perceiving that the men standing around 
were gazing at the glittering pile before them 
with greedy eyes, and fearing they might be 
tempted to disobey his orders, Wat caused 

10—2 



148 MERRY ENGLAND. 

hammers to be brought, wherewith all the 
gold and silver plate and vessels were beaten, 
out of shape and broken in pieces. 

The ornaments were next destroyed, the 
jewels and other precious stones being ground 
down in mortars, and the dust scattered 
about; while the embroidered apparel and 
garments of cloth of gold and silver were- 
hacked to pieces. 

Wat Tyler went forth upon the terrace to 
see the fragments of the gold and silver 
vessels cast into the Thames, taking Chaucer 
with him. 

When the last basket had been emptied 
into the river, he remarked, with a stern 
smile, to the poet — 

" Tell the Duke what thou hast seen, and 
he will understand how I would have served 
him had he been here ! Thou art now free-, 
and mayest depart, unless thou dost prefer 
to stay, and see the palace burnt down !" 



THE SAVOY. 149 



" I have seen too much already !" replied 
Chaucer, sorrowfully. " I will take a fare- 
well look at the edifice I have so much loved, 
and then depart." 

After gazing for a moment at the splendid 
pile, which now seemed more beautiful than 
ever, he went his way. 

As soon as he was free from the rebels, 
the poet made haste to quit London, and 
returned not till these terrible times were 
past. 

"Now set fire to the palace !" cried Wat, 
■" and let the work be done effectually !" 

While the order was eagerly obeyed, and 
fire applied to the combustibles already 
heaped in different parts of the building, 
Wat Tyler quitted the river terrace. 

As he strode through the palace, and once 
more noted its grandeur, he may perchance 
have felt some compunction. But it swayed 
iiim not. 



150 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Having seen the combustibles lighted, 
he went forth and stationed himself 
in the front court to watch the conflagra- 
tion. 

The fire burnt with extraordinary rapidity, 
and flames soon broke out from some of the 
great bay-windows. 

Orders had been given that every one 
should come forth ; but they were very slowly 
obeyed, and a trumpet was now sounded to 
recall them. Presently half a dozen men 
rushed out, having a prisoner with them. 
They brought him before their leader, who 
saw at once that it was Liripipe. 

" What hath he done ?" demanded Wat. 

" He hath disobeyed thine order, and con- 
cealed a large piece of gold plate beneath 
his jerkin !" replied one of the captors. 
"Behold it!" 

" He must die !" replied Wat, sternly. 

" Spare me !" cried the wretch. " Thou 



THE SAVOY. 151 



hast known me many years in Dartford ! I 
have restored the plate !" 

" Thou hadst hidden it !" cried the man 
who had accused him. " We discovered it 
■upon thee !" 

" Place the gold plate in his jerkin," said 
Wat ; " and then cast him into the fire !" 

The terrible sentence was carried out 
literally. 

Notwithstanding his cries and struggles, 
the miserable wretch was hurled through an 
open bay-window, and perished in the flames. 
But Liripipe was not the only Dartford 
rebel destroyed by the burning of the 
Savoy. 

Mark Cleaver, Curthose, Grouthead, Peter 
Crust, and others, numbering nearly forty 
persons, found their way to the Duke's 
well-stored cellars, and, resolving to enjoy 
themselves, broached a cask of Malmsey, 
and another of Gascoigne wine. 



153 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Though told that the palace was on fire, 
they heeded not the warning, but continued 
their carouse ; until a great wall fell down, 
with a tremendous crash, and shut them up 
completely. 

Escape was then impossible, and their 
comrades did not even attempt to liberate 
them, but left them to their fate. It may 
be that the wine they had access to prolonged 
their wretched existence. For seven days 
their cries were heard. Then all became 
silent. 

Lambeth Palace, when fired by the rebels, 
formed a grand object ; but it was nothing 
compared with the burning palace of the 
Savoy. 

Thrice the size of Lambeth, loftier, 
grander in every respect, and better situated, 
the Duke of Lancaster's palace, when set on 
fire by the rebels, could be seen by the 
whole of London. 



THE SAVOY". 153 



The enormous structure burnt throughout 
the night, and as the flames sometimes rose 
to a great height, the spectacle, though 
terrible, was wonderfully fine. 

Nothing could have affected the citizens 
more powerfully than this fire, inasmuch as 
it proved to them beyond all question that 
the rebels were not connected, as they had 
hitherto imagined them to be, with the 
ambitious John of Graunt. 

Moreover, the burning palace could be 
seen by the King and his Council in the 
Tower, and the spectacle affected them, 
though in a different manner. 

Coupled with other events that occurred 
simultaneously, it made them think that the 
nobles and gentlemen of England were 
doomed. 




VII. 



HOW MESSER BENEDETTO WAS BEHEADED AT 
THE STANDARD AT CHEAPSIDE. 




jjHILE the noble Palace of the 
Savoy was destroyed by one set 
of the rebels, outrages even more 
dreadful were committed by the Outlaw and 
his party. 

Newgate had been demolished, and the 
prisoners liberated ; and thus another large 
band of malefactors was added to the rebel 
army. Many houses were plundered as the 
army marched past the Old Change, near 
St. Paul's, and along Cheapside towards 
Lombard Street, whither they were bound, 
and none escaped unless they could prove 
themselves friends of the insurgents. 



THE SAVOY. 155 



Everything was done by the terrified 
citizens to conciliate the rebels, who were 
now completely masters of the City. Provi- 
sion-shops, wine-cellars, and shambles were 
thrown open. But though the Outlaw did 
not interdict pillage, he forbade all feasting 
and carousing till the day's work was 
done. 

As the rebels marched along they stopped 
every man they met, and thus addressed 
him: "With whom holdest thou?" If he 
answered not " With the King and the 
Commons," they put him to death. Thus 
carrying terror and destruction with them, 
they marched to Lombard Street. 

It may seem strange that with a Lord 
Mayor so courageous as Sir William Wal- 
worth, and a citizen so valiant as Sir John 
Philpot, the rebels should be allowed to 
commit all these dreadful outrages with- 
out hindrance ; but the loyal citizens were 



15(5 MERRY ENGLAND. 

completely panic-stricken, and thought only 
of defending their own habitations. 

With this design, the wealthier among 
them got together their friends and as many 
servants as they could, and strongly barri- 
caded their houses. All the larger habita- 
tions were thus converted into fortresses. 

Owing to all the armed men being thus 
employed, the Lord Mayor and Sir John 
Philpot found it impossible to get together 
a sufficient force to attack the rebels with 
any chance of success. They could not 
muster three hundred men ; and what were 
these against the enormous host, now in- 
creased bj all the disaffected citizens, who 
alone amounted to some twenty thousand ? 

At that time there were in the City two 
renowned knights, Sir Eobert Knolles and 
Sir Perducas d'Albreth. Each of them had 
six score companions, completely armed, and 
ready to sally forth upon the rebels at any 



THE SAVOY. 157 



moment ; but they desired to reserve their 
men for the King, feeling sure he would 
soon need them. 

AVhen Wat Tyler and the rebel leaders 
crossed London Bridge and entered the 
City, a consultation took place between the 
Lord Mayor and these two sagacious and 
experienced knights, who strongly advised 
him not to attack the rebels, or the City 
would be utterly destroyed, but to wait for 
a favourable opportunity, which could not 

fail to occur. 

Lombard Street, as we have already had 
occasion to mention, was then almost en- 
tirely inhabited by a company of rich 
Italian merchants, who lent money on 
usance, and of late had farmed some of the 
Government taxes, amongst others the 
obnoxious poll-tax, which had caused the 
insurrection. 

Certain he should obtain a very large 



158 MERRY ENGLAND. 

amount of treasure' by plundering the 
houses of these rich Italian merchants, and 
actuated by a special desire of revenge upon 
Benedetto, the Outlaw made all haste to 
Lombard Street. 

On hearing of the approach of the rebels, 
the merchants hastily concealed their chests 
of treasure and plate in the cellars and 
other secret places, and carrying with them 
as much gold as they could, abandoned 
their houses, and took refuge in the ad- 
joining churches of St. Mary Woolnoth, St. 
Edmond, and Allhallows, where they hoped 
they would be safe. Vain expectation ! 

As the Outlaw turned from Cheapside 
into Lombard Street, he called out to his 
followers that he was about to deliver to 
them the treasures of the Lombard mer- 
chants, who had robbed the peasants. 

" Go and take all you can find !" he 
cried. "But from each house I claim ten 



THE SAVOY. 159 



thousand marks. The rest is yours, and 
must be equally divided among you all. 
"We will force the knaves to disclose where 
their treasure-chests are hidden." 

On breaking into the houses, the rebels 
were surprised to find them deserted, and 
feared, at first, that the treasure was gone ; 
but they soon discovered where the chests 
■and money-bags were concealed, and lost no 
time in emptying them ; taking care to lay 
aside the sum required by their leader. 

When the houses had been stripped of 
all the valuables, the Outlaw, with Hoth- 
brand and a large party, went in search of 
the fugitives, having been informed that 
they had taken refuge in the adjoining 
churches. 

The unfortunate Benedetto, and two 
other Italian merchants, were found in the 
church of St. Mary Woolnoth. 

They were at the altar, and the priests, 



160 MERRY ENGLAND. 

who were standing before them, menaced 
the intruders with the thunders of the 
Church if they dared to touch them. 

But the Outlaw, and those with him, 
were not to be deterred by such threats; 
and, rushing forward, dragged the victims 
from the place of sanctuary. 

Reading his doom in the Outlaw's terrible 
looks, the unhappy Benedetto fell at his 
feet, and besought pity, proffering, at the 
same time, the bags of gold he had brought 
away with him. 

The Outlaw took the money, but did not 
relent. 

Regarding the kneeling merchant with a 
stern look, he said — 

" This is thy ransom, I trow, which thou 
hast left unpaid ?" 

"My ransom was to be a thousand 
marks," rejoined Benedetto. " Here are ten 
thousand. Take them, and spare my life." 



THE SAVOY. 161 



" I will take the gold, but I cannot spare 
thee !" rejoined the Outlaw. "Thy name is 
inscribed on the list of those adjudged to 
death for grievous wrongs done to the 
people ! I cannot pardon thee if I would ! 
Prepare for instant death ! One of these 
priests will shrive thee !" 

" Yet spare me, and I will take thee 
where more treasure will be found !" im- 
plored Benedetto. 

The Outlaw hesitated for a moment, and 
then said, sternly, and resuming his pre- 
vious inflexible look, " It may not be !" 

A priest was then called, and followed 
the unfortunate merchant as he was dragged 
away to the Standard at Cheapside, around 
which a hideous throng was collected. 

Several persons having been previously 
executed there, the steps were slippery with 
blood- 

A stalwart individual, of forbidding ap- 
vol. in. 11 



162 MERRY ENGLAND. 

pearance, who acted as executioner, and 
carried a large two-handed sword on his 
shoulder, ordered the wretched man to kneel 
down. 

The priest then clambered up to him, and 
after saying a few words in a low tone, 
and listening to his response, gave him 
absolution. 

After Benedetto had pressed a crucifix to 
his lips, the executioner struck ofi' his head ; 
which rolled down to the foot of the steps, 
and was carried off by the crowd. 



END OF BOOK THE FOURTH. 



BOOK V. 



SMITHFIELD. 



11—2 



A NIGHT OP TERROR. 




HAT night the Outlaw made his 
head-quarters in Leadenhall, then 
a large private mansion, belonging 
to Sir Hugh Nevil, having Hat battlements, 
coated with lead, whence it derived its 
name, and a large central court. This hall 
afterwards became the property of the re- 
nowned Eichard Whittington. 

In Leadenhall, after his sanguinary day's 
work was over, the Outlaw feasted and 
caroused with Hothbrand and others of his 
officers, laughing and jesting over the direful 
deeds they had done, and planning other 
deeds, equally direful, for the morrow. 
And here he stored the vast amount of 
plunder he had obtained. 



166 MERRY ENGLAND. 

The large courtyard of the mansion was 
filled with armed men, who kept watch 
during the night. 

Armed men were also placed in the 
adjoining markets; and Gracechurch and 
Fenchurch Streets were guarded in like 
manner, for fear of a surprise. 

But in Cheapside, where so much 
slaughter had taken place — for all the 
merchants had been beheaded at the Stand- 
ard — thousands of drunken wretches were 
lying fast asleep, and might have been 
" killed like flies," as Froissart saith, had 
any armed men fallen upon them. But 
none of the loyal citizens dared to leave 
their houses. 

Wat Tyler passed the night in a very 
different manner. Having resolved upon 
a separate course of action, he kept aloof 
from his brother chief. 

After witnessing the destruction of the 



■ f ■ 

SMITHFIELD. 167 

Savoy, he conducted his division of the 
army through the lower part of the City, 
along Thames Street and Tower Street to 
Tower Hill, where he posted himself, with 
the design of preventing any assistance 
from being brought to the King, or any 
provisions from being introduced into the 
fortress. 

During his march through the City he 
would not allow pillage. Large supplies 
were brought by the citizens who were 
favourable to the cause; and he told his 
men that these must suffice for the present. 

A dreadful night of terror and suspense 
was passed by those within the beleaguered 
fortress — all communication with their 
friends and with the City being now cut 
off. 

From their place of observation, the 
summit of the White Tower, the King and 
the Council witnessed the burning of the 



inS MERRY ENGLAND. 

Savoy, and they beheld the arrival of Wat 
Tyler and his host on Tower Hill. 

It was now clear that the fortress was to 
be assaulted on the morrow, and prepara- 
tions were made for its defence ; but it was 
also clear that the boldest and bravest of 
the Council, Sir Simon Burley and Sir 
Eustace de Valletort, were not hopeful, 
having reason to fear the garrison would 
capitulate. 

By the King's command, Sir John Hol- 
land had been released from confinement in 
the Beauchamp Tower, but was not allowed 
to enter the palace, and was sent to keep 
guard on the walls. 




II. 



HOW WAT TYLER ENTERED THE TOWER. 




EXT morning, those who looked 
from the walls and battlements 
of the fortress, and from the 
summit of the donjon, saw the whole of 
Tower Hill covered with an armed multi- 
tude. Terrible to hear were the shouts of 
these wild-looking men. 

After awhile a troop of rebels, bearing a 
banner of St George, rode down, as near as 
they dared, to the Bulwark Gate, and, sound- 
ing a trumpet, called out that unless the 
King came out to confer with their leader, 
they would forthwith attack the fortress, and 
slay all within it. 

This insolent message was repeated to 



170 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Richard, and troubled him exceedingly. 
Summoning a meeting of the Council, he 
asked their advice, and Sir Simon Burley 
recommended that he should agree to a con- 
ference outside the Bulwark Gate, and, while 

it took place, they would endeavour to seize 
the rebel leader, and conveying him into the 
Tower, instantly put him to death. 

The plan being approved, trumpets were 
blown from the battlements, and notice was 
given to the rebels that, an hour hence, the 
King would sally forth, and hold a brief 
conference with their leader. 

A loud shout from the besiegers signified 
their satisfaction ; and, a little time before 
the interview, a large body of archers moved 
down towards the Bulwark Grate. The\ r 
were headed by Wat Tyler, with a body- 
guard of some two hundred good men-at- 
arms. 

Undeterred by this formidable display, 



SMITHFTELD. 171 



Richard, fully armed and mounted on a 
powerful charger, came forth. He was at- 
tended by Sir Simon Burley, Sir Eustace de 
Valletort, Sir Osbert Montacute, the Baron 
de Vertain, and De Gommegines — all well 
mounted and completely armed. In the rear 
were five score archers. 

On seeing the King and his attendants 
come forth, and noticing that the Bulwark 
Gate was encumbered by archers and cross- 
bowrnen, Wat Tyler ordered his men to 
charge, and dashed forward. 

At the same time the company of rebels 
behind gave a loud shout, and pressed on 
after the horsemen. 

Alarmed by the charge, the King instantly 
turned back, and though Sir Simon Burley 
and Sir Eustace tried to stop him, he re- 
entered the fortress, and they were compelled 
to follow. 

But they were hindered by the men-at- 



172 MERRY ENGLAND. 

arms, and before they could get in, Wat Tyier 
and his men prevented the gate from being 
closed, the drawbridge raised, and the port- 
cullis lowered. 

So quickly and so successfully was the 
manoeuvre accomplished, that within a 
quarter of an hour after the King's retreat 
more than two thousand rebels had entered 
the fortress, and the Tower was taken by 
Wat Tyler almost without a blow being 
struck. 

The guards at the gates and the men on 
the battlements were driven away, and re- 
placed by rebels. 

Only the upper part of the White Tower 
was in the hands of the Royalists, and was 
occupied by Sir Simon Burley, Sir Eustace 
de Valletort, and the knights. 

In the chapel of the White Tower, the 
Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord 
High Treasurer had taken refuge. 



SMITHFIELD. 173 



But the rebel leader was content that they 
should remain shut up there for awhile. 

In the palace were the only persons with 
whom he had to deal — the King, the Princess, 
and Bditha. 




III. 




WAT TYLER S PROPOSAL TO THE KING. 

sudden was the entrance of the 
rebels into the Tower, and so 
numerous were they, that the 
garrison, either from fear, or, as was thought, 
from a secret understanding with the insur- 
gents, attempted no resistance. 

However, the guards stationed at the 
gates of the palace proved faithful, and 
refused to admit the rebel leader and 
those with him; but they were quickly 
slain. 

Dismounting in the courtyard, Wat Tyler, 
attended by a dozen armed men, entered the 
palace, and ascertaining from an usher that 
the King was in the Princess's apartments, 



SMITHFIELD. 175 



commanded the terrified official to conduct 
him thither. 

As the rebel leader strode along the 
passage with a proud step, he felt that 
at length the object of his ambition was 
gained, and that supreme power was within 
his reach. 

As may be supposed, the palace was in 
the utmost confusion. Grooms, pages, and 
yeomen had disappeared. Frightened to 
death, the Princess's ladies had shut them- 
selves up in their own rooms. 

The only person left with the royal lady 
was Editha. They were together when 
Eichard sought his mother's apartments. 
The Princess's courage did not forsake her 
at this trying juncture, but seemed to rise 
with the occasion ; and Editha displayed 
great spirit. 

The King having told them that the 
Tower was in the hands of the rebels, and 



176 MERRY ENGLAND. 

that they might expect an immediate visit 
from "Wat Tyler, they were not surprised 
when the door was suddenly opened, and 
the rebel leader marched into the room, 
leaving his followers outside. 

After advancing a few paces, he stopped. 
His stalwart figure, exaggerated by the 
armour he wore, his haughty mien, and the 
exceeding sternness of his looks, combined 
to give him a very formidable appearance. 
He made no obeisance to the Kinsr or to 
the Princess, but waited to be addressed. 

As Eichard remained silent, the Princess, 
collecting all her energy, said to the inso- 
lent intruder — 

" How dar'st thou profane this apartment 
with thy presence ?" 

" I am here by right of conquest, madam," 
he replied. " The Tower is in my hands, 
and I shall enter any room within it I 
think fit. I have come to make certain 



SMITHFIELD. 177 



propositions to your son, the King ; and I 
am much mistaken if, having regard to his 
safety and welfare, you do not counsel him 
to accede to them." 

" State what thou hast to say !" cried 
Eichard, who, by this time, had regained 
his self-possession. 

" First, then, said the rebel leader, 
haughtily, " let me declare — as, indeed, must 
be evident — that I alone can maintain thee 
on the throne ! I have now greater power 
than thine uncle, John of Graunt, whose 
palace I yesterday burnt down, or than the 
Earls of Cambridge and Buckingham. 
Though I war with the nobles and the 
knights and with the clergy, I do not seek 
to dethrone thee, but will uphold thy 
authority on certain terms." 

" State thy terms," said Eichard. " I am 
willing to listen to them." 

" That the people may confide in thee, 
vol. in. 12 



]78 MERRY ENGLAND. 

thou shalt espouse a daughter of the people," 
rejoined "Wat. "That I may confide in 
thee, thy consort shall be my daughter 
Editha." 

Before Eichard could answer, the Princess 
interposed. 

" Editha is not a daughter of the people," 
she rejoined, boldly. "Neither is she thy 
daughter !" 

" She passeth as such," said Wat Tyler, 
" That is sufficient." 

Then, turning to the King, he added : 
" Let me have an answer to my proposition, 
that I may know how to act." 

" Ere you reply to this bold man, my 
liege," said Editha, " suffer me, I pray you, 
to say a word. I owe him no obedience, 
and will render him none ! Eeject his inso- 
lent proposition — reject it with scorn ! Defy 
his utmost threats and malice. He dares 
not raise his hand against your royal per" 



SMITHFIELD. 179 



son ! Should he draw his sword, it shall 
pierce my breast — not yours !" 

The words were uttered with so much 
energy that Wat Tyler recoiled, and she 
placed herself between him and the King. 

But, in another moment, the rebel leader 
recovered, and exclaimed, in a furious 
voice — 

" Think not to thwart my purpose, girl ! 
I have planned this marriage, and it shall 
take place, or thou and thy great protectress 
will rue it, and the King will lose his 
crown ! Who shall oppose my determi- 
nation ?" 

" I oppose it not," rejoined Richard. 

"Thou dost hear?" cried Wat, triumph- 
antly. " The King agrees. Now wilt thou 
disobey ?" 

" I shall never marry !" said Editha. 

" Never marry ?" exclaimed Richard. 
" Not if I offer thee my hand ?" 

12—2 



180 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" I am wedded to heaven !" she rejoined. 
" Last night I pronounced the solemn vow 
at the altar before the Archbishop, in the 
presence of her Highness !" 

" 'Tis true !" exclaimed the Princess. 

Eichard uttered an exclamation of de- 
spair. 

" Trouble not yourself, my liege," said 
Wat Tyler. " She shall yet be yours. The 
Archbishop shall release her from the vow, 
or I will have his head !" 

And he quitted the room, with the 
evident determination of executing his 
threat. 

" I will stay him !" cried Eichard, hur- 
rying to the door. 

But he was prevented from going forth 
by the rebel guard stationed outside. 

" I am a prisoner in my own palace ?" 
exclaimed Eichard, as he returned, with 



SMITHFIELD. 181 



alarm depicted in his countenance. " The 
good Archbishop will be sacrificed !" 

" No, my son/' rejoined the Princess ; 
"Heaven would not permit so atrocious a 
deed. The Archbishop is safe in the White 
Tower." 




IV. 




HOW THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY AND 
THE LORD HIGH TREASURER WERE BE- 
HEADED ON TOWER HILL. 

N quitting the Princess's apart- 
ments, "Wat Tyler left a guard 
at the door, as we have stated, 
giving the men strict injunctions to allow 
no one — not even the King — to come forth. 
Taking another party with him, he began 
to search the palace, and ere long chanced 
upon one of the Archbishop's servants, 
who, being threatened with death, con- 
ducted the rebel leader and his men by a 
secret passage to the chapel in the White 
Tower, where they found the Archbishop 
and Sir Robert Hales engaged in prayer. 



SMITHFIELD. 183 



Mass had just been said, and both had 
received the Holy Communion. Not know- 
ing what might ensue, the Archbishop had 
passed the whole of the previous night in 
devotion. He was now kneeling at the altar, 
praying and confessing his sins; and Sir 
Robert was kneeling beside him, when the 
rebel leader and his men rushed into the 
chapel. 

Alarmed by the noise, the exalted per- 
sonages looked round, and seeing these 
savage-looking men armed with pikes and 
bills, at once surmised their purpose. But 
they did not quit their kneeling posture. 

Rushing up to the Archbishop, who was 
arrayed in his full ecclesiastical costume, 
and wore his embroidered dalmatic and alb, 
and had a black velvet beret on his head, 
Wat Tyler seized him roughly by the 
shoulder, and forced him to arise. The 
Lord Treasurer rose at the same moment. 



184 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" What wouldst thou ?" demanded the 
Archbishop. 

" Come with me, Simon de Sudbury, and 
release a young damsel from the vow she 
made before thee last night, in the presence 
of the Princess," said "Wat. 

" I cannot absolve her if I would," said 
the Archbishop ; " and I would not if I 
could." 

" Then thou shalt die !" rejoined Wat 
Tyler. 

" I well know I have no mercy to expect 
from thee, remorseless villain !" said the 
Archbishop. 

"Thou art right, Simon de Sudbury!" 
said Wat. " Thou hast long since been 
doomed to death for thy treason to the 
people, and I would not have spared thee 
hadst thou granted my request ! Thou also 
art sentenced to die the death of a traitor !" 
he added, to Sir Robert Hales, who re- 



SMITHFIELD. 185 



garded him sternly. " Bring them along !" 
he added, to his followers. 

" Ay, let us go !" said the Archbishop to 
the Lord Treasurer. "We are both well 
prepared ! It is best to die when there is 
no longer pleasure in life !" 

" I would I could have died in arms !" 
replied Sir Eobert. 

Throughout this trying scene, both main- 
tained their customary dignified deport- 
ment ; and so majestic did they look, that 
the rebels did not dare to lay hands upon 
them, as they led them from the chapel. 

So expeditiously was the seizure accom- 
plished, that Sir Simon Burley and Sir 
Eustace de Valletorfc, who were in the upper 
part of the donjon, were not aware of their 
removal. 

Wat Tyler's first design was to put 
the Archbishop and the Lord Treasurer to 
death on the green in front of the chapel of 



186 3IERRY ENGLAND. 

St. Peter; but he changed his mind, and 
decided that the executions should take 
place on the summit of Tower Hill ; since 
John Ball and the greater part of his fol- 
lowers were left there, being unable to enter 
the fortress. 

Accordingly he gave orders that the 
prisoners should be taken thither; and, 
mounting his steed, he rode at the head of 
the escort. 

From the summit of the White Tower 
Sir Simon Burley, Sir Eustace de Valletort, 
and the other knights, beheld this melan- 
choly procession. They saw the two dig- 
nified prisoners marching in the midst of 
the rebel guard, and preceded by Wat 
Tyler on horseback, and a ferocious-looking 
ruffian, marching on foot, and bearing an 
axe on his shoulder. But they could not 
rescue them, since the men-at-arms and the 
archers refused to act. 



SMITHEIELD. 187 



From the windows of the palace Richard 
and his mother, with Editha, likewise wit- 
nessed the same dismal spectacle. 

They saw the infuriated crowd that fol- 
lowed in the wake, armed with pikes and 
bills, and heard the dreadful cries of " Death 
to the traitors ! Death to the oppressors of 
the people !" And they knew what was 
about to take place. 

In this manner the procession passed 
through the gateway of the Garden Tower, 
along the lower ward, and out at the Bul- 
wark Gate ; and throughout the march, 
exposed as they were to all sorts of in- 
dignities and insults from the vile miscreants 
who attended them, the two illustrious 
personages maintained an unaltered de- 
portment. 

But they were yet more roughly treated 
as they toiled up Tower Hill ; and the 
good Archbishop had need of all his for- 



188 MERRY ENGLAND. 

titude to pass through this dreadful ordeal. 
As to the Lord Treasurer, his courage sus- 
tained him, and he eyed his tormentors so 
fiercely that they drew back. 

Hitherto no scaffold had been erected on 
Tower Hill, and indeed no execution had 
taken place on the spot, subsequently 
drenched with the best blood in the 
kingdom. 

Stationed on the brow of the hill, John 
Ball, seated on his mule, had watched the 
painful march of the victims, and exulted 
in the indignities to which they were 
exposed. 

As they came slowly on, he rode down to 
meet the Archbishop, and, addressing him 
in a scoffing tone, said — 

" Simon de Sudbury, thou art welcome 
to Tower Hill. At length thou wilt reap 
the reward of thy crimes." 

"What have I done that ye desire to 



SMITHFIELD. 189 



kill me ?" demanded the Archbishop. " I 
have yet to learn mine offence." 

" Thou hast deeply wronged the people," 
replied John Ball, " and they have doomed 
thee to death. Is it not so, my friends ?" 
he cried, looking aronnd at the infuriated 
multitude. " Shall he not die ?" 

" He shall die !" they replied, as with 
one voice. 

"Thou hearest, Simon de Sudbury?" 
said John Ball. "Thy sentence is pro- 
nounced." 

"I will not speak farther to thee, 
apostate," said the Archbishop ; " but I 
will address thy deluded companions. I 
plead not for life, but I ask what I have 
done?" 

" Thou hast robbed us !" cried a thousand 
voices. 

"Ye are wrong," responded the Arch- 
bishop. " I have worked for you ; I have 



190 MKRRY ENGLAND. 

expended my money upon you. Let Can- 
terbury speak for me. Ye know what I 
have done for that city. I have partly 
rebuilt it." 

" Heed him not," cried John Ball. " He 
speaks falsely." 

" He shall die !" cried the throng, in- 
exorably. 

" Hear me, mistaken men," cried the 
Archbishop, in a voice that awakened atten- 
tion. "If you kill me, there will come 
upon you the indignation of the just 
Avenger. All England will be put under 
an Interdict." 

On this there arose a terrible cry, and as 
soon as the multitude were in some degree 
quieted, John Ball said — 

" We neither fear Pope Gregory's Inter- 
dict nor acknowledge his authority. Thou 
art a great offender, and justice hath at 
length overtaken thee. Prepare thyself for 
instant death." 



SMITHFIELD. 191 



" I am already prepared," replied the 
Archbishop, firmly. " I passed the whole 
of last night in prayer and confession, and 
when seized by thy lawless chief, I was 
kneeling at the altar. Mayst thou be as 
well prepared to meet thy end ; and it is 
not far off ! I forgive thee, and may Heaven 
forgive thee likewise." 

To this the Lord Treasurer added, in a 
terrible voice — 

" I have no forgiveness for a wretch like 
thee, who has forsaken his religion and in- 
cited the people to rebellion ! My blood 
will rise to heaven to bear witness against 
thee. I summon thee to appear at the 
Judgment Seat within three days." 

So awful were the words, that those who 
heard them looked aghast. 

Seeing the effect produced, Wat Tyler, 
who had kept back to allow John Ball to 
speak, pushed his horse forward, and ordered 
the execution to proceed. 



192 MERRY ENGLAND. 



During the colloquy previously recounted, 
a large block had been brought from a neigh- 
bouring butcher's shop, and beside it stood 
the ruffianly headsman, leaning on his axe 
and scowling at his victims. 

Around was gathered a 'group of fierce- 
looking men, armed with pikes and gis- 
armes, and within the circle were Wat 
Tyler on his steed and the monk on his 
mule. 

Near the captives were half a dozen villa- 
nous-looking wretches, appointed to assist 
the executioner in his task. 

First to suffer was the good Archbishop. 
He looked round at the circle of spectators, 
but met not a pitying glance. 

Howling like so many wolves, they shook 
their weapons at him ; but their fury dis- 
turbed him not. 

Quietly unfastening the piece of fine 
linen known as the amice, suspended over 



SMITHFIEL1). 193 



his shoulders, he took it off, and next 
removed his alb. These were the sole pre- 
parations he made. 

Then turning to the headsman, he told him 
he forgave him. The surly caitiff made no 
response, but signed to him to kneel down. 

The Archbishop complied; but before 
laying his venerable head upon the block, 
he lifted up his hands to Heaven, and 
ejaculated, " 0, all ye blessed angels and 
saints, assist me by your prayers !" 

Growing impatient at the delay, the 
executioner forced him down, and then 
struck at him with the axe ; but the blow 
not proving fatal, the Archbishop slightly 
raised himself, and, joyfully and with a 
beatific expression of countenance, ex- 
claimed, "Heaven wills that I should be 
ranked among the martyrs !" 

Not till the seventh stroke was the good 
man's head severed from the body. 

VOL. III. 13 



194 MERRY ENGLAND. 

The Lord Treasurer met his fate with 
the utmost resolution. 

Insensible, apparently to the outcries of 
the spectators, he looked sternly at the two 
leaders, and then, throwing off his velvet 
gown and chain, said to the headsman — 

" Take those, thou clumsy varlet, and do 
thy work quickly, if thou canst !" 

Satisfied with the gifts, or ashamed of 
his previous awkwardness, the executioner 
struck off the Lord Treasurer's head with a 
single blow. 

But the ferocious rebels were not content 
with these acts of vengeance. Setting the 
two heads on pikes, they carried them to 
London Bridge, and fixed them on the City 
Gate, where the heads of traitors were 
usually placed. 

In order that the head of the Archbishop 
should be recognised, they nailed his black 
cap to the skull. 



SMITHFIELD. 195 



The bodies of the two illustrious victims 
were left on Tower Hill, and remained 
there — none daring to remove them — till 
the following night. 

The mutilated remains of the Lord Hio-h 
Treasurer were interred in the Temple; 
and the good Archbishop, who had won a 
crown of martyrdom, though he failed to 
receive it on earth, found a fitting place of 
sepulture within the choir of Canterbury 
Cathedral. 

"When the tomb was accidentally opened 
a few years since, it was found that a leaden 
shot occupied the place of the head. 

Once a year, in former days, the Mayor 
and Aldermen of Canterbury used to visit 
the tomb of the great benefactor of the 
city, and pray for his soul. 



L4) 



13- 




V. 




CATHERINE DE C0TJRCY TAKES REFUGE IN 
DARTFORD PRIORY. 

OUNTED on a powerful charger, 
and having Catherine de Courcy 
seated behind him, Conrad quitted 
Eltham secretly that night, and riding with 
great swiftness, reached Dartford Priory in 
less than an hour. 

The gates were closed, and some little time 
elapsed before the old porter could be in- 
duced to open them ; but at last he yielded 
to Catherine's supplications, and admitted 
them into the court. 

Though it was now somewhat late, the 
Prioress, who had not yet retired to rest — 
being engaged in prayer — came to the door 



SMITHFIELD. 197 



with Sister Eudoxia ; and on their appear- 
ance Conrad instantly set down his fair 
charge, and as the light carried by Sister 
Eudoxia fell upon the features of the new- 
comer, the Prioress uttered an exclamation 
of surprise. 

" I thought it was Editha," she cried. 

"No, 'tis I — Catherine de Courcy," re- 
plied the other ; " I am come to seek refuge 
with you, holy mother." 

" You are welcome, dear Catherine," re- 
plied the Prioress, tenderly embracing her. 
" My thoughts were running upon one for 
whose preservation I have just been pray- 
ing. 

With a mind greatly relieved at having 
thus successfully accomplished his object, 
Conrad departed without a word. 

He returned to Eltham without drawing 
bridle, and entered the palace as secretly as 
he had quitted it. 



198 MERRY ENGLAND. 

A great weight was taken from Sir Lionel's 
mind when he learnt that his daughter was 
in safety. 

After some converse with the old knight, 
Conrad was about to retire, when Sir Lionel 
stopped him. 

" I have a plan to propose," he said. " If 
you agree, it ought to be acted upon forth- 
with. Are all the men in the garrison 
rebels?" 

" I fear so," replied Conrad ; " they have 
all joined the league." 

" Dare you propose to them to return to 
their allegiance ?" 

" I will sound some of them to-night, and 
if I find them favourably disposed, I will 
muster the whole garrison to-morrow, and 
march them to London." 

Conrad's overtures were so well received 
by the men he addressed, that he was en- 
couraged to carry out his design. 



SMITHFIELD. 199 



Next day, at an early hour, he summoned 
the whole garrison to the courtyard. 

Fully armed, and mounted on his charger, 
and having Sir Lionel heside him, likewise 
on horseback, he made the men a lengthened 
address, in which he pointed out to them 
the certainty of their ultimate destruction if 
they continued in rebellion, promising them 
not only pardon, but reward, if they re- 
turned to their duty, and proceeded to the 
King's assistance. 

Addressed to willing ears, his arguments 
prevailed; the promise of pardon and re- 
ward being doubtless the main inducement. 

Eaising a loud shout for the King, and 
brandishing their weapons, they promised to 
follow wherever Conrad should lead them. 

"Then we will march to London at 
once !" cried Conrad, determined not to let 
their newly-aroused loyalty cool. " Follow 
me !" 



200 MERRY ENGLAND. 

" Help to put down the King's enemies, 
and your misdeeds will be forgotten and 
forgiven !" cried Sir Lionel. 

Once more the echoes of the palace were 
awakened by loyal shouts, as the late rebels 
followed Conrad and the old knight across 
the drawbridge. 

Thus was the royal palace, for a time, 
completely abandoned. But better so than 
occupied as it had been. 

As they rode together along the avenue, 
Sir Lionel heartily congratulated Conrad on 
his success. 

"I am not surprised at it," said the 
other. "The men are beginning to get 
frightened, and are glad to purchase their 
pardon." 

On arriving at Blackheath, at the old 
knight's suggestion, Conrad called a halt, 
and, addressing the men, said, " It behoves, 
us to act with the utmost caution. When 



SMITHFIELD. 201 



we enter London, we must make it appear 
that we still belong to the rebel party. 
By such means we shall not be attacked, 
and shall be the better able to render 
assistance to the King. We will declare 
ourselves at the fitting moment. Await 
the signal from me." 

Promising attention to order, the men 
continued the march. 

As they approached Southwark, the nu- 
merous desolated and half-burnt mansions 
showed them the havoc committed by their 
former comrades ; and so sad was the spec- 
tacle, that it excited feelings of compassion 
even in their rugged breasts. 

Before crossing London Bridge, Conrad 
again halted to make inquiries, and the 
information obtained determined him to 
proceed at once to Tower Hill. 

Ere this the heads of the Archbishop and 
the Lord Treasurer had been fixed on the 



202 MERRY ENGLAND. 

City gate, and the sight so enraged Conrad 
and Sir Lionel, that, unable to control 
themselves, they dispersed the crowd, who 
were gazing at the relics. 




VI. 



HOW THE OUTLAW WAS SLAIN BY CONRAD 
BASSET ; AND HOW CONRAD WAS KNIGHTED 
BY THE KING. 




EVER was London the scene of so 
many strange and terrible events 
as at the period of our tale. 
While two of England's wisest and best 
sons were butchered on Tower Hill, an effort, 
that proved successful, was made by the 
royal party to drive out the rebels left within 
the fortress, when "Wat Tyler quitted it to 
witness the executions. 

Owing to the treasonable apathy of the 
archers and men-at-arms constituting the 
garrison, Sir Simon Burley, Sir Eustace de 
Valletort, and all the knights and esquires, 
had been unable to prevent the entrance of 



204 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Wat Tyler into the fortress, and were com- 
pelled to remain in the upper part of the 
donjon until the rebel leader had taken his 
victims to Tower Hill. 

They then ventured forth, and, making- 
their way to the stables without being dis- 
covered, mounted their steeds. "While they 
were collecting all the men-at-arms they 
could, they were joined by the King, who* 
was so transported with fury that he insisted 
on leading the attack on the rebels ; and, 
springing on his steed, and snatching a lance 
from an esquire, he dashed forth, calling- 
upon the others to follow him, and charged 
the rebels who were left in the upper ward. 

Taken completely by surprise, and unable 
to resist the attack, they fled, and numbers 
were ridden down and slain by the knights,, 
but the majority ran swiftly along the lower 
ward, and escaped by the gates. 

Excited by the pursuit, and burning to 



SMITHF1ELD. 205 



avenge himself of the insults he had received 
from Wat Tyler, Eichard imprudently fol- 
lowed them beyond the Bulwark Gate. 

In vain his followers called to him to 
stop ; he rushed madly on for more than two 
hundred yards, and only drew up when he 
perceived a very formidable-looking person- 
age, mounted on a black steed, dashing 
towards him at a headlong pace, sword in 
hand, with the evident design of capturing 
or slaying him. 

Then he stopped, but it was too late. 

Ere he could turn and fly, the fierce-look- 
ing horseman, who had descried him at a 
distance, was upon him. 

The terrible assailant with whom the 
young King had to deal, though he knew 
him not, was the Outlaw. 

Not many minutes previously the re- 
doubted rebel leader had appeared, with a 
certain portion of his followers, on Tower 



206 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Hill, and, perceiving that a great number of 
insurgents were flying from the fortress, he 
galloped down towards the Bulwark Grate, 
to ascertain the cause. 

Long before he got there the King ap- 
peared, and the chance of capturing the 
young monarch, whom he instantly recog- 
nised, made him quicken his pace. 

Dashing up to Richard, and seizing his 
bridle, he called out, in a threatening voice — 

" Yield thee amy prisoner !" 

" Away, villain !" cried Eichard, authorita- 
tively. " Knowest thou not I am the King ?" 

To his surprise, however, his assailant did 
not relinquish his hold, but replied, in an 
insolent tone — 

" I know it ! Nevertheless thou art my 
prisoner !" 

But assistance was at hand. 

Just at the very nick of time Conrad 
Basset appeared. 



SMITHFIELD. 207 



A few minutes previously he had entered 
Tower Hill, and was riding along at the 
head of his men, with Sir "Lionel by his side, 
when he perceived the King's danger. 

Drawing his sword, he dashed forward, 
and called out — 

"Kelease his Majesty instantly, villain, 
or 

"What meanest thou, Conrad?" cried the 
Outlaw, without releasing his hold. 

"Defend thyself, villain!" rejoined Con- 
rad. 

No longer doubting what was meant, the 
Outlaw released his hold of the King, who 
started off to a short distance, but then 
stopped, being desirous to see the end of the 
encounter. 

" Thou art a false traitor, Conrad !" cried 
the Outlaw. 

" 'Tis thou who art the traitor !" rejoined 
the other. " I am the avenger !" 



208 MERRY ENGLAND. 

A brief, but terrible, conflict then ensued, 
regarded with fearful interest by the King — 
regarded, also, with fearful interest by hun- 
dreds of other spectators ; but it resulted in 
the death of the Outlaw, whose throat being 
pierced by Conrad's sword, fell backwards 
from his steed, exclaiming, with his latest 
breath, " Curses on thee, traitor ! Thou hast 
robbed me of the crown !" 

Meanwhile Sir Lionel de Courcy had 
joined the King, and in consequence of the 
explanation he was able to give his Majesty, 
Sir Simon Burley and the others, Conrad 
was invited to enter the fortress, and bring 
the whole of his men with him. 

Nothing passed between the King and 
the young man till they reached the inner 
ward. 

Eichard then drew his sword, and in the 
presence of all his nobles dubbed his de- 
liverer knight. 



VII. 

THE KING AGREES TO HOLD A FINAL CON- 
FERENCE WITH WAT TYLER AT SMITHFIELD. 



Blg||KOM the brow of Tower Hill Wat 
■K| Tyler witnessed the deliverance 
of the King, and the subsequent 
death of the Outlaw by the hand of Conrad 
Basset. 

Though astounded and enraged that 
Conrad had gone over to the royal party, 
Wat Tyler almost forgave him for his deser- 
tion, since he had freed him from the only 
person able to compete with him for sove- 
reign power. From John Ball he dreaded 
no opposition ; but he had felt that a deadly 
quarrel must speedily arise between himself 
vol. in. 14 



210 MERRY ENGLAND. 

and the Outlaw. This difficulty was now re- 
moved. 

Feigning, however, deep regret at the 
death of his brother chief, and vowing dire 
revenge, he caused the body to be conveyed 
to Leadenhall, and shortly afterwards fol- 
lowed it thither, to take possession of the 
Outlaw's treasure. 

Before his departure he left a very large 
body of men — numbering nearly thirty thou- 
sand — on Tower Hill, under the command 
of Hothbrand, to prevent any supplies from 
being received by the besieged, and also to 
check any attempt on their part to sally 
forth. 

J ohn Ball accompanied him to Leadenhall, 
where they had a long consultation together 
as to the next step to be taken. 

As "Wat Tyler now despaired of carrying 
out his ambitious project in regard to Editha, 
he resolved to seize upon the young King, 



SMITHFIELD. 211 



since lie could then pass such measures as 
he pleased in the name of his royal prisoner. 

To besiege the Tower, now that the gar- 
rison was increased by the men brought 
from Eltham, would be a work of time. To 
enter the fortress by stratagem would be 
difficult. 

By the advice of John Ball, he ordered 
Hothbrand to make a proclamation, inviting 
Eichard to meet him on the following day 
at Smithfield, where they could hold a con- 
ference, and the King could hear the de- 
mands of the Commons. A solemn pledge on 
the part of Wat Tyler was likewise to be 
given, that no harm would be done to the 
King or his attendants; but this promise 
was not meant to be kept, Wat Tyler's real 
intention being to seize upon the young 
monarch and slay his attendants. 

Notice of the proclamation was brought 
to the King, who had with him at the time 

14—2 



212 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Sir Simon Burley, Sir Eustace de Valletort, 
Sir John de Newtoun, Sir Lionel de Courcy, 
and the young knight, Sir Conrad Basset. 
The two members of the Council at once 
decided that his Majesty ought not to attend 
the proposed conference. 

" 'Tis a stratagem on the part of this 
daring rebel to get you into his power, my 
liege," said Sir Simon. " If you quit the 
Tower, you will never return." 

"But I shall be guarded by the Lord 
Mayor, Sir John Philpot, and all the valiant 
and loyal citizens," replied Eichard. " More- 
over, I can count upon Sir Eobert Knolles, 
Sir Perducas d'Albreth, and their com- 
panies." 

"That Wat Tyler meditates some trea- 
chery I nothing doubt, my liege," observed 
Sir Conrad Basset; "but he shall never 
accomplish his design. Your Majesty may 
attend the conference without fear. I will 



SM1THFIELD. 213 



slay him, as I slew his brother chief. With 
his death the rebellion will be ended, since 
no one can take his place." 

" Sir Conrad is right," said Sir Lionel. 
" Your Majesty will be in no danger, and 
the opportunity of getting rid of this power- 
ful rebel ought not to be neglected." 

" The plan promises well, but the risk is 
too great," observed Sir Eustace. 

" The risk will be mine," said Sir Conrad ; 
" but I will gladly sacrifice my life if I can 
deliver his Majesty from this thraldom, and 
enable him to recover the sovereignty of the 
realm, which he hath well-nigh lost." 

" You will not deliver me alone," said 
Eichard, " but thousands of my loyal sub- 
jects, whose lives and property are menaced 
by this villain and his robber host. My 
lords, I will attend the conference at Smith- 
field." 

No further opposition was offered by the 



214 MERRY ENGLAND. 

two members of the Council; for though, 
they had not changed their opinion as to 
the extreme hazard of the plan, they hoped 
for success. 

Accordingly a trumpet was sounded, and 
proclamation was made that at noon on the 
following day the King would proceed to 
Smithfield to hold a conference with the in- 
surgent leader, and would be prepared to 
assent to all the just demands of the Com- 
mons. 

"When this answer was brought to Wat 
Tyler and the monk, who were feasting at 
Leadenhall, the latter exclaimed, " 'Tis well ! 
We shall take him as easily as a fowler 
snareth a bird !" 




sr^FJ 



VIII. 




WAT TYLER IS AGAIN WARNED BY FATHER 
GAWEN. 

EXT morning preparations were 
made for that meeting, on the 
issue of which depended the con- 
tinuance of the monarchy of England. The 
nobles and clergy were already doomed to 
extermination by the rebels. Whether the 
young King would share their fate, a few 
hours would decide. Wat Tyler firmly 
believed if the throne became vacant, he 
was destined to mount it. 

The Eoyalists were under a like impres- 
sion. In their opinion, the decisive moment 
of the conflict between the Nobles and the 
Commons had arrived. Either they must 
crush the rebel leader, or he would crush 



216 MERRY ENGLAND. 

them. Wat Tyler must never leave the 
place of meeting alive. Such was their firm 
resolve. 

Strange to say, the rebel leader had 
such reliance on fortune, that he felt 
sure he should come away unharmed and 
triumphant. 

Clad in a complete suit of chain mail, 
over which he wore a surcoat embroidered 
with the royal badge, and mbunted on a 
superbly -trapped charger, Richard, escorted 
by Sir Simon Burley, Sir Eustace de Valle- 
tort, Sir Conrad Basset, De Grommegines, 
De Vertain, and other knights and barons, 
quitted the Tower, uncertain whether he 
should ever return to it. 

Among ihose with the King was his 
brother, Sir John Holland, but the haughty 
young noble kept aloof from the others, and 
rode with Sir Osbert Montacute. 

The band of former rebels brought from 



SMITHFIELD. 217 



Eltham, whose fidelity could now be relied 
upon, were left in charge of the Tower, 
under the command of the Lieutenant and 
Sir Lionel de Courcy. 

The battlements and towers were covered 
with archers and cross-bowmen, and the 
gates were instantly closed as soon as the 
royal party had passed. 

All the rebels, however, had by this time 
quitted Tower Hill for Smithfield. 

Smithfield, at the period of our history, 
was a large plain at the back of the Tower, 
overlooked by the eastern walls of the city. 
It was approached from Aldgate and by a 
postern gate from Tower Hill. 

On this broad and level field, admirably 
adapted for the purpose, tilts and tourna- 
ments on a magnificent scale were frequently 
held, and judicial combats and duels de- 
cided. 

Here, in 1374, splendid jousts were exhi- 



218 MERRY ENGLAND. 

bited for seven days by Edward III., in 
honour of his favourite, the beautiful Alice 
Perrers, who was conducted thither by the 
infatuated monarch in a gorgeous car, fol- 
lowed by a train of knights and damsels 
mounted on chargers and palfreys. 

Such displays were now past, and Smith- 
field, instead of being the scene of knightly 
encounters and royal magnificence, was 
covered by thousands of insurgents, whose 
intention was to plunder all the wealthy 
burgesses, and then setting fire to the City 
in four places, burn it down. 

From St. Botolph's to the Minories Cross, 
near which stood a convent of poor nuns of 
the order of St. Clare, and extending thence 
to the eastern verge of the plain, was drawn 
up the entire insurgent force, numbering, as 
we have more than once explained, nearly a 
hundred thousand men. The foremost ranks 
were occupied by archers and cross-bowmen, 



SMITHFIELD. 219 



the rest of the host being armed with pikes, 
poleaxes, bills, glaives, glavelots, and gis- 
armes. 

None were mounted except Wat Tyler, 
Hothbrand, and John Ball — the two 
former on chargers, the latter on his 
mule. 

Wat Tyler wore a coifFe de mailles, with 
a bunch of horse-hair depending from it, a 
gorget and breast-plate, and was armed with 
dagger, and a short, broad-bladed sword. 

John Ball was habited in his grey mo- 
nastic garb, and his hood being thrown 
back, fully displayed his countenance, which 
had an almost demoniacal expression. 

Wat Tyler was riding slowly past the 
front line, thinking that such a host must 
prove invincible, when he perceived a friar 
approaching, accompanied by a woman. 

Instantly recognising Father Grawen and 
his wife, he was about to order them awa y ; 



220 MERRY ENGLAND. 

but an impulse he could not control, induced 
him to receive them. 

" What wouldst though with me ?" he 
said, in a stern tone, to the hermit, as they 
came up. 

"I am come once more to warn thee 
— and for the last time !" replied the 
friar. 

" I despise thy warnings !" said Wat 
Tyler. " Thou art a false prophet — a 
dreamer of idle dreams ! Seest thou not I 
am lord and master of this great city? 
Even now the King is coming unto me to 
make terms !" 

" Thou thinkest to catch him in thy toils," 
rejoined the hermit ; " but thou thyself shalt 
be snared and taken !" 

" Hast thou heard aught ?" demanded 
Wat Tyler, regarding him fixedly. 

" What I have heard has been declared 
to me — but not by man !" rejoined the 



SMITHTIELD. 221 



hermit, solemnly. " Depart at once, or thou 
wilt surely perish !" 

" Now I know thee, treacherous friar !" 
cried "Wat. " Thou art hired to come 
hither with this lying tale ! Thou wouldst 
save the King !" 

" I would save thee, unbeliever ! " rejoined 
the hermit, angrily. " But perish in thy 
pride !" 

" Time was when thou wouldst listen to 
me, Wat !" cried his wife. " Turn not a 
deaf ear now ! Seek safety in instant 
flight !" 

" Begone, woman ! I know thee not !" 
cried Wat. " Hark ! yonder is the King 1 
Begone ! or both of you shall be driven 
hence !" 

" Farewell for ever, barbarous man !" cried 
his dame. " Thou deservest thy fate !" 

And she departed with the hermit. 

But when she got to St. Botolph's Church, 



222 



MERRY ENGLAND. 



she stopped, and would have tarried there to 
witness the approaching interview, had not 
the hermit forced her away, saying, " The 
ight is not fit for thee, woman !" 




IX. 




THE FATE Oi 1 THE REBEL LEADER. 

jIT the postern-gate, leading from 
Tower Hill to Smithfield, Eichard 
found the Lord Mayor and Sir 
John Philpot waiting for him, with six 
score men-at-arms. 

Both were armed from head to heel — the 
former in plate armour, the latter in chain 
mail. Sir William Walworth had a mace at 
his saddle-bow, and a long dagger in his 
girdle. Sir John Philpot had sword, shield, 
and battle-axe. 

" Are these all the men-at-arms you can 
muster, Sir William?" inquired the King, 
looking at him reproachfully. 

" My liege," replied the Lord Mayor, " all 



224 MERRY ENGLAND. 

the loyal citizens have got their friends and 
servants shut up with them in their houses ; 
but they are prepared to sally forth instantly, 
and hasten to Smithfield, should the alarm 
be given. Sir Robert Knolles and Sir Per- 
ducas d'Albreth will each bring six score 
good companions. In this way I doubt not 
we shall be able to muster some five or six 
thousand valiant men." 

" That will suffice," replied Richard. 

He then told the Lord Mayor and Sir 
John Philpot the plan formed to put the 
rebel leader to death. 

" I am glad your Majesty has mentioned 
the design to me," observed the Lord Mayor. 
"I will send, messengers instantly to Sir 
Eobert Knolles and Sir Perducas, and all 
the principal citizens, to come forth at once 
with their men, and wait on Tower Hill, so 
that they can enter by the postern when 
they hear the alarm." 



SMITHFIELD. 225 



On entering Smithfield, Richard and his 
attendants were astounded at the sight of 
the immense host drawn up on the other 
side of the plain. 

Presently the royal party came to a halt, 
and the King, having previously arranged 
his plans, moved forward to a short dis- 
tance, attended only by Sir John de New- 
toun, whom he sent to intimate to the rebel 
leader that he was ready to confer with 
him. 

Having delivered the message, Sir John 
rode back ; but it soon became evident, by 
the slowness of his proceedings, that the 
insolent rebel was resolved to make the 
King wait. Sir John therefore went again 
to him, and, in an authoritative tone, bade 
him make haste. 

" When I am at leisure I will come to 
the King," he repeated. " An thou 
troublest me, I will not come at all." 
vol. in. 15 



226 MERRY ENGLAND. 

Afraid of defeating his plan if he offended 
him, Sir John again retired. 

After another delay, the daring rebel 
rode slowly forward, and planted himself 
haughtily in front of the King. 

" Why dost thou not make an obeisance 
to his Majesty, presumptuous varlet?" cried 
Sir John, highly incensed. 

" I will not parley with the King at all 
while thou art near," said Wat. 

" Leave us," rejoined Richard, making a 
■covert sign to him. 

Thereupon the knight withdrew, bur, 
with the Lord Mayor and Sir Conrad Basset, 
kept a watchful eye upon the rebel leader. 

" Now let me hear thy demands without 
more ado," said Richard, scarcely able to 
tolerate the rebel leader's insolence, and 
eager to put an end to the scene. 

" These are the demands which I make in 
the name of the Commons, of whom I am 



SMITHFIELD. 227 



the chief," replied Wat Tyler, pausing be- 
tween each proposition : " Entire exemption 
from slavery and serfdom. Partition of 
lands among the peasantry. Utter abolish- 
ment of nobles and clergy." Eichard could 
not repress a slight exclamation, but Wat 
Tyler went on : " Destruction of imposts. 
Free right of chase to all." 

" Much thou dost ask may be granted," 
said Eichard. " But I must consult with 
my Council." 

" Thy decision must be made at once," 
rejoined Wat Tyler. " It must be yea or 
nay ! I will never lay down arms till all 
existing laws are abolished, and all legislators 
placed at my disposal. Hear me, King !" 
he added, with extraordinary arrogance. 
" There shall be no other laws in England 
than those that proceed from my 
mouth !" 

Eichard regarded him with astonishment, 

15—2 



228 MERRY ENGLAND. 

marvelling at his pride, but he made no 
remark. 

After a pause, Wat Tyler added, " I have 
a proposal to make to thee, King ! 'Tis 
this. Let us divide the realm between us. 
Less than half will not satisfy my ambition. 
How sayst thou ? Dost thou assent ? 'Tis 
a liberal offer, methinks, from one who can 
take all." 

" And thou dost deem thou canst take 
all ?" observed Eichard, in a sceptical tone. 

" I am sure of it !" replied Wat Tyler, 
drawing his sword, and playing with it. 

He had resolved to kill the King, but 
was so much awed by Richard's majestic 
demeanour, that he hesitated to strike the 
fatal blow. 

The hesitation saved Eichard, and allowed 
him to make a sign to the Lord Mayor, 
who was nearest to him. 

Remarking the gesture, Sir William Wal- 



SMITHFIELD. 229 



worth immediately rode up, keeping his 
hand upon his dagger, ready to strike. 

" Ha !" cried Wat Tyler, fiercely ; " why 
dost thou break upon our conference ? 
Thou wert not summoned." 

" It is not fit thou shouldst be alone with 
the King, thou treacherous villain !" cried 
the Lord Mayor, indignantly. " Had I his 
Majesty's commands, I would slay thee." 

" 'Tis ye who harbour traitors !" ex- 
claimed Wat. " Ye have one with ye now, 
who has broken his oath to the league, and 
repaid my favours to him with the basest 
ingratitude. Let him come forward and 
speak with me." 

Glad of the opportunity of summoning 
him, the Lord Mayor called to Sir Conrad, 
who immediately rode forward and con- 
fronted his former leader. 

" Ha, traitor ! ha, villain !" exclaimed 
Wat, furiously. " Darest thou look me in 



280 MERRY ENGLAND. 

the face, after thy perfidy and deceitfulness ? 
Deliver up thy sword to me, base ingrate ! 
By St. Dunstan, I will never eat till I have 
thy head !" 

Carried away by passion, he dashed sud- 
denly forward, and would have struck Sir 
Conrad with his sword, if the Lord Mayor 
had not dealt the infuriated wretch a terrible 
blow with his dagger just below the 
gorget. 

Though mortally wounded by the stroke, 
Wat Tyler turned and tried to regain his 
followers ; but he was quickly overtaken by 
Sir Conrad, who dragged him from his 
horse and instantly despatched him. 

At this spectacle, Hothbrand called 
out, in' a loud voice, "Comrades, see ye 
not they have treacherously slain our 
leader ?" 

Upon this tremendous cries of " Ven- 
geance !" arose from the insurgent ranks ; 



SMITH FIELD. 231 



and the archers nocked their shafts, and 
prepared to shoot the King and his at- 
tendants. 

But at that moment of extreme peril, 
when his life was in jeopardy and his king- 
dom trembled in the balance, Eichard dis- 
played a courage worthy of his valiant 
sire. 

Without a moment's hesitation, he rode 
fearlessly towards the rebels, and with a 
look of majesty that impressed all who 
beheld him, he called out, in a loud, clear 
voice — 

" What would you do, my friends ? 
Would you spill the blood of your King 
because you have lost your leader. Lament 
not the death of a traitor and a ribald. I 
will be your leader. Follow me, and you 
shall have whatsoever you require." 

Such was the effect of this address, de- 
livered with wonderful spirit, that the 



232 MERRY ENGLAND. 



archers and cross-bowmen forbore to shoot, 
and the men consulted each other by 
glances. 

Seeing that they wavered, and feeling 
that all was lost unless he made an instan- 
taneous effort, John Ball rode forward on 
his mule, and with the looks and gestures 
of a demoniac, called out — 

" Listen not to him ! He will beguile 
you with enticing words and false promises 
to your destruction. He is now in your 
power. Slay him, and avenge your fallen 
leader !" 

Further speech was not allowed him. 
His skull was cleft in twain by Sir John 
Philpot, who dashed up at the instant, and 
the apostate monk fell to the ground from 
his mule. 

Enraged by the fall of their second 
leader, the men once more called out, 
"Vengeance!" and exclaiming, "Let us 



SMITHFIELD. 233 



kill them all !" again bent their bows, 
when loud shouts at the other side of 
the field announced that assistance was at 
hand. 

While the King was courageously ad- 
dressing the rebels, Sir Simon Burley and 
Sir Eustace Valletort galloped off to sum- 
mon assistance. 

In another instant Sir Eobert Knolles 
and Sir Perducas d'Albreth rode through 
the postern-gate, each at the head of six 
score archers. 

They were immediately followed by a 
corps of two thousand well-armed and well- 
mounted citizens, who shouted lustily as 
they came upon the field ; and it was this 
shout that struck terror into the rebels. 

Demoralized by the death of Wat Tyler, 
who alone could lead them, the insurgents 
offered no determined resistance, and when 
they were charged by the redoubted knights 



234 MERRY ENGLAND. 

and their hardy companions, who smote 
them with their spears, and trampled them 
beneath their horses' feet, slaying many 
hundreds, they threw down their arms and 
fled. 

Hothbrand was killed in the first charge. 

Next came the armed citizens, burning 
for vengeance. They completed the rout of 
the rebels, driving them into the open 
fields, and chasing them in every direction 
like wild beasts. 

Multitudes were put to the sword, no 
quarter being given, no prisoners made. 

So rapidly and so effectively was the 
work done, that in less than two hours after 
the death of the rebel leader the insur- 
rection he had kindled, and which threat- 
ened with extermination all the nobles and 
gentlemen of England, was at an end. 

Sought for amid the heaps of slain in 
Smithfield, the bodies of Wat Tyler and 



SMITHFIELD. 235 



John Ball were recovered and conveyed to 
the Hospital of St. Bartholomew. 

Subsequently their heads were stricken 
off, and replaced those of the martyred 
Simon de Sudbury and the Lord Treasurer 
on the spikes of London Bridge. 




X. 



AN EARLY GRAVE. 




FTEE the rout of the rebels, 
Richard proceeded to St. Paul's, 
to offer up thanks to Heaven for 
the great deliverance given him. 

Accompanied by the Council, the Lord 
Mayor, Sir John Philpot, Sir John de New- 
toun, Sir Conrad Basset, and others, he rode 
slowly along Aldgate, Cornhill, and Cheap- 
side, everywhere receiving the most en- 
thusiastic demonstrations of loyalty and 
devotion from the citizens. 

None who had openly favoured the 
rebel cause now dared to show themselves. 
Richard, however, caused a proclamation to 
be made at the Standard in Cheapside that 



SMITHFIELD. 237 



all citizens who returned forthwith to their 
duty should be pardoned. 

But, though joyous shouts rent the air, 
the aspect of the city was very melancholy. 
Houses, halls, and monasteries burnt and 
demolished met the eye at every turn~ 
Many of the small streets were encumbered 
with ruins, or filled with goods that could 
not be carried off. 

London, indeed, looked like a city that 
had been sacked during a siege. The 
enemy had been driven off, but the frightful 
havoc committed could be discerned on all 
sides. 

It was impossible at that moment to 
estimate the damage done. But no one 
doubted it must be enormous. 

But there were other sights even more 
painful than houses burnt and destroyed. 
Headless trunks were lying unburied in the 
streets, and great numbers of priests, monks, 



238 MERRY ENGLAND. 

and nuns were wandering about without 
shelter. 

Profoundly touched by the sight, Eichard 
spoke to the Lord Mayor, who promised 
that places of refuge should immediately be 
found for these unfortunate persons. 

After hearing mass in St. Paul's, which 
was thronged with the citizens, Eichard 
proceeded to the Tower. 

As soon as he had dismounted, he re- 
paired to his mother's apartments, and took 
with him Sir Eustace de Valletort. He 
found her alone with Editha. 

Ever since his departure they had been 
praying for him. 

From his joyful looks, the Princess knew 
he had been successful, and flying to- 
wards him, she clasped him to her breast, 
exclaiming — 

" Ah, fair son ! how much I have endured 
on your account ! I thought I should have 



SMITHFIELD. 239 



•died ! But my anxiety is all over now 
that I behold you again, in safety, and 
triumphant over your enemies !" 

" Heaven has answered your prayers, 
madam!" replied Eichard, raising his eyes 
upwards. " My kingdom is saved. The 
rebels are completely discomfited, and their 
leaders slain !" 

For a few moments there was a deep 
silence, during which the Princess and 
Editha breathed an earnest prayer. 

" You say that all the leaders are slain, 
my son?" inquired the Princess. 

"All, madam," he replied; "I am com- 
pletely delivered from my enemies." 

" May your reign never again be dis- 
turbed by tumults and rebellions, sire !" 
exclaimed Editha, fervently. 

" 'Tis too much to hope and expect," 
cried the Princess ; " but may all plots and 
dangerous designs be defeated !" 



240 MERRY ENGLAND. 

"Madam," said Editha, with, a look of 
sadness, "I will now ask your gra- 
cious permission to retire to Dart ford 
Priory." 

" Nay ; you are too young to retire to a 
convent," interrupted the King. 

" I shall be happier there, my liege," 
she replied, with a melancholy smile. 

" But you have seen nothing but danger 
and strife," cried Eichard. " You know 
nothing of the pleasures and amusements of 
a Court. At present you are depressed. 
"When you have recovered your spirits you 
will think differently." 

She shook her head gently, but made no 
reply. 

" Eemain, I entreat you, till these ter- 
rible events are effaced from your memory !" 
he cried, almost in an imploring tone. 
" Then, if you wish, you shall depart." 

" My liege," she said firmly, but sadly, 



SMITHFIELD. 241 



"my resolution is taken. I have done with 
the world." 

Eichard looked at her earnestly — entreat- 
ingly — but seeing no change in her counte- 
nance, he said to the Princess — 

"Use your influence with her, I pray 
you, madam !" 

" "lis best she should go," rejoined the 
Princess. 

Eichard uttered an exclamation of de- 
spair. 

" Do you not approve of my decision ?" 
said the Princess, in a low tone, to Sir 
Eustace de Valletort, who had been a 
deeply interested observer of the scene. 

" Entirely, madam," he replied. 

" I have need of repose after this terrible 
turmoil," said the Princess, " and shall re- 
main for some little time in seclusion. The 
Tower awakens too many painful memories. 
Order the barge, I pray you, to be pre- 

vol. in. 10 



242 MERRY ENGLAND. 

pared at once, to conduct us to Dartford 
Priory," 

" It may be proper to inform your High- 
ness," said the knight, " that Sir Lionel de 
Courcy and Sir Conrad Basset are about to 
set out for Dartford Priory, where the Lady 
Catherine de Courcy has taken refuge." 

" Say you so ?" cried the Princess. 
" Then bid them attend me in the barge. 
1 shall be glad of their escort." 

Sir Eustace bowed, and departed on his 
errand. 

For the last few minutes Eichard had 
looked like one stupefied. Turning sharply 
round, he said — 

" Will you leave me, Editha ?" 

"She is going with me, my son," re- 
plied the Princess. "Do not oppose her 
departure." 

And, taking a hand cold as marble, she 
drew the poor damsel from the room. 



SMITHFIELD. 243 



One look back at the King — the last. 

She never beheld him more. 

In less than a month afterwards she 
was lying in the secluded graveyard of 
Dartford Priory. 

Sister Eudoxia and the Prioress prayed 
daily beside that early grave. 

Almost simultaneously with the sad 
event just recorded the marriage of Conrad 
Basset and the lovely Catherine de Courcy 
took place at Canterbury Cathedral. 

The valiant young knight subsequently 
rose high in the King's favour, and Ca- 
therine became the fairest ornament of the 
Court of Anne of Bohemia. 



THE END. 



LONDON : 

BAVILL, BDWABDS AND CO., PBINTBBS, CHAffDOS SIBEEI, 

COTBNT GAEDEN. 



