















VBBR WSSm 

JMBHfflHI ggggffi 

DDDHIiHB«ICwHOHBwP<wVnraWVrww 
•WfSn jbuMj 








LIBRA HY 

OF THL 

U N IVERSITY 

Of ILLI NOIS 

823 

K84a 

V.3 



CENTRAL CIRCULATION BOOKSTACKS 

The person charging this material is re- 
sponsible for its renewal or its return to 
the library from which it was borrowed 
on or before the Latest Date stamped 
below. You may be charged a minimum 
fee of $75.00 for each lost book. 

Theft/ mutilation, and underlining of books are reasons 
for disciplinary action and may result In dismissal from 
the University. 
TO RENEW CALL TELEPHONE CENTER, 333-8400 

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 



'AUG 081996 

JUN 1 2 1997 
8 1997 



When renewing by phone, write new due date below 
previous due date. LI 62 






ANNE SHERWOOD: 



OR, THR 



SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS OF ENGLAND. 



" H faut 6ter les masques des choses, aussi bien que des personnes!" 

Montaione. 

" Per me si va nella citta dolente : 
Per me si va nelT eteruo dolore : 
Per me si va tra la perduta gente." — Da.ktb. 

" Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at 
ease, and with the contempt of the proud." — Ps. cxxiii., Bible Version. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. III. 



LONDON: 
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1857. 



LONDON : 

i.I. AMI EDWABDB, POINTERS, CIUNDOS Mi: 

COVENT CARD] s . 



8£3 
v\3 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE I. 



After reading Lord Claude's letter, the joy- 
ous light which had illuminated Annie's face 
died away, and she remained for a long time 
in a melancholy attitude, resting her head 
upon her hand. She saw indeed that Claude 
loved her, but she saw too that he had not 
courage for her sake to brave the world's 
opinion. Still the family pride, against 
which her mind would have revolted in any 
other person, in Claude excited neither anger 
nor indignation. Her partial fondness would 
not even allow her to qualify that pride as 
weakness, and she even went so far as to 
think it would be a derogation of his dignity 

VOL. III. B 



2 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

to stoop to her. Never had Annie been so 
humble in her own eyes ; she forgot, utterly 
forgot her fond dream, that successful genius 
might one day level the distinction between 
her noble lover and herself, and again and 
again she accused herself of madness and 
presumption. "And his love," she mur- 
mured, " is a fatal accident for Claude, but 
for me — for me it is the crown of existence, 
even though it be destined to perish in the 
furnace of affliction. To be loved by Claude 
one day — one hour — might well be bought 
by years of suffering !" 

Again and again the letter was read, and 
Annie pondered over Claude's remarks on 
Oswald ; " he was too contemptibly weak to 
make his own happiness, in defiance of a 
world which could offer him nothing in ex- 
change for the felicity he sacrificed on her 
tinselled altars !" When Claude wrote that, 
he meant to return to Annie; two months 
later, he remembered the gulf which separated 
them, and, perhaps, his already cooled passion 
made it easy for him to avoid one whoso love 
would degrade him. "But he mav change 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 3 

again !" repeated Annie, " lie may change 
again, he may yet return ! Ah, shall I then 
have courage and strength to surmount or 
conceal my weakness, and show him that I 
too have pride ? But what has pride to do 
with love ? I will delay my departure ; per- 
haps we may meet again — if we do, he shall 
see by my untroubled look that I am indiffe- 
rent to him ! Oh, that I w r ere ! Yet, no ! 
Still let me love one so worthy of devotion. 
I will stay, and if he comes I can at least 
assure myself of his health ; of that he says 
nothing ! How little he knows the tortures 
of suspense I have suffered, while uncertain 
of his state ! Ah, if he were like Eichard ! 
but no, I w r ould not have him anything but 
what he is, that ' one bright, particular star' 
that I have dreamt of so long, nay, all my 
life, but never saw, till I knew Claude ! the 
star to which I may look up with fond, yet 
unobserved idolatry! I wish Sydne}^ were 
home ; then I should at least, sometimes, hear 
his name pronounced : it is very sad never to 
hear him named!" 

Soon after, Sydney came home for his 

b 2 



4 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

holidays ; but Annie was in low spirits, not 
at all entertaining, and he rather avoided 
than sought her company ; when obliged 
to be with her, he behaved with as haughty 
an air as he could assume, for despite the 
rough usage of a public school, and a well- 
merited chastisement from a merchant's son, 
whom he had taken occasion to remind of 
his rank, Sydney still retained a thorough 
consciousness of his own position in life. 

Annie expected little from Sydney, but 
still the boy's callousness cut her to the heart. 
Lady Adelaide was positively becoming ill- 
humoured, despite the value she set on her 
charms, and her knowledge that bad temper 
would indubitably diminish, if not quite efface 
them. To describe the miseries she laboured 
to inflict on her dependant would be a futile 
attempt, and a weariness to the reader. 
Sometimes they were small, very small in- 
deed, like the tiny insect's sting, or the mote 
that enters the eye, and though so mitral 
often tortures that sensitive organ past en- 
during. And Annie might have escaj 
from all this, to the haven of peace her sister's 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 5 

home offered ; but " perhaps he will return !" 
whispered to herself, in the lowest murmur, 
still held her captive in that hardest of 
bondages. 

Ellen's disappointment on learning Annie's 
decision was very great, so was her surprise. 
Richard expressed no astonishment. " Lord 
Claude Douglas is the magnet !" said he. 
"But he is in the East, you know," said 
Ellen ; "we read a paragraph in the paper 
about him the other day." 

" Never mind, he will return, or Annie 
hopes he will. But I can't help wishing she 
would trv to banish him from her mind !" 

" That she never will," said Ellen ; " if she 
loves him, it will be for ever. My poor dear 
Annie ! Oh, Richard dearest, what shall 
we do ?" 

" We cannot do anything, dear love, but 
commend our sister to our heavenly Father's 
care and guidance !" 

n> at «fc _■'- ^t y. 2". 

>T» /ff /Jt «fT <■» »•• '•- 

A new year had come, and with it the 
realization of the most ambitious dream that 
had ever lit the life of an obscure woman. 



6 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Annie Sherwood " awoke one morning and 
found herself a celebrity !" Not only had 
her work succeeded beyond the most sanguine 
expectation she could have formed, but yet 
more, the creation of her fancy had won the 
plaudits of master-minds, whose praises were 
indeed a triumph. "What w^ould Claude 
say ? what would Claude think ?" He was 
never Lord Claude Douglas in Annie's 
memory ; the name was so much sweeter in 
its simple southern sound, Claude! But 
long months, long weary months rolled away, 
and suns rose and set, and still he did not 
come, nor did any tidings of him greet her 
expectant ear. He had forgotten his foolish 
dream, or he was ashamed of having loved 
his inferior — which ? He was living, and in 
improved health, the papers had told that 
much. What heart-sickening days were 
those to Annie Sherwood ! Yet was she in 
a measure sustained by her growing, though 
anonymous reputation, and already a second 
work was about to build it higher. 

What a triumph it would be, when once 
she should rend the veil, and show that the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 7 

pen whose eloquent words had made so many 
hearts thrill, had been guided by the hand of 
the despised dependent of the great and proud 1 
Sometimes Annie saw her darling offspring, 
for such it was to her, in the hands of the 
cold-hearted Adelaide, and eliciting even from 
her expressions of admiration. Sometimes, 
too, she heard the choicest passages read 
aloud by the cracked, croaking voice of Miss 
Dobson, who was marvelling what people 
could find to attract them in such trash ; she 
was sure it was not to be compared to Father- 
less Fanny, which had been the favourite novel 
of her youth ; of course, Miss Dobson's 
criticisms greatly moderated the young 
author's exultation ! It was June, already 
leafy June ; "I will wait three months more 
— yes, three months more I" repeated Annie. 
At the end of three months the Curzons 
would be returning to England. 

It w f as not only June, but the anniversary 
of England's proudest day, Waterloo. Lady 
Adelaide had some friends staying with her. 
She had accompanied them to Waterloo. 
Walter and Herbert had been indulged with 



8 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

a holiday, and had heen allowed to go also. 
Of course the governess was left at home ; 
she saw the gay, laughing party set out in 
the luxurious carriage ; there were happy 
smiles on all their faces, except that of 
Adelaide. 

Annie did not envy them their smiles and 
their brave array, but she did sigh once or 
twice, as she thought of the rustling leaves 
and the pleasant breeze in the green woods 
through which they would pass, and she sat 
for a while, leaning her head upon her hand, 
and thinking of Napoleon. Travelling back 
from "Waterloo to the battle of the Pyramids, 
she was in the East, and soon the eagle of 
war was driven from her mental vision, and 
in its place rose the form of a traveller in the 
far-off desert. He sat under a palm-tree in 
an oasis, and had adopted, as travellers often 
do, the habit of an oriental; his dark 
speaking face became that habit well. Round 
him were grouped his Eastern and European 
attendants, and as he was stretched on the 
sands till the heat of day was past, he was 
reading, perhaps Hafz, perhaps Zadi//, the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 9 

exquisite tale which Claude's own country- 
man had clothed with all the rich imagery 
of an oriental story-teller. 

Suddenly Annie started up, with an irre- 
sistible inclination to go forth from the busy 
haunts of men, and to spend two or three 
hours alone in the green wood, if she could 
find her way thither alone. She would take 
Claude's letter with her, and read and re- 
read it — perhaps she might find out some 
hitherto -hidden meaning in its pages. Poor 
dreamer ! 

Having hastily prepared for her excursion, 
Annie told a servant whom she saw when 
passing out, that she would be absent several 
hours, and would require no dinner. When 
the door had closed — indeed, before it had 
well closed — the servant in question hastened 
to inform the housemaid, that "there cer- 
tainly was something very queer about Miss 
Sherwood. What business could she pos- 
sibly have out? His opinion was, that she 
was going to meet that old rake of a Colonel. 
He had been past that morning, and had 
looked up at the school-room window; no 



10 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

good would come of it," &c. The house- 
maid, while arranging her ribbons at a gla- 
quite agreed with Thomas ; but still, though 
she agreed about Miss Sherwood, "the Co- 
lonel was a pleasant gentleman, and had 
pleasant ways with him. He had given her 
once five shillings only to carry a bit of a 
note to Miss Sherwood." 

"Why, you good-for-nothing girl!" inter- 
rupted the cook, who had received many an 
act of kindness from Annie, "how dare you 
try to take away the poor thing's name like 
that? Don't you know well enough she 
never read a word of the note, but quite 
indignant-like bid you carry it back again? 
and instead of giving it to the old villain 
again, didn't you sit down in this blessed 
kitchen, and read every word of it?" 

"At all events, I've seen her cast sheep's 
eyes at him," said the discomfited Susan. 

"Very true," said the footman. 

"Hold your tongue, you bad fellow! If 
you weren't good-for-nothing yourself, you 
wouldn't be so ready to talk against innocent 
people — it only shows how bad you are." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 11 

"Well, I tell you 'gov'nisses' is a bad 
set!" replied Thomas, "though most of 
them's demure. Pray, didn't she stay out 
one night till it struck nine o'clock ?" 

" More shame of my lady to send her !" 

"My lady didn't send her." 

"But I know she did, Thomas." 

" But cook, didn't I hear my lady telling 
Mr. Curzon that Miss Sherwood would go 
roaming about evenings, and it wasn't re- 
spectable of her, and my lady hadn't a doubt 
but that she'd come to no good. Ah, didn't 
I hear that with my own ears ?" 

"More shame for them that said it — more 
shame for one woman that speaks ill of 
another with no cause. A great lady has 
no more right to talk scandal than another. 
I'll trouble you to give me no more of your 
empty discourse, Thomas: and as for you, 
Susan, if I hear any more of that old sinner's 
doings with you, I'll make a ' pint' of telling 
Mr. Curzon — that I will I" 

"We shall see," said Susan, scornfully 
tossing her curls, for housemaids may wear 
curls, though governesses may not. "We 



12 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

shall see whether master'll believe you or me!" 
"Yes, we shall see!" said the cook, with 
that decided tone which cooks usually ac- 
quire, even cooks of the gentlest hearts. 

Meanwhile, the object of the foregoing 
remarks, all unconscious of the attention she 
had excited, pursued her way, and crossing 
the Boulevard, hastily passed through one 
of the gates, as though she would feel more 
at ease when the city of pleasure and luxury 
was left behind. Unconscious of time as it 
passed, unconscious of the distance she was 
traversing, Annie did not remember that 
several miles separated her from the city, 
when the murmuring: breeze of the "Bois de 
la Cambre" invited her further onward. 

How beautiful those green* alleys are, car- 
peted with emerald turf, walled and almost 
canopied with grand forest trees! No human 
sound to mar the scene, no sound at all, 
but the gentlest of all summer breezes, lilting 
the leaves, and making murmuring music. 
Truly the wood was a paradise to the poor 
governess, who came from a dingy school- 
room, and she sat down on the green grass 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 13 

in a little recess, and drawing forth Claude's 
letter, spread it on her knee, and read a few 
sentences and wept — read again, and again 
wept. But her tears were not all bitter, and 
she looked up at the glimpses of blue sky 
above the dark trees, and blessed Him that 
made her that she had lived and loved ! 
Whatever the veiled future had in store for 
her, had she not lived and loved ? 

And while thus she thought, a radiant 
smile burst through the cloud of her tears, 
and she breathed the name so inexpressibly 
dear to her. And even while, in her sup- 
posed solitude, she was calling on her lover's 
name, some one came forth from a neigh- 
bouring alley, and uttering a joyful cry, 
Annie darted forward, and hid her face in 
the arms that were opened to receive her. 
Everything was forgotten, but the one blissful 
thought, "Claude is with me again! he loves 
me! he loves me! Earth can give me no more !" 
She was unconscious, totally unconscious of 
the impassioned words that were addressed 
to her — unconscious that her glowing cheek 
had been raised from its hiding-place, and 



14 ANNE Ml KR WOOD. 

that her Claude was reading half her love in 
her eyes — all he could not read — unconscious 
that he was again pressing down her eyeli< 
with kisses, only interrupted by fond-mur- 
mured words in the soft southern speech of 
his mother's native land. No, she knew 
nothing — understood nothing — but "Claude 
has come back to me! — he loves me!" and 
in that one idea centred the universe of 
Annie Sherwood. Claude was the first to 
wake, for he too had been in a blissful 
dream — so blissful that he had forgotten 
who he was, and had been surprised into 
declaring a passion he had intended to 
crush and annihilate. When he recalled 
his scattered senses, a sigh escaped his 
bosom. "You sigh! You are then sad, my 
Lord!" said Annie, timidly, and disengaging 
herself from his embrace. "Sad! no, indeed, 
dearest! why should I be? But call me 
Claude ; let me be Claude, and nothing el 
to you. It was that murmured word that 
revealed you to me just now, like another 
wood nymph!" he added, smiling, but 
not with his old, gay, happy smile. "But 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 15 

you should not have wandered to this soli- 
tude alone," he added, more gravely. 
"Alone! Am I not always alone?" said 
Annie; "but I did not think — I did not 
know — that I was doing wrong;" and 
Annie spoke with that child-like timidity 
which steals over the manner even of the 
most high-spirited woman, in the presence 
of the man she loves, directly he has won 
from her the secret of her heart. " I have 
been very sad and lonely lately," she 
added, "and to-day all the Curzons had gone 
to Waterloo; I was quite alone, and I did so 
long to escape to this green wood and read, 
but I will go back directly if you think that 
I ought." 

" Pauvre enfant," murmured Claude, abs- 
tractedly, as he swept the mass of dark hair 
off Annie's forehead, and gazed long and 
earnestly in her face. 

" Shall I go now ?" she asked. 

" Not yet, not yet," he answered quickly ; 
* c it is a coward thought, that makes us fear 
the world's envious tongue !" So saying, he 
led Annie back into the green recess, and 



16 ANNE SHEKW00D. 

made lier sit down beside him, while clasping 
both her hands in one of his, lie again forgot 
the gnlf between him and the poor depen- 
dant, and she ntterly forgot his own sage 
reproof for her lonely wanderings in the 
green wood — forgot what the world might 
say of her for sitting there with Lord 
Claude, when the evening shadows were soon 
going to fall, and one herald star had already 
risen . No wonder Annie forgot ; she trusted 
so entirely to Claude. — Could he be wrong ? 
Impossible! "You came to read," said 
Claude, " but the book — where is it ? I do 
not see your book ! Was it the clouds — 
the leaves, you came all this weary way to 
read ?" " ~No, indeed I" But so low was the 
answer, that none but love's ear could have 
heard it. " Show me your book," repeated 
Claude. But Annie had none to show; and 
at last, blushing, trembling, as if caught in 
a guilty action, she showed him his own 
letter, which he would have taken from her, 
only that she wept at the thought of parting 
with it. 

" Our unexpected meeting to-day, Annie, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 17 

dearest," said Claude, when they were a little 
calmer, " has made me think of Zadig. Do 
you remember the part where Zadig, after a 
long weary search for Astarte, finds her 
tracing his name upon the sand? Even so 
I found you, ange bien-aime, tracing mine 
upon the viewless winds 1" 

" If Zadig had been a poet," said Annie, 
" he would have made a thousand songs upon 
that happy meeting ! You thought of Zadig 
in the desert, Claude ?" 

" Often ; and though I could not make ' a 
thousand songs' upon the lovers' meeting, 
one night of peculiar beauty, while sitting 
under a palm, at a little distance from my 
people (who were grouped round a fire which 
they had lit, and were chaunting some mo- 
notonous but soothing love stanzas), I put 
together a few" verses, such as Zadig might 
have sung — in French, of course, for I have 
not the pretension to write English poetry." 

"Ah, I know they were beautiful !" said 
Annie. 

"No, indeed, not poetry at all," said 
Claude, smiling fondly on the loving woman 

VOL. III. c 



IS ANNE SHERWOOD. 

beside him, who thought thai all emanating 
from him must have beauty in it. " They 
were but the most ' mediocre' verses." 

" But you will tell them to me — they must 
be sweet ; to me, at least, they must be so." 
"I have forgotten the first stanza." 
"Never mind; begin at the second." 
" Well then, fancy a whole army of as- 
terisks, and after them — 

"Au desert j'ai cherche dans les lointaius pays, 
Par la chaleur dujour, par la fraicheur des nuits, 
Quand l'astre aux millc fcux brillc en tout son eclat, 
Quand la nue a voile la douce Zoharmg. 
Ma poitrine exhalant de longs cris de souifrancc, 
Comme en un froid tombeau, tout est rcste silence ! 

Je t'appelais en vain, lumierc de mes ycux — 

Toi, plus belle cent fois que le solcil des cieux ! 
J'cssayais de chanter pour t romper ma souffrancc ; 
Mon coeur etait fletri, rcduit a rimpuissancc, 
Mabouche ne voulait que redire toujours, 
Oli, reviens Astarte! oh, rcviens me? amours!" 

"Beautiful, most beautiful," said Annie. 

"Ah, you think so because your heart 
listens, and not your mind," said Claude; 
" otherwise you would find out all the flaws." 
Still he was pleased that the heart should so 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 19 

listen, and bias the judgment ; and Annie 
stoutly maintained her opinion. 

"But did you say nothing for Astarte?" 
she asked suddenly. "Did you give her 
heart no voice, while she watched, and waited, 
and wept ?" And as she spoke, Annie looked 
up for an instant with that loving, yet shrink- 
- ing look, that a woman wears when she would 
momentarily read a loved face, while bashful 
fears strive with the half-formed w^ish, and 
press her eyelids down. 

"Yes, dearest/' replied Claude, "I did;" 
adding more gaily — 

" c When a man says, I've written fifty rhymes, 
He makes you fear he will recite them too!' 

I would not betray my infirm verses to any 
less partial hearer, knowing as I do what 
they are worth, only springing from a vagrant 
fancy — that fancy stirred up in boyhood by 
the sparkling waves of the Mediterranean, 
and since nurtured by the land of Ossian. 
This, I thought, might have wandered 
through the brain of Astarte, while between 
hope and fear she awaited her lover — 

c 2 



20 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Ah, maitre de ma vie, ou done errent tes pas ? 
Mon ame te pleure, corame si le trepas 
Avait fauche tes jours ! Oil done es-tu, chere ame ': 
Mon front s'est obscurci, mes yeux restent sans flaiumc. 
Mon regard cherclie en vain la lumiere du ciel ; 
Et je ne le vois plus, e'etait toi le soleil ! 

Lorsque l'aube du jour dissipe la vapeur, 
Quand tout sur cette terre a repris sa couleur, 
De tes traits en mon cceur restent la douce image ; 
Et l'astre de la nuit souvent sur mon visage 
Voit couler bien des pleurs ; e'est ton seul souvenir 
Qui, brulant dans mon cceur, m'empeche de mourir. 

Oh ! cher Zadig, reviens ! ma jeunesse est fletric — 

Tout me semble mourir, la fleur penche sans vie, 

La feuille se seche, l'oiseau cesse son chant ; 

Comme oiseau, feuille et fleur, mon coeur s'en va mourant. 

Mais si tu revenais, oh ! tresor de mon ame, 

Tout renaitrait, l'oiseau, feuille, fleur et" 

I forget the rest, Annie.' 3 And Claude 
smiled yet more fondly on his eager listener, 
and wondered if the great singers — the 
geniuses whose words have made immortal 
music — the Dantes — the Miltons — the Shak- 
speares — ever had more rapt listeners than 
love had made for his trifling verses. " But 
we must go now, my precious one, said he ; 
" we must leave this, oiu' leafy paradise, and 
go back to the world !" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 21 

" Yes, we must go !" responded Annie, 
with an answering sigh, while a prophetic 
tear trembled in her eye, and seemed to say, 
" Such a sun will never rise again for you as 
rose this summer morning.' ' 

" A tear !" said Claude, in his low, musical 
voice. " What if we must go forth from our 
Eden to-day, my beloved ? there stands no 
cherub at the entrance, with a naming sword, 
to bar our return ! But I cannot go till I 
have left some memorial of this the happiest 
day of my life !" 

"Is it really, really such?" asked Annie, 
with a troubled joy. 

"Keally and truly," responded Claude, 
kissing her cheek, " for to-day I have realized 
the dream of my life !" And while he spoke, 
he began with a firm, strong hand to cut 
Annie's name, or rather the initials of her 
name, on the bark of a tree. " How often I 
shall return here !" said Claude. 

"You will add your own?" said Annie. 

" Must I ?" 

" Oh, yes ! do, do !" 

Claude began to carve the initials of his 



22 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

name beside those of Annie Sherwood, but 
the tree was unusually hard: the impetus 
which had made his arm move at first now 
failed; and ere the character was half 
formed, he threw down the knife, and gave 
up the attempt. Annie sighed deeply. 
She did not ask him to renew his efforts, 
but the failure struck on her heart as an 
omen. 

At that moment a number of those dark 
sinister-looking rooks winged their dull flight 
above the lovers' heads, uttering discordant 
cries, and two priests came up the green alley 
of the woods, in their long black soutanes. 
Annie involuntarily shuddered ; and when 
Claude questioned her tenderly, she only 
replied by pointing to the melancholy flight 
of birds that darkened the sky. Like all 
the children of imagination, she was super- 
stitious ; and Claude, like a true Southerner, 
shared her feeling. Both saw an evil omen 
in those black-winged birds, and in the 
dark-robed priests, cut off from all life's joy, 
but left unsheltered from its storms and 
misery. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 23 

"What can they be doing here?" said 
Annie, meaning the priests. 

" And we ! what do we here ? What 
strange destiny brought ns to this spot 
to-day?" muttered Claude to himself, a 
shadow sweeping over his expressive fea- 
tures. " Forgive me, Annie dearest !" he 
added, with earnest gravity. 

" Forgive you ! what have I to forgive ?" 

" Much ; I have been selfishly preferring 
my own gratification to your welfare. I 
have been very wrong to make you linger 
here. Let us hasten !" So saying, he led 
Annie quickly through the green wood, that 
now seemed shorn of half its beauty. Si- 
lently they walked on, hand clasped in hand, 
till they came to the spot where the wood 
terminates in the common highway. There 
instinctively each turned to look back. 
" Such hours come but once in life !" said 
Claude, mournfully. 

tc Like the snow-flakes in the river, 
One moment white, then lost for ever!" 

"Lost for ever !" repeated Annie, un- 
consciously, as she left the green shade 



24 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

which had been to her as the gate of Eden, 
an ingress to that " Vita nuova," the 

" all 



That Eve has left her daughters since the fall !" 

that " Vita nuova" that none can know 
till they have loved. 

* * * * * * 

In her dreams that night, Annie was alter- 
nately blissfnl and wretched, — now rising 
to the purest height of joy, the brightest 
heaven mortality can reach ; then thrust 
down, down for ever, sinking lower and 
lower, like the lost spirits of whom the poet 
tells, — the lost spirits who strive to regain, 
and almost do regain, a forfeited heaven ; and 
while hovering on the brink of the Empy- 
rean, are hurled back by shooting stars to 
the abyss of misery. Yes, Annie's dreams 
were troubled; yet how sweet, how happy 
was the first waking thought! "It is all, 
all true. I have not dreamt it ! Claude 
has returned, and he loves me ! Oh, yes. he 
loves me ! His love is the crown of my 
life ! Nothing can dim my radiant joy, — 
nothing can take it from me but death ! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 25 

Nor can death ! love is immortal, if the soul 

be ! Nothing can take his love from me." 
* $ & * « $ 

Let us turn from the clinging woman's 
tender reveries and dreams, — from her who 
has forgotten or despises every adverse wind 
that fortune has blown on her defenceless 
head, in the fulness of her present happi- 
ness ; let us turn from her, to her noble 
lover. Claude Douglas spends not the night 

in chequered dreams ; no, he paces his rich 
chamber, whose downy couch vainly invites 
him to repose, in a conflict of contending 
passions — love, pity, honour; every generous 
passion that can ennoble the soul of man, 
ranged against one dark-browed fiend, 
pride ; and that fiend strives with them all, 
as though it would strangle every virtue, 
trampling them beneath its relentless feet, 
while still it holds its brow shamelessly erect 
before that heaven, whose representatives it 
dares with impious rage to crush ! Can the 
proud son of one of England's noblest houses 
wed her who has received the hireling's 
wages 1 eaten the dependant's bread ! waited 



CO AHUI BHXEWOOD. 

upon the nod — obeyed the mandate of his 
inferiors ? Impossible ! A icain, can lie break 
the tender heart that loves him devotedrj 
and in breaking that heart, annihilate his 

n happiness for ever? Xo, n<> ! Still 1< 
can he dishonour the being whom he would 
have pure as the inmost thought of an 
angel. Pride must yield, love conquer. 
Annie should never know that he had 
doubted, wavered for a minute. They wonld 
be all in all to each other. Thev would live 

■ 

above the world. He would bear her to I 
mother's land, or to a home in the iar, free 
West, where the great in mind, and the 
great in soul, are the only noble- ! And 
Claude repeated — 

" What lost a world, and bade a hero lly ; 
The timid tear in Cleopai e ! 

Yet be the soft triumvir's fault forgiven; 
By this how many lose, not earth, but hcavei. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 27 



CHAPTEE II. 

The next time that Annie and Lord Claude 
met, was in the gay promenade of the park. 
He joined her immediately, or at least walked 
heside the children, as he had been accus- 
tomed to do formerly. His manner, though 
tender and affectionate, was constrained, and 
his expressive eye full of melancholy. Albeit 
the most charming of men, Lord Claude 
Douglas was pre-eminently irresolute, and 
already the vision of living for love in the 
sweet South, or the free Transatlantic world, 
had dissolved, and, " like the baseless fabric 
of c alV visions," had left "no wreck behind;" 
like Aladdin's palace, when his imperial 
father-in-law sought it in the morning, " The 
place thereof knew it no more I" The re- 
turn of Claude's doubts and fears bringing 
with them the shadow of that huge, over- 
whelming monster the world, had plunged 



28 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

him into the most painful state of mind. 
Happily for Annie, love had lulled her 
usually quick powers of perception into a 
deep sleep. She saw no clouds in her sky, 
not even the small cloud " big as a man's 
hand ;" and if she had seen it, she would 
have refused to believe its evidence. No, 
neither doubt nor fear had she ; " perfect 
love casteth out fear" in the heart's natural 
affections, equally as in its religious belief. 
Claude Douglas sometimes looked earnestly 
in her speaking face, and read there, as in 
an open book, her blind confidence in him ; 
and as he read, though he was gratified, his 
spirit grew more and more troubled. Had 
Annie's love been more ambitious, and less 
sentimental; had it been her lover's title 
and position which dazzled and held her in 
bondage, instead of the charms of his heart 
and mind, — she would have understood him , 
and perhaps latent pride taking the alarm, 
she might have had resolution enough to 
turn away from a love, gained more by re- 
sistless destiny, than given as a free-will 
offering. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 29 

After a long conversation, embarrassing 
from irresolution on the one side and timi- 
dity on the other, Lord Claude asked Annie 
abruptly, what her plans for the future were? 
Annie started a little, but only momentarily; 
of course Claude only meant about resigning 
her present disagreeable employment. "I 
shall leave the Curzons in September," said 
she ; " about that time they will be return- 
ing to England." 

" And you ?" asked Claude. 

" I shall go direct to my sister's," she re- 
plied ; adding ingenuously, " We shall meet 
again, at Ellen's. I do so want you to 
know Ellen and her husband." 

Claude sighed, but made no reply. What 
could he be thinking of? Ah ! it was a 
sigh of pleasure. His kind heart was re- 
joicing over Annie's coming emancipation ; 
she was quite sure of that. " I wrote a long 
letter to Ellen, last night," continued Annie, 
colouring deeply; "I was so anxious to tell 
her all about you, and our strange meeting, 
and " 

" But I would rather you should not tell 



30 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

— I mean, not now — not yet," began Claude, 
hastily. 

"You w r ould rather I should not tell 
Ellen \" exclaimed Annie, with some sur- 
prise. 

" No, dearest," answered Claude, " not 
till " The sentence remained incom- 
plete, even in his own mind ; how could he 
complete it while his views were still so 
vacillating? Annie was disappointed, and 
even a little troubled ; she wanted so much 
to pour some of her overflowing happiness 
into the gentle heart of her loving Ellen. 
Who could sympathize, who rejoice with her 
as her sister would, and next to her, her true- 
hearted, affectionate brother Richard? But 
Claude must have some very strong reasons 
for his wish ; no doubt it was to give Ellen 
a happy surprise later : he was sure to be 
acting for the best, so Annie grew soon con- 
tented, and when she went home, burnt the 
lone: letter she had written to Ellen. 

For some time Lord Claude contented 
himself with meeting Annie, as he had done 
that day, during her walks with the children. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 31 

and they were usually taken in the park, or 
on the Boulevard. His old, intimate visits 
to the school-room were not renew r ed, though 
he was an occasional visitor of the Curzons' 
drawing-room. Annie thanked her noble 
lover in her heart, for the delicacy and con- 
siderate kindness which, she doubted not, 
dictated the line of conduct he had adopted, 
and only loved him the more enthusiasti- 
cally, as his apparent honour rose more 
highly in her dazzled imagination. 

AYhen the lovers met, though the tender- 
ness of Claude's tone and look threw a charm 
over every word he uttered, their conversa- 
tion was confined to the discussion of those 
intellectual and imaginative topics, which 
had appeared their bond of union before they 
became declared lovers ; another proof, if one 
were wanting, of the refinement which 
guided all the actions of Claude Douglas. 
Poor Annie ! it was well she thought so, 
though the motives and intentions she had 
ascribed to Claude existed only in her own 
fertile and partial imagination. 

Probably Claude Douglas had no more 



32 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

thought of wronging or afflicting Annie 
Sherwood, than he had of overthrowing the 
monarchy of England. He was in some 
things very unaccustomed to the ways of 
the world, though he had lived thirty-one 
years in it. Those years had been spent in 
a dream of poetry, rather than in the prac- 
tical usages of life. Had he been a thoroughly 
heartless man of the world, the position in 
which he had placed himself would not only 
have appeared easy to withdraw from, but 
rather an amusing "petit cm barrets' than a 
serious dilemma. But as it was, he saw 
himself in a labyrinth from which there was 
a very difficult egress, if any at all. In vain 
he repeated to himself that adverse destiny, 
rather than his own will, had thrown him in 
the way of Annie Sherwood, when he had 
fully resolved to pass through Brussels with- 
out seeing her. Whatever had occasioned 
their meeting, they had met, the how was 
immaterial, and he had been surprised into 
a mad declaration, of which lie already re- 
pented. Some years, if not a life, oi' painful 
regret lay before him, and not him alone, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 33 

but the woman whom he loved — yes, loved 
most fondly, only not well enough to bear 
the oppressive mockery of the heartless, on 
her account. 

At length he resolved on leaving Brussels, 
and leaving Annie ; in a day or two he would 
put his resolve into execution. He would, 
when leaving, write and tell her, — tell her 
what ? He knew not, and could not bear to 
think. But the day or two never expired, 
and growing more and more enchained by 
charms which he never could describe — the 
charms of a woman neither very beautiful, 
nor still very young, he let his resolves melt 
away like snow-flakes, formed no more, and 
finally, with a spirit which in another man 
he would have condemned and despised, gave 
himself up entirely to the fascination of the 
present moment, turning away from the 
veiled future as though it could have dis- 
closed the head of a Medusa. 

Claude was indeed cautious not to draw 
disagreeable observation on Annie, so cau- 
tious that none ever suspected the tie which 
bound them to each other. He had no longer 

vol. in. d 



34 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

any intentions whatever with regard to her, 
no views honourable or dishonourable, un- 
less to enjoy her society as long as he could, 
and to win her heart if possible, more irre- 
vocably than it was won at present 1 By 
turns joyous and depressed, there were mo- 
ments when Claude's manner assumed a kind 
of reckless gaiety and laisser-aller, whicli 
gave Annie a vague uneasiness, which she 
could not understand, but made her view 
with delight any return to a more serious 
mood. As for Annie's previsions, they were 
scarcely, if at all, deeper than those of her 
lover. Still very young in heart and fancy, 
if not in years, she had all the simplicity of 
a girl, and was as happy and contented as 
though the coronet of the Dryburgha were 
already circling her brow. She was so inex- 
pressibly happy in feeling herself beloved 
by Claude, that her heart asked no move, un- 
less it were that Ellen might share her bliss, 
by knowing its extent. As for the puerile 
pleasure of parading her conquest before the 
envious or indifferent, she never thought o\' 
it; and if she pictured to herself a life spent 



ANNE SHERWOOD. • 35 

as the chosen companion of him she loved, 
it was only as the wife of Claude, never as 
the Lady Claude Douglas, to be one day Mar- 
chioness of Dryburgh. If she remembered 
Claude's rank and position at all, it was only 
to wish with Portia, that she could become 
worthier of her noble lover. 

Ah! what a blessed dream it seemed to 
ponder over the day when Claude, having 
loved her, and made her his own, solely for 
herself, unadorned, as she knew herself to 
be, with the trappings of beauty, rank, or 
wealth, when his disinterested love should 
have given her all, to reveal herself to him 
as the mysterious Egeria, whose genius had 
made the pulses of so many hearts stir with 
delight and admiration, and whose anony- 
mous reputation had become as a household 
word in every gifted or intellectual mind! 
But not yet, not yet ; let the generous, the 
noble sacrifice be completed, before Claude 
knew that his loving Annie held so high a 
place in the self-created nobility of genius. 

Meanwhile, Annie wrote to Ellen, of 
course not telling the nature of her joy, for 

i) 2 



36 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

to obey Claude seemed as binding as a reli- 
gious duty, but dimly shadowing forth to 
her the coming revelation of so full and per- 
fect a happiness, that she wanted time t-> 
become accustomed to its brightness her- 
self. 

Ellen, simple Ellen, took all this in sober 
earnest, and felt quite sure that her exulting 
hopes for her beloved sister were about to be 
accomplished ; and if Richard shook his head 
never so little with a doubting air, poor 
Ellen grew quite as angry as it was possible 
for her to grow, with the doubt which the 
little shake of the head implied. Her early 
admiration of and full confidence in her si>- 
ter's charms were as strong, — nay, probably 
stronger than ever ; and had it been an- 
nounced to her that Annie had captivated a 
crowned head, it would not have appeared 
to her the least absurd or improbable. 

"I told you so! I told you >«>, Richard!" 
exclaimed Ellen, triumphantly, running into 
her husband's study, her eyes radiant with 
delight, and a newspaper in her hand. 

"You told me, Ellen, that there was to be 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 37 

a meeting in Batli next Thursday for the 
suppression of " 

" That has nothing to do with it, nothing 
in the world. Look here, dearest, look; listen, 
I mean. 'Lord Claude Douglas has returned 
from his Eastern wanderings, and is, we 
understand, sojourning in Brussels. It is 
rumoured that his Lordship is likely to he 
married in October."' 

" So says the newspaper, Ellen ; hut what 
is that to us?" 

" Everything ! he is going to marry 
Annie." 

" Dearest Ellen, pray don't prepare dis- 
appointment for yourself." 

" I am not, Richard," said Ellen, looking 
a little mortified; "but this account so 
exactly corresponds with much that Annie 
says, even in point of time. Does she not 
tell us that next September she will be the 
happiest of the happy? so happy, that she 
cannot contemplate her own coming bliss 
without trembling. Yes, I shall see Annie 
Lady Claude Douglas, and those who have 
dared to treat her as an inferior will have 



38 ANNK SH1EWOOD. 

t<> bend to her. What will the Doctor Bay, 

Richard?" 

"The Doctor? If your day-dreams ai 

true, the Doctor will break his heart!" 
" Will he not rejoice with us?" 
" No ; he loves Annie, and an old man's 

love is as strong as it is usually hopeless." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 39 



CHAPTEE III. 

It was the latter end of September, and ere 
the glories of an unusually bright summer 
had become memories, the little nation of the 
" Beiges" was preparing to astonish herself 
and her neighbours by a pageant of ex- 
traordinary splendour, in commemoration 
of Belgium's successful struggle to throw 
off the un genial yoke of the House of 

Orange. 

A grand procession was to take place, 

arranged with lavish splendour, and em- 
blematical of all the past, present, and future 
glories, in arts, arms, and commerce, of the 
infant kingdom. Very gorgeous, indeed, it 
would be — very effective, and somewhat thea- 
trical; there would be gilded and painted 
cars, banners of every hue and texture, and 
rose-crownedmaidens ad infinitum, who would 
all look pretty and nymph-like in the dis- 



40 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

tance ; in fact, the programme was as nearly 
Frencli as anything Beige could be. 

Besides all these daylight displays, there 
were to be, during the evenings of the three 
grand days, balls, concerts, &c; and to crown 
all, illuminations, which would make the 
Chinese Feast of Lanterns seem, by com- 
parison, like a foggy December evening in the 
midst of London. 

The Curzons had gone away for the three 
days that the festival would last. Lady 
Adelaide would not sanction sight- seeing, 
even by her presence. She had taken with 
her the hopeful scions of the house of Curzon. 
The governess she could not take : of course 
she could not go in the carriage with her 
Ladyship, and Dobbie w r as to have the seat 
by the coachman. The governess must be 
left to her own devices; — how happy she was 
to be so left ! She did not now feel the 
loneliness of her situation : how could she, 
when each bright thought that rose in her 
heart was happier than the last ? What was 
the oppressive yoke of the governess to her 
now ? the yoke that was so soon to be broken 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 41 

for ever — that had grown even easy to bear 
since Claude's love had made an Eden of her 
life's wilderness ! 

Annie thought over the way in which she 
had spent her last brief holiday only three 
months before, in leafy June, in the midst 
of the green wood ! it had been the brightest 
of her life. This day would not be so spent ; 
Claude had gently reproved her for her 
solitary rambles ; he had thought the in- 
dulgence at least imprudent ; she could not 
even wish to do what he condemned. 
And her lonely room was not lonely now ; it 
was peopled by such lovely images ; and the 
fond woman smiled to herself at her pleasant 
dreams, and cared for little beyond the em- 
pire of her own fancy. 

Annie employed her first leisure hour in 
stringing together some verses, defective in 
many ways, but overflowing with the bright 
imagery that joy imparts, and they sparkled 
like sunshine upon a dancing river. Then 
she read over all Claude's letters ; he had 
written her a great many; and sometimes she 
had received them in a volume of poetry, 



42 ANNK SHERWOOD- 

sometimes in a bouquet that was a letter in 
itself. Those letters of Claude's were so 
beautiful, so eloquent — at least Annie thought 
so — so full of poetry and imagination, fuller 
still of love ; love that formed the rich gold 
setting to the glittering gems of thought 
strewn throughout the closely written page-. 
Then Annie turned from the gentle, loving 
w r ords Claude had written, to the books lie 
preferred, some of them so grave with deep 
thought, others so sparkling with wit and 
merriment. Then she looked out for a 
moment to see if the shadow of that form 
which she would know among a thousand, 
were thrown upon the green alleys of the 
Park. Yet, how r cautiously, and even trem- 
blingly, she looked, lest Claude might see her, 
and think her capable of levity. 

When evening came, and with it a rich 
stream of melody burst on her oar from the 
well-trained military bands which perambu- 
lated the streets, Annie thought o\' Claude in 
the brilliant circle of the court at that hour, 
the graceful, the proud, grand form, that 
every eye would follow with envy or admi- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 43 

ration. And would Claude remember lier 
there ? would lie think of her faithfully, 
lovingly, while surrounded by the daughters 

of rank and beauty ? Yes, yes ! she knew 
he would, and she smiled exultingly. She 
was right. In the midst of a court ball, and 
its splendid array of beauty and fashion, Lord 
Claude well remembered Annie Sherwood 
— remembered her as we remember the 
bitter thought from which we vainly try to 
escape. 

Two days of the festival had passed. On 
the third, Annie stood for a long time — her- 
self, as she hoped and supposed, unseen — 
watching through the 'jalousies' of her own 
little window, a gentleman seated on a bench 
in the Park, and apparently absorbed in 
reading. Now and then he looked up with 
a quick, hurried glance, as if thinking over a 
passage he had read, and then appeared to 
replunge into his book with increased interest. 
At length he rose abruptly, and walked away 
in such haste, that the volume he had been 
reading was left behind. Not long after, a 
bouquet was brought to Annie, certainly not 



44 anm; SHERWOOD. 

among the most beautiful she had received 
from the noble giver, for it had been hastily 
chosen; but everything coming from Claude - 
hand was precious. Lovingly she looked on, 
and lovingly kissed the tender blossoms, and 
cautiously untied the ribbon that bound them 
together ; then with eager haste opened the 
billet which they had been the means of con- 
veying to her. How surprised, and even 
frightened she looked, when she saw the 
contents ! A few hurried words of entreaty, 
which only stopped short of a command, 
that she would meet Lord Claude at the 
Porte de Namur at three o'clock, " lie had 
something of vital importance to say to 
her. He knew she was alone, but he had 
not dared to visit her. lest his doing BO 
should subject her to unpleasant remark- ; 
but if she loved him, she would grant his 
request; every one was too busy to notice 
them," <S:c. 

Of course, Claude knew well that he would 
be obeyed — knew well that his slightest wish 
was her sovereign law — that if he had but 
beckoned her over the edge o\' a precipice, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 45 

she would have blindly followed. Yes, lie 
knew it all — knew it too well ! 

It was true that Annie moment aril}' re- 
membered the apparent impropriety of the 
proposed clandestine meeting ; but Claude 
desired — nay, willed it. He was the soul of 
honour ; what he desired and willed must be 
right. Annie would not hesitate a moment 
longer. 

" Where can Miss Sherwood be gone ?" 
said the footman. 

"Oh! to meet her young lover, the Colonel/' 
said Susan. " Well, it is a great pity some 
folks hold their heads so high, as if they were 
the virtuousest of folks ! Dear me, only to 
think how demure she looks all the time ! I 
really wonder at the Colonel's taste ! Why, 
she hasn't more colour in her cheeks than a 
bit of white wall !" 



4G ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE IV. 

At three o'clock a carriage stood at the Porte 
<le Namur, outside, apart from the gay crowds 
of pleasure-seekers. A gentleman was walk- 
ing to and fro. Every few minutes he con- 
sulted his watch, and turned impatiently to 
the gate to note who passed out. 

A lady approached, dressed entirely in 
black. Her step was hurried — her breath 
quickened by agitation — and her usually pale 
cheek flushed with the deepest crimson. 
" You are come ! All is well ! Let us set 
out I" said Claude, eagerly, as lie took her 
hand. 

"For where, my lord?" asked Annie, 
talteringly. 

"Annie, can you not trust me?" said 
Claude, in a tone of tender reproach. And 
Annie replied by putting her hand silently 
into his. He immediately led her to the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 47 

carriage, and jumped in after her, muttering, 
H Quelle aveugle confiance!" 

The coachman had evidently previously 
received directions, for he drove on without 
orders. Annie dared not ask " to where are 
you leading me ?" so she only whispered to 
her own heart, " Claude wills it so ; it must 
be right." 

" You tremble, Annie ; your eyes are full 
of tears : do you doubt me ?" asked Claude, 
after a pause. 

" Fear you, Claude ! No ; whom could I 
trust, if not you?" 

" Then why this sadness ?" 

" I cannot tell. It is involuntary, but I 
am quite happy." 

" You did not think my request strange ? 
or even — wrong?" 

" Oh no, since you made it !" 

" Pauvre enfant!" murmured Claude, just 
as he had once before said it. " Pauvre en- 
fant /" he repeated, and then relapsed into 
silence, while he held both those cold, trem- 
bling hands in his, and tenderly chafed them 
to restore warmth. 



48 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

There was, indeed, a vague fear in Annie's 
heart — no fear of Claude, no doubt of him 
— only an unendurable sense of coming evil, 
dimly shadowed forth, but marching on in 
silence and certainty. 

The lovers sat without speaking, till the 
carriage stopped at the entrance of the 
Bois de la Cambre, the green wood where 
their first vows and promises of love had 
been exchanged. Annie made no inquiries, 
unless it were by her timid eye. " To-day 
must decide the destiny of our lives," said 
Claude, hurriedly. " Let it be done in the 
sweet spot where first we talked of love." 
He assisted his companion to alight, and 
dismissing the carriage with some directions, 
which Annie did not hear or notice, returned 
to her, and taking her passive hand, led her 
into the green alley in silence, and on, until 
they reached the well-remembered spot, in 
which stood the tree, whereon he had carved 
the initials of Annie Sherwood. " Let us 
sit down," said he. And Annie silently 
obeyed ; but no word was spoken for some 
minutes. Then Claude said, abruptly, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 49 

" Annie !" She looked up timidly in liis 
face. " Annie, have you dreamt sometimes 

of ; have you wished to see Italy — Co- 

rinne's Italy?" 

" Oh, so often, Claude ! so very often !" 
"With me, dearest? with your own 
Claude ?" said he, yet more tenderly folding 
her in his circling* arm. And Annie only 
replied by happy smiles and blushes ; and as 
he gazed on her admiringly, Claude compared 
that soul-breathing face with the beauty of 
the women the world admires, and proudly 
thought how much hers exceeded. He went 
on drawing lovely pictures of the land of 
Dante, of Tasso, and of Petrarch, and of the 
happy hours they would spend there together, 
forgetting the world, by the world forgotten. 
And Annie listened to Claude's eloquent 
words, as the devotee would listen to the 
eloquent priest's pictures of his dawning 
Heaven ! 

While talking of coming joy, Claude was 
not unmindful of the past trials and suffer- 
ings of his beloved. He recounted them 
with indignant vehemence — spoke of the joy 

VOL. III. E 



50 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

of her emancipation from the yoke of the cold- 
hearted Lady Adelaide, whom he despised 
too much to abhor ! " But that bitterness 
is past — all past," murmured Annie ; " long 
since I cast away such thoughts. I am t 
happy for resentment — too happy not to 
be at peace with all the w r orld. But for 
haying borne that yoke I should never 
have seen you, and should have lived and 
tlied without ever having known and loved 
Claude l" 

" Then you would have known and loved 
a better man, Annie, one who would better 
have merited your devotion!" said Claude, 
sadly. 

" Never ! never !" said Annie, enthusiasti- 
cally. 

" Thanks, dearest one ! thanks for all your 
love!" said Claude, warmly; "thanks lor 
letting me know that low's extent. I be- 
lieve — nay, I am sure — that it is capable 
of of any sacrifice for my happiness." 

"Any," said Annie; "any but that of 
honour I" 

" Honour !" repeated Claude, in a doubting 



ANNE SHERWOOD* 51 

tone ; " honour ! I long worshipped the 
divinity the world had set up, and now, now 
I know it is a false God !" 

"Why?" asked Annie's frightened look, 
for her lips could not frame a question. 

" Because it mars our happiness," replied 
Claude. " I mean it would mar it, could we 
not learn to live above the cold, heartless 
world's opinion — to live, dearest, in that 
Heaven of love, which sees Earth's misty 
vapours floating beneath its footstool, 
innoxiously to itself, because they are too 
gross to enter there !" Claude was looking 
up at the sky ; he did not note the vague 
shadows which passed over the face that lay 
nestling in his bosom. He was dreaming : 
he did not feel the momentary start of the 
slender form he held imprisoned in his arms : 
he saw not, as he went on describing the 
happiness that he and Annie were to enjoy 
so soon together, in the land of art and 
romance — he saw not that love and hope and 
joy, and all that makes woman's life beau- 
tiful, were going out, one by one, in Annie's 
face, like stars that leave a sky of unmingled 

e 2 



52 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

cloud behind them, the darker because their 
light once shone. No ; Claude Douglas saw 
not this, and he finished by calling on the 
holy Heaven to witness the eternity of his 
love, adding, " I shall never marry." 

Annie did not start at those words, nor 
change colour ; no, they had been gradually 
coming upon her. She did not shrink from 
Claude's sheltering arms ; no, she lay in them 
still, quite silent and passive, her head still 
bent upon the bosom that was to be its 
pillow of rest through life. She smiled, 
and her smile looked wondrously bright, and 
her eyes glittered like jewels through her 
dark hair, which Claude's hand had dis- 
hevelled. " Es-tu contente ? Es-tu heureust . 
mon ange ?* whispered Claude in his softest 
voice. 

" Oh, yes ! so, so happy !" replied Annie. 

" Now, then, all is decided. I knew, I 
was sure you loved me too well not to be 

superior to the weakness of M And here 

Claude paused : he did not look at Annie; 
his brow burst as if on lire, burnt with shame 
and remorse. He was not a bad man • to 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 53 

act the villain was new to him ; he must 
grow accustomed to crime, to endure the 
aspect of his own evil deeds. Yet he was 
exulting in his success, triumphing in having 
Avon such a devoted love ; but he pitied his 
victim, and felt a shade of disappointment, 
to find her less pure than he had dreamed, 
and willing to accompany his wandering 
steps with any name short of that of wife. 
But Claude determined to banish these lin- 
gering regrets, and to forget all but their 
mutual love. 

Once, ere they turned and left the wood, 
the lovers looked back on the spot they had 
quitted. A moment Claude looked serious, 
and even sad; the instant after he laughed 
with, the gaiety of a schoolboy ; then, with 
all the versatility of a true Frenchman, 
changing to serious tenderness again, lie 
threw himself on his knees before Annie, and 
kissing both her hands, fervently swore to 
devote himself to her happiness for ever. And 
as Claude there knelt, Annie bent over him, 
and pressed upon his forehead one long, lin- 
gering kiss, the first she had ever given to 



54 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

man, except her father, and twice she mur- 
mured " Farewell I" 

" Why do you say Farewell ?" said Claude, 
in a tone of surprise. 

" Are we not parting for to-day, my Lord': 
said Annie, calmly ; and looking him quite 
full in the face, as she had never dared to 
look before, she added, with a light laugh, 
" When we meet again, it will be under 
such very different circumstances, you 
know." 

" True," said Claude, joining in her merry 
laugh, " it will be so. Think of me — dream 
of me to-night, Annie." 

" Of whom else should I think ! Of whom 
else should I dream, after — after to-day a 
happiness !" said Annie. 
. " In three days," said Claude, as they 
parted; "in three (lavs you will be all my 
own. But you will write, Annie ? 1 shall 
hear from you to-morrow?" 

" You shall hear from me to-morrow, my 
Lord," replied Annie, as her cold hand glided 
from that of Claude Dou^la<. 

***** 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 55 

Annie Sherwood was again in her solitary 
chamber; it w T as already dark. A servant 
brought in a lamp, looked at her disordered 
hair, her yet more disordered countenance, 
and decided that she, the governess, had 
been " after no good :" that servant was a 
prophet, surely! " Thank you," said Annie ; 
and the woman put down the lamp and dis- 
appeared. 



"What have I to do with light now? 



;> 



muttered Annie, extinguishing the lamp. 
"" Is not my soul all, all darkness ? Would 
I could thus extinguish the sun that lights 
so foul a world 1" Annie fell on her knees 
by the bed-side ; to pray ? Alas, no ! she 
had no faith left in heaven or earth ; what 
idolater has, when the idol that has won his 
whole passionate soul falls into the dust and 
mire before his eyes ? 

Annie Sherwood's was not a nature to be 
heart-broken. She had too strong a will to 
be crushed by the unexpected blow that had 
fallen upon her; no, she was not broken- 
hearted, but hardened, hardened as the nether 
mill- stone. When morning broke on her 



56 ANNE BHSKWOOD. 

sleepless eyes, it found no trace of agitation 

on her face or in her manner. She was quiet 
and composed, — her plans for life decided. 
She had vowed in the depth of her humilia- 
tion and despair, to tear from her heart the 
last lingering memory of the passion that 
had been her crown and glory, and what 
Annie Sherwood willed she would accom- 
plish. 

Lord Claude Douglas impatiently awaited 
Annie's letter. On reviewing their late in- 
terview, some uneasy doubts had arisen in his 
mind, as to whether he was quite sure of her 
entire acquiescence in his plans. The ex- 
pected letter came ; with eager haste Claude 
broke the seal ; it was written in such a firm 
hand, such bold characters, as weakness never 
traced. 

" My Loud, — I believed you a man of 
honour; you supposed me one of tin «e sen- 
timentalists who think ' the world well lost 
for love !' We have been mutually deceived. 
The offer with which you have honoured me 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 57 

(the offer of your protection, I suppose I 
ought to term it), would no doubt be very 
gratifying to a less ambitious woman than 
myself; but as that would give me no share 
in your title, and your fortune is, I believe, 
inferior to that of Colonel Annesley, w T ho 
has offered me his name, and a respectable 
position in society, I trust you will hold me 
excused for preferring my substantial interest 
to — what shall I say ? Disgrace ? no, for 
disgrace is already mine, since I have already 
listened to a proposition which, probably, no 
man makes to any woman, unless he believes 
her previously lost ! 

" I hope you will at least give me credit 
for frank dealing now, however much you 
may formerly have misconstrued my senti- 
ments. I am in a truth- speaking humour at 
present, my Lord, and must freely tell you that 
I regret nothing in Lord Claude Douglas, 
except that part of himself which he deems 
too costly to bestow upon me. Should I not 
accept Colonel Annesley's honourable pro- 
posals, it will simply be that something more 



58 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

advantageous will present itself. A person 
in my position is obliged to be mercenary, 
bon are, malgre. 

" I have the honour to be, my Lord, 
" Your Lordship's very humble servant, 

"Anne Sherwood." 
"September 30th, 185—/' 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 59 



CHAPTEE V. 

The time arrived for Annie to leave Brussels, 
to leave the Curzons, and to see the face of 
Claude Douglas no more. Her preparations 
were few ; she would not permit herself to 
look round, or to take a farewell of spots 
that would have been so dear to memory, 
could the last few days have been blotted 
out. 

In the interim, several letters had been 
brought to Annie, of which she had only 
read the superscription, in order to return 
them immediately, and unopened, to the 
writer. Perhaps it would have been well 
had she looked into them ; there might have 
been contrition — repentance — a wish to make 
reparation therein testified; there might have 
been something: written there that would 
have taught even Annie Sherwood to relent, 
by softening her pride. Perhaps all this 



60 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

was there ; but had it been, and had Annie 
known it, then her destiny would have been 
unaccomplished. 

She had passed Claude Douglas in the 
street, in the public promenade, with so 
cold and unmoved a countenance, that she 
seemed to have forgotten herself to stone. 

Colonel Annesley had indeed made Annie 
a bond fide offer of his withered hand, and 
his seventy frozen winters. She hated and 
despised the hoary-headed "roue' beyond 
expression ; but she would now marry him — 
marry him at any cost, at the cost of life 
and reason, rather than allow Lord Claude 
to suppose that she felt an}- lingering ten- 
derness for him. So Annie wrote, and 
formally accepted the old man's offer : he 
eagerly proposed to follow her immediately 
to London, where the marriage would be 
solemnized. 

Colonel Annesley was a man who dared 
to justify all he dared to do. He would 
have been glad indeed to dispense with the 
ceremony of leading the dependent of Lady 
Adelaide Curzon to the altar; but as that 



ANNE SHERWOOD. Gl 

appeared to be a point not likely to be 
yielded in the capitulation, the gallant veteran 
did what best he could, and, putting a bold 
front on the affair, declared his intentions to 
Mr. Curzon, expecting to meet with much 
aristocratic surprise, if not a very warm re- 
monstrance ; but, strange to say, Mr. Curzon, 
on the contrary, congratulated the elderly 
Adonis, declaring that " Miss Sherwood was 
one of the most captivating women he had 
ever knowm ; he had always appreciated her 
talents and merits, and he was happy to 
think that she was about to be placed in a 
position which she was so w^ell calculated to 
adorn," &c. 

Oh, Mr. Curzon ! Mr. Curzon ! your me- 
mory is very short, very short indeed ; but, 
on the whole, you are a well-meaning, good- 
natured creature, if you only dared to be so, — 
if your God whom you serve, the world, w r ould 
only let you be what you really are. Mr. 
Curzon went so far as to hint that he had 
some reason to suspect an attachment on 
Lord Claude's part to Miss Sherwood, and 
the Colonel, having so formidable a rival, 



0;2 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

mi^ht indeed congratulate himself on hifl 
conquest. The Colonel accordingly did con- 
gratulate himself, and became tenfold more 
eager in the pursuit of an object which 
another man, probably, coveted. 

The news of the engagement soon spread. 
Lady Adelaide smiled scornfully. She knew 
better than the world ; she knew that Annie 
loved Claude Douglas ; for one woman can 
always read another's secrets ; and she knew 
that if she gave herself to any other, it would 
be worse than death. She hoped that Annie 
really might marry the Colonel. She had 
hated her long, ever since she had begun to 
attract attention and admiration from her- 
self. She could not forsrive her having won 
Lord Claude's heart ; and for that she desired 
revenge — revenge she would amply have, if 
Annie really married the libertine old man, 
whose object would bo no sooner accom- 
plished, than he would weary of the idol his 
doting fancy had set up, and break it if lie 
could. 

Adelaide well knew, or thought she knew, 
that there had been some lover's quarrel 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 63 

between Lord Claude and Annie, and that 
that w r as stimulating the latter to a rash act, 
of which she would immediately repent. 
Yes, the sooner the marriage took place the 
better ; then Claude would be effectually se- 
parated from Annie ; and to effect that object 
had now become the master-passion of the 
passionless Adelaide's life. It made her cold 
heart beat ; it animated her marble form, and 
gave an energy to her countenance which 
had before been entirely wanting. Adelaide 
w r as now a much more striking woman than 
she had been in the calm repose of her pas- 
sionless beauty. How she was admired as she 
stepped along with her Juno-like gait, and 
her proud, glittering eye ! — how all admired 
her, except Claude Douglas ! He was still 
the Mordecai who refused to bow down to 
her, and Adelaide, stung to the quick, irri- 
tated at his insensibility, gloried in his 
rupture with the woman he loved, and vowed 
to bring him yet into her bondage, whatever 
it might cost herself — at whatever sacrifice 
it might be accomplished. 

Lady Adelaide saw Claude's melancholy 



04 ANNS SHERWOOD. 

and dejected countenance, and, under pre- 
tence of sympathizing with his supposed 
cares, drew him constantly to her house. 
He eagerly accepted her pressing invitations, 
but it was in the hope of meeting and con- 
versing with Annie. That object was never 
accomplished ; but so skilfully were the 
measures of Adelaide taken, so artfully did 
she adapt herself to his humour, that, forgetful 
of his late aversion to her selfish character, 
and soothed unconsciously by her delicate 
flatteries, he at last grew so accustomed to 
those daily visits, that he went unsolicited. 
Anything was better than society which had 
become a weariness, or solitude, which was 
a yet greater burden. Moreover, he could 
not be insensible to the fact, that whenever 
he entered, Adelaide's eyes lit up with un- 
wonted animation, and that her reception of 
him was such as she never accorded to any 
other £uest : and then she always yielded 
her opinions to him, however contrary they 
might previously have been. How could 
Lord Claude be other than pleased and 
flattered ! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 65 

And Adelaide — unshielded as she was by 
the holy love that should be as an atmo- 
sphere round a wife and mother, — Adelaide, 
who had lived for herself alone : was there not 
some danger that she w^ould insensibly be- 
come interested in the dangerous game which 
she had begun, for her amusement? No,. 
for her mortified vanity — for her revenge ! 

Unsuccessful in his advances towards a 
reconciliation with Annie, Claude Douglas* 
imagined he might pique her jealousy into- 
that w x hich submission on his part could not 
accomplish. So he, too, carried on a dan- 
gerous game, and daily his assiduities towards 
Lady Adelaide became more conspicuous. 
" Vous jouez avec le feu ! ■ something whis- 
pered every now and then ; but he laughed 
at the inward monitor, and went on. 

Lord Claude was told of Annie Sherwood's 
engagement : he heard it with scornful 
doubt, and even when Mr. Curzon confirmed 
the report to him, saying that Colonel An- 
nesley himself was his informant, he merely 
replied that the old roue was a " vantard" 
who was vainly trying to raise the ghosts of 

VOL. III. F 



06 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

loves buried in the last century. Believe 
Annie Sherwood was going to marry that 
doting old man ! Of course, Claude would 
not. He knew Annie loved him devotedly, 
whatever she might write, whatever she 
might say. Offended, wounded she might 
be; but still she loved him. His passion was 
increased by the very spirit she had shown ; 
he knew that they would be reconciled, 
and he was ready now to make some sacri- 
fice to purchase that reconciliation, but, 
entreaties and submission having failed, he 
would win her back by alarming her jealous 
fears. 

Mr. Curzon was strangely blind to the 
fact which everybody else observed, that Lord 
Claude was flirting with his wife, and his 
wife something 1 more than flirting with Lord 
Claude. Husbands are often blind to such 
things, especially husbands who are satisfied 
with themselves, and so thoroughly satisfied 
as was Mr. Curzon. 

Something occurred to detain the Cm 
in Brussels beyond the time anticipated for 
their departure. Anni<' B engagement hi 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 07 

expired ; she determined to proceed to Eng- 
land alone. 

A coach stood at the door to convey the 
governess from the Curzons' inhospitable 
mansion. A respectable-looking woman was 
seated in the conveyance ; it was a poor 
French servant, to whom Annie had shown 
some kindness, and whom she had engaged 
to attend her on her journey, as a sort of pro- 
tection from the slander which she knew was 
likely to assail her from those she was about 
to leave. The luggage was already placed 
on the coach. 

Some one knocked at the drawing-room 
door. " Come in," said Lady Adelaide. Lord 
Claude was seated beside her, only on a lower 
chair. He was engaged in holding a skein 
of silk for Lady Adelaide, which her white 
fingers were disentangling and winding. 
Annie Sherwood walked in: her step was 
firm, her colour high but unvarying, and 
her breath equally drawn ; there was no trace 
of agitation in her face. 

Directly opposite to her stood Claude, his 
countenance agitated by emotion : in his con- 

f 2 



68 ANN!. SHERWOOD. 

fusion lie had started up, and dropped Lady 
Adelaide's silk. Adelaide, too, was agitated; 
Annie, the only one of the three unmoved. 
"My engagement has expired, Lady Ade- 
laide," said Annie, composedly. "I ha 
come to remind you that it has, in case you 
should have forgotten the circumstance." 

" It is not the usual hour for the children 
to walk," said Lady Adelaide, coldly, and 
glancing at Annie's dress, without noticing 
her remark. 

"No; but my charge has expired. 1 am 
leaving." 

" Impossible, Miss Sherwood !" said Lady 
Adelaide, hauffhtilv. " You must remain 
three weeks longer, till I can suit myself in 
London." 

" 1 am sorry I cannot oblige you." 

" Oblige me ! You must have taken Leave 
of your senses ! Oblige me ! Go and attend 
to your duties, Miss Sherwood, and let me 
have no further interruption. 

Claude opened his lips to speak; he was 
advancing towards Annie, his face flushed 
and agitated ; he saw the woman he lov 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 69 

insulted and oppressed; impulsively he would 
have rushed to her with shelter and protec- 
tion ; he forgot that he had forfeited all right 
to offer her either ; but Annie, who saw his 
intention, remembered, and repulsed him 
with a look of withering contempt. " I re- 
peat once more, Lady Adelaide," said she, 
calmly, " I have no further duties to per- 
form in your house. Such as I have had, I 
have faithfully discharged; but it is over 
now." 

" Leave the room, leave it instantly!" cried 
Adelaide, passionately. She could not bear 
the look of mingled love, penitence, and 
sorrow, that Claude bent on Annie. Could 
she have retained her, to torture her jealous 
love, by seeing Lord Claude at her feet, she 
would have done it ; if that was not to be, 
she might go. 

" Go !" repeated Adelaide. " You are no 
fitting inmate for a respectable house ! You 
can apply to the housekeeper for your wages 
— your salary." 

" Annie, Annie !" exclaimed Claude, again 
approaching, "hear me !" 



70 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" If you are disposed for a dramatic re- 
hearsal with that consummate actress, my 
Lord," exclaimed Adelaide, " I must request 
that it is not in my presence!" And while she 
spoke, her beautiful face lost all its beauty, so 
livid it was with rage. 

" My Lord," said Annie, with a cold dignity, 
which made Claude, despite himself, draw 
back again, " my time and thoughts are so 
occupied by my approaching marriage, I have 
really none for sentimentality. Perhaps 
when I am a married woman, I shall find 
leisure and inclination for flirtation, accordii 
to the fashion." So saying, she turned away 
with a freezing smile, that pierced more than 
her words. 

" What is this? what does this mean?" 
exclaimed Mr. Curzon, who stopped egress 
by the door. 

"Simply this, that I, this day, throw off 
the heavy yoke of servitude, Mr. Curzon, and 
am leaving your house." 

" But I hoped — I thought you were to 
accompany us to England, Miss Sherwood." 

" My engagements do not permit it, as 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 71 

your departure is delayed. I am leaving this 
moment." 

" I am sorry, extremely sorry !" said Mr. 
Curzon. 

" I hope you will nevertheless hold me 
excused for sharing that sentiment, for I am 
very glad !" said Annie. " My conveyance 
is at the door. Farewell, Lady Adelaide ! 
farewell, Mr. Curzon ! To Lord Claude 
Douglas, I believe I have never been formally 
introduced; nevertheless I have great plea- 
sure in wishing him also a last farewell !" 

" But your sal I mean what we are 

indebted to you ?" said Mr. Curzon. 

" Give it to the poor, if you please !" said 
Annie. 

Mr. Curzon politely offered her his hand. 
Claude would have rushed after her hastily- 
retreating footsteps, but Adelaide detained 
him by grasping his arm. " Not unless you 
would have me die !" she gasped. 

The coach dashed on. Annie Sherwood's 
calm, quiet face remained immoveable, except 
for the contemptuous smile that parted he 
lips. 



72 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Mr. Curzon stood on the steps, looking 
after the governess. As she swept by the 
windows, she saw Adelaide lying, perhaps 
insensible, in the arms of Lord Claude 
Douglas. 

At the corner of the Rue Ducale, looking 
very pleased and satisfied, stood Colonel 
Annesley, watching the departure of his 
betrothed. He was arrayed more than ever 
in the bravery of juvenile fashion. " Au 
revoir /'' exclaimed the Colonel, kissing his 
hand to Annie. She smiled, bowed, and 
looked pleased and happy. 

Mr. Curzon's last words to Annie Sher- 
wood had been, " I hope that every happi- 
ness awaits you, and that you will reckon me 
among your friends, Miss Sherw r ood. What- 
ever may have occurred to render your resi- 
dence with us at times painful, I trust you 
will acquit me of taking any share in what 
may have distressed you." 

Oh, Mr. Curzon ! what a different effect 
your w r ords had to that intended! Annie 
Sherwood well knew they were not intended 
for her, but for the future Mrs. Annesley, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 73 

and she despised your meanness. No, no ; 
they were never meant for your humble de- 
pendant, whom you had so long regarded as 
something too abject to notice, as you would 
notice your groom, your horse, or your hound, 
and whom your condescending patronage 
would have insulted, even beyond your 
oppressive haughtiness, had she not despised 
your understanding too heartily to resent its 
little emanations ! 

A few days before her departure, Annie 
ha,<£ written to her sister, the sole remaining 
[ ; nk between her and Heaven — 

" My Ellen, my own dear Ellen ! the only 
loved object that I have on earth ! I write 
to tell you, in a few brief words, that I am 
just going to be married. Don't be sur- 
prised, nor pained, that I bid neither you, 
the sister of my soul, nor your husband, to 
the wedding. As soon would I call down 
one of the pure spirits from the eternal 
throne to witness my marriage — for it is an 
unholy one, a most unholy one ! Oh, Ellen ! 
I am marrying, not for love, but for hatred 
and revenge ! I fancy I see you shudder — 



74 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

fancy that I see your pure face flush with 
sudden shame and sorrow! Stay, I will not 
torture you further. Listen to the brighter 
side of the story. 

" My intended is rich, generous, and a 
gentleman in mind and manner. Moreover, 

he is easy-tempered, and But no more ! 

I cannot go on enlarging on his portrait. 
Yon must not see him till all is over. No, 
you must not see him then, or you would 
despise me for an act to which I have been 
goaded by misery and despair. It is useless 
to remonstrate with me, Ellen : the die i - 
cast. You will not hear from me again till 
I sign the name of Annesley'" 



ANNE SHERWOOD, 75 



CHAPTER VI. 

A fine gentleman (according to the Addi- 
sonian and Steel notion of a fine gentleman) 
was Colonel Annesley on his wedding morn- 
ing, which happened to be his seventy-first 
birth- day, a circumstance which he thought 
it advisable to keep from general knowledge, 
still more from the knowledge of his bride ; 
so he wished himself many happy returns of 
the day, and did without the congratulations 
and good wishes of his friends, except as far 
as his marriage was concerned. His person, 
which had been positively handsome half a 
century before, was about as carefully 
adorned as that of the all- conquering Mr. 
Congreve must have been, when he was 

determined on making "pious Selina" a 
sinner. The fashion of the Colonel's adorn- 
ment, if not as bygone as that of Mr. 
Congreve, was certainly not more modern 



76* ANNE SHERWOOD. 

than the costume of Beau Brummell would 
be, could he now appear at St. James's ; 
still it was that of a young man. The 
gallant gentleman's manners were exactly 
those of a well-bred Chesterfieldian scholar : 
and but for the rakish expression of his faded 
eyes, which had been blue, and now were 
washed-out colour, lie would have been still 
an agreeable reminiscence of times and 
things extinct. 

Colonel Annesley was very well read, espe- 
cially in the Shenstonian school of poetry, 
and was particularly fond of repeating such 
quotations as — 

" She. gazed as I slowly withdrew, 
My path I could scarcely discern ; 
So sweetly she bade me adieu, 

I thought that she bade me return!" 

Colonel Annesley had been desperately in 
love with Lady Adelaide Curzon, or, as he 
would have expressed it himself, " had ex- 
perienced for her a consuming flame!" 
Consuming it was, and. like the modern 
invention for smoky chimneys, had proved 
a self-consumer. Now, he was "passionni ' 



ANNE SHKRWOOD. 77 

(the Colonel spoke French, though with a 
very vile English accent) for Lady Adelaide's 
very antipodes ! It seemed scarcely possible 
that his bride (lie had been married just 
one hour) could demand from him any con- 
cession which he was not ready to make. 
He had been particularly liberal in the mar- 
riage settlements. He had done yet more. 
He had executed a will in Annie's favour, 
leaving her unreservedly mistress of the for- 
tune which he could not take with him, when 
he should lay by the bravery of his attire 
and perfumes, and lie down with the worm 
in the silent chambers of death. 

Yes, the wedding was over ; there had 
been rather a large circle of friends to ac- 
company the happy pair to the altar, consi- 
dering that St. George's had seldom witnessed 
such a mesalliance as that now formed 
between a man of family and fortune and a 
simple little governess. ~No doubt the friends 
had some reasons for accepting the Colonel's 
invitation to his nuptials. For the most 
part they had been civil to the bride, but 
some had marvelled much to see the quiet 



78 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

composure with which she had gone through 
the ceremony ; and all had been considerably 
astonished that she had displayed nothing 
approaching awkwardness or vulgarity. The 
carriage stood at the door, which was to 
convey the bride and bridegroom away to 
spend their honeymoon. Oh, what a honey- 
moon it would be ! It was to be passed in 
Italy, "Corinne's Italy," as Annie and 
Claude had been accustomed to call it. 
Annie was at last to see Eome, the glorious 
vision that had swept through the dreams of 
all her life, the one spot that had enthralled 
her vivid fancy so long, so unceasingly; and 
she was to see it in the company of the hus- 
band of her choice. Happy Annie ! 

Already the paragraph had been written 
describing the wedding and the guests at- 
tending, and the sumptuous dejeuner, and 
telling how "the accomplished and lovely 
bride" (of course she was lovely, now that 
she was going to be rich) was the daughter 
of the Eev. H. Sherwood, a name so distin- 
guished in the fields of literator The late 
occupation of the bride was not onee ad- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 79 

verted to ; the governess-ship must be sup- 
pressed ; that would have ruined the whole 
paragraph. But they named her as a 
daughter of genius, and author of the well- 
known and popular works, whose anonymous 
reputation had reached so high. Then they 
wound up by describing the tour winch the 
happy pair had already commenced. The 
paragraph was not to appear till the next 
day. It had been elaborately written. The 
Colonel had a great taste for those things, 
and its insertion was well paid for. 

The carriage, as has been already said, 
was waiting. It had been so for an hour. 
The bride had retired to assume her tra- 
velling dress, so had the youthful bride- 
groom. 

When the door was once shut and locked 
on Annie, and she stood alone with her own 
spirit, the quiet of her pale face sank lower, 
lower still, till it settled into a look of such 
despairing misery, that a demon might have 
been touched with latent pity had he seen her. 

Her wedding was over, and she who had 
gone so resolutely through the sacrifice was 



80 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

beginning to count the cost of a marriage of 
vengeance, and now she stood in the midst 
of her gaily-adorned dressing-room — a con- 
trast — oli, what a contrast to its airy elegance ! 
Her magnificent wedding-dress of rich lace 
was unfastened, and falling off her shoulders ; 
she had trodden on it, and the costly flounces 
were half torn off, and hanging in tatters 
like the sordid rags of the beggar; the wreath 
had fallen from her head, and her feet were 
crushing the delicate orange-buds ; while her 
long black hair, escaping from its confine- 
ment, hung dishevelled around her. One 
hand was supporting her falling dress, the 
other tightly clasping a diminutive locket, 
containing one jetty curl, which she always 
wore tied round her arm. 

The bride stood long lost in thought ; of 
what was she thinking ? of her coming 
honeymoon — her adoring husband? No, 
she was dreaming of a bright summer's day, 
in a greenwood's shade, a day too happy for 
mortality; and, as she thought of it, the 
stern expression other brow softened, and a 
mist of moisture passed over her beautiful 



ANNE SHERWOOD. SI 

eyes, while the rosy light of love flushed her 
pale cheek. Then suddenly she started, the 
scene had changed to an autumnal scene in 
the same wood, only it had lost its fresh 
greenness ; and she saw the sun set there, 
and the light of her own life go down too, 
never, never to rise again. As she thus 
thought, the miserable look returned, furious 
}}assion chased the love-light from her eyes, 
and tearing the locket from her arm that she 
had the moment before so lovingly caressed, 
she flung it into the fire. An instant after 
she plunged her hand into the burning coals 
to rescue it, murmuring, " Not yet ! not yet ! 
Let me keep it a little longer!" With a heart- 
breaking sob, she threw herself on the floor. 
Annie forgot she was married, forgot that 
she must prepare to accompany her doating 
husband to the land of song and romance, 
" Corinne's Italy !" And the impatient 
bridegroom, where was he? he had neither 
come nor sent to summon her. She might 
dream on, though he had told her to hasten 
— she might dream on, blessed or wretched 
though her dreams might be. 

VOL. III. G 



82 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

A loud shriek from a woman's voice, and 
confused rushing of men's feet aroused her ; 
it w^as not that she heard herself called — how 
could she answer to the name of Mil, 
Annesley? She did not feel, she did not 
know it was hers. She was not in her own 
new character at all. She was in Brussels, 
Lady Adelaide Curzon's ill-used dependent, 
not quite wretched, for Claude Douglas was 
going to unrivet her chains soon. Who 
was the Mrs. Annesley they were calling 
upon ? 

At length her door is besieged by the ser- 
vants — she must wake up ! Where was she ? 
what was the strangely splendid room in 
which she stood ? Her room ! Annie Sher- 
wood's ! the governess ! Oh, no ! that could 
not be. Why was she half-clad in that rich, 
disordered dress ? She could not tell ; she did 
not know. Something must have happened ! 
Had she lost Claude's locket, dear Claude 
locket ? Oil, no ! it is sate, and Bhe is fondly 
clasping it to her bosom ; only it is tarn is tied, 
and the glass is cracked. 

" Mrs. Annesley! Mrs. Annesley!" The 



ANNE SHERWOOD. S3 

door is at last opened. " Mrs. Annesley 1 
Oh, Mrs. Annesley, master's dead !" 

Annie hears bnt one word, "dead." 
" Claude, my Claude ! he is not dead?" she 
cries wildly, for she forgets there is any 
other life than his, and she understands 
nothing of what has happened, till they lead 
her where the old man lies, already stiff and 
cold, but decked out still as the bridegroom 
of the morning. Then Annie Sherwood 
remembers that she was a wife, and is a 
widow, and for awhile a deep awe settles 
upon her proud spirit. 

It appeared from the medical examination 
which took place, that Colonel Annesley had 
died of a heart-disease, accelerated by excite- 
ment : his death must have been instanta- 
neous. He had entered his dressing-room 
to prepare for the coming journey, w r ith a 
gay step and a smiling countenance \ after 
the door had closed, he was heard humming' 
a French air — 

" L'amour porterait-il des ailcs 
Si ce n'etait pour voltiger?" 

And he was never again seen alive. Alarmed 

G 2 



S4 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

at his master's not ringing, as he had said he 
would soon do so, the valet had ventured to 
knock at the door ; receiving no answer, after 
some time waiting, he entered. There lay 
" the gallant, gay Lothario," the splendour 
of his bridal attire strangely contrasting with 
the livid face, and the ghastly eyes still open, 
but dim and expressionless. 

* /jc #Jc 7|V ^ v~ 

The funeral followed quickly on the bridal. 
Mrs. Annesley recovered from her shock, and 
assumed with all speed and due propriety, the 
deep weeds denoting her bereavement ; with 
those weeds, however, she had put on no 
dissembling "mockery of woe." She expressed 
little grief for the loss of one whose character 
■could at best inspire nothing beyond a con- 
temptuous pity. 

Though momentarily awed by the sudden 
death of Colonel Annesley, the spirit of Annie 
was quite unsubdued, and while, with the 
utmost external calmness, she entered on her 
new sphere of action, her heart was a prey 
to the most agitating passions ; beyond all, 
jealousy. She was aware that the Curzons 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 85 

had arrived in London, that Clande Douglas 
had immediately followed, as if in the suite 
of Lady Adelaide, and she doubted not his 
being daily at her house ; that thought alone 
was torture. As for Claude Douglas, he con- 
sidered himself an injured man. 

One day, Ellen suddenly appeared before 
her sister. At the sight, every shade of 
stoicism melted from the face of Annie, and 
the two embraced in silent tears. " I have 
come to take you home, Annie ! You will 
not refuse to go with me, dearest ?" 

"Where is Eichard?" asked Annie, with- 
out seeming to notice Ellen's question. 

" At home. He wanted to come with me, 
but he could not leave his sick poor." 

" I am glad he did not come : I don't 
think I should like to have seen him now. 
He is too good a man to look on me with 
indulgence/ ' 

" He loves you, Annie, like a brother." 

" Possibly, and for that very reason would 
give me some of those coups, of which it 
is said, ' Faithful are the wounds of a 
friend/ " 



86 Aim SHERWOOD. 

" But you will go with me, Annie ? you 
will go with me home ?" 

"Why should I ?" 

" That we may watch over your health and 
happiness." 

" My health is excellent," said Annie ; 
"it has never been other. I think I am 
made of wrought iron ; nothing shakes me 
physically. And as for happiness, I have 
attained that which is supposed to constitute 
its foundation, wealth and independence. 
What position can be better, or more 
enviable, than that of a young widow with 
money, and spirit to spend it pleasantly?" 

" I cannot think a widow's position can 
be other than very mournful," said Ellen ; 
" but allowing it to be all you say, or would 
infer, there must be something still wanting 
to your happiness, dear Annie !" 

"True," said Annie, sighing, "a title." 
" A title, Annie !" 

"Yes, it is the next mark at which I aim, 
now I have secured a fortune." 

"Oh, Annie ! Annie! it breaks my heart 
to see you so little like yourself !" ex- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 87 

claimed Ellen, scarcely able to restrain her 
tears. 

" Come, come, Ellen, don't let us senti- 
mentalize ; I am a little changed, I admit ; 
but only as much as might have been ex- 
pected. You forget the ordeal I have gone 
through. Mrs. Maberly was the first to 
begin the transmutation of my metal. She 
effected but a little. Antonia's heartlessness 
did more," added Annie, with a choked voice ; 
" but it was reserved for Lady Adelaide 
Curzon and another friend to complete the 
transmutation. Behold me as I come forth 
from the crucible — changed, indeed — my 
former self annihilated; but not, no, not 
transmuted into pure gold !" Ellen wept in 
silence as she listened. "Do you remem- 
ber," continued Annie, "do you remember the 
French governess we used to meet long ago, 

in the E Square Gardens ? Not Julie 

Angelet (Julie was an angel, and only fit for 
heaven), but Clarisse. You know she had 
a trick of saying, ' Moi aicssi, f avals bon cceur, 
mais c est fiiiiP I am adopting her style and 
sentiments on a grander scale. Come, Ellen, 



^S ANNE BHERWOOD. 

no more tears ; let me be happy in my own 
way, and you, clear one, go hack to your Eden. 
I am not a pure spirit, to enter there. Go 
back, darling," she added, with all her old 
fondness of manner, folding her sister in a 
close embrace, " go back, and walk on in the 
blessed path that angels light with their 
smiles. My road, oh, Ellen dear, is jar, far 
apart from yours! But I am not quite 
wretched — not quite despairing. I have 
already won a name in the literary world. 
I have a refuge in fame. Then I have 
wealth ; it shall not be ill- spent. I will do 
with it what even Richard will approve ; 
and if I ever meet one whose ri^ht to 
it is better than mine — I mean any relation 

« 

of Colonel Anneslev s — 1 will resign all to 
him." 

"Ah ! now you talk more like yourself,' 1 
said Ellen, smiling; "now I begin to recog- 
nise my own Annie, and her generous heart. 
But you must tell me one thing. Annie. 
You used, long ago, to talk in your letters 
of a very charming person — a Lord Claude 
Douglas — and I always thought, I always 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 89 

fancied he would make you an offer. Richard 
laughed at me for it ; but I could not help 
fancying it still." 

"It was no fancy," said Annie, coldly; 
" he did make me an offer." 

" Why did you not accept him ?" 

" Colonel Annesley had more money," 
said Annie, carelessly. 

" Then I w r as wrong in one thing, — you 
did not love Lord Claude ?" 

" Love him !" repeated Annie, in a sharp, 
unnatural tone ; " what primitive notions 
you have, sister mine. I declare you re- 
mind me of Mrs. Reuben Butler. But you 
have never congratulated me on my literary 
achievements." 

" But I have been proud enough to read 
your books, dear Annie ; yet prouder to hear 
what people have said of them. I knew the 
world would one day do you justice ; that 
you had only to be knowm in order to be 
appreciated." 

" Of course," said Annie ; " and, as I told 
you the day we set off from Merton to seek 
our fortunes, we must all fulfil our kismef. 



90 AN NT. SHERWOOD. 

I have been appreciated ; you can never tell 
how well, Ellen, unless you could make the 
acquaintance of the friends I have just left, 
at least a little before my marriage." 

" And yet you told me how happy you 
were at the Curzons', only last June, 
Annie.'' 

"Did I? — Well, I suppose it was true; 
but like the fairy illuminations in Brussels, 
last September, which I witnessed, and en- 
joyed like a child, the lights have gone out 
in my heart. Poor Colonel Annesley had a 
very poetical imagination ; he used to Bay 
my spirits were like shooting stars, gloriously 
brilliant one minute, but the next exhausted 
and extinguished in their own light. 

" T should have asked vou about him be- 
lore," said Ellen, with much feeling, l> but 1 
feared to pain you." 

"Dear me, why?" 

"His sad end." 

"Yes, it was very awful; but 1 cannot 
say it affected me much beyond the natural 
compassion that one feels when they read 
such tilings in the newspapers. I was very 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 91 

sorry for him, very sorry indeed ; but as my 
heart had nothing to do with the marriage, 
I am not yet hypocrite enough to play the 
inconsolable widow." 

Ellen sighed deeply ; she sat holding 
Annie's hand, and looking sorrowfully into 
her face, as if to try and recognise the w T arm, 
generous heart that had once been hers. 
Then she talked gently, tenderly, to her 
sister of their lost reverend father, his saintly 
life, his martyr's end, sudden as Colonel 
Annesley, but in every other circumstance 
so widely different. Then she reminded 
Annie of old familiar scenes and faces, of the 
trials and privations they had known toge- 
ther, and how a gracious Providence had led 
them out of darkness into light. 

Annie listened, and as she listened, the 
tear of sensibility would sometimes start to 
her eye, and her heart would soften beneath 
the spell of the gentle, loving voice, as be- 
neath the breath of a divine melody ; but the 
effect was transient, and the hard, strong w r ill 
came back again all the harder and stronger, 
after feeling each assault of love and pity. 



92 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

A few days Ellen remained with her sister, 
constantly occupied in the endeavour of 
winning her back to a softer mood, and, if 
possible, leading her home wdth her, — to that 
home where she assured her the most watch- 
ful tenderness should efface from her mind 
the memory of past sorrow. But Annie was 
" like the deaf adder, who refuseth to hear 
the voice of the charmer, charm he never so 
wisely !" " I have not yet fulfilled my 
kismet" she replied, w^hile she cautiously 
evaded giving any details of the painful 
occurrences which had embittered her life 
and mind, and had stamped in indelible 
characters, " Marah," on everything that 
earth could offer. 

At length, sad and disappointed, Ellen 
returned to her pleasant home, where the 
voice of love and duty called her ; but she 
bore with her a wounded heart and a gravity 
of mien hitherto unknown to her irontle 
nature. 

Annie Sherwood turned back to the path 
she had chosen for herself, and neither by 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 93 

look nor tone betrayed the ruins within her 
dark and despairing soul ; yet inwardly she 
repeated — 

" And to be wroth with those we love 
Doth work like madness in the brain!" 



94 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEK VII. 

" A weary world 1" said Mrs. Annesley, 
looking up with what seemed the light of 
many smiles concentrated in one ; "a weary 
world ! No, no, it is full of sunshine and 
laughter!" She was speaking to a man 
whose features bore the impress of pensive 
melancholy, because pensive melancholy was 
the characteristic which he considered best 
became his sable looks and sallow complexion ; 
in reality, he had never known a sorrow. 
There is a mask of sorrow as well as a mask 
of gladness. 

It was abrilliant assembly ; Mrs. Anneslej 
was the fashion ; she had almost reached the 
zenith of her literary lame, and apparently 
that of her happiness also. She was wealthy, 
a reiirninsx o-enius, and was, io her own infi- 
nite astonishment, proclaimed a beauty ! No 
shade of sorrow was ever seen to pass over 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 95 

her expressive features, her eyes were ever 
brilliant, her pale cheek pale no longer, but 
flushed with a brilliant colour that seemed 
born of inward contentment. She had 
friends, oh, so man}' ! She that had been 
friendless, but for her child-like sister ; and 
she loved to gather round her a brilliant 
throng of wit and genius. Her literary 
soireeswere frequent, but rec/ierc/wes,2Lii& none 
seemed to remember, or trouble themselves 
to ask, what had been what the French 
would call her " antecedents." 

But in the midst of an admiring crowd, 
while strains of rich harmony filled her gor- 
geous apartments, and her gayest sallies 
enchained the ears of her auditors, the envied, 
admired, flattered Mrs. Annesley would sud- 
denly glide from her throne, and in the secret 
solitude of her chamber, might have been 
found on her knees, or stretched on the floor, 
the false lights of feigned joy extinguished 
in her eyes, the smiles gone from her lips, 
and her brilliant colour exchanged for a 
livid countenance of misery. Sometimes at 
such an hour as that, a meanly-clad woman 



90 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

in a brown merino gown and an old coarse 
straw-bonnet, might have been seen to glide 
down a back-staircase in the luxurious man- 
sion, to pass swiftly and cautiously through 
the hall, and out of the door into the dark 
streets. There she would stand with a 
half-bewildered look, pressing her thin white 
hands together, and looking up at some soli- 
tary star, with a vague wondering look, and 
as if the difference between its shining bright- 
ness and her own dark soul bewildered her 
brain. "Thou art bright!" she would ex- 
claim ; " thou art bright, oh, star, yet art 
thou cold and desolate. Thou hast never 
loved nor been loved with warm passion, 
and I — yes I, at least, have loved and been 
loved ! Wretched as I am, none can take 
the past from me — the precious past! I 
will see him once again ; I will see his sha- 
dow on the window-blind ! but hers — hers 
will be there too ! Oh, hate ! undying hate ! 
is there no respite from remembering her ! 
Could I forget her one minute, just one mi- 
nute, that his image might come back to me 
undimmed, unsullied ! But they are toge- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 97 

ther, always together in my despairing mind. 
And I mnst go on thinking, thinking, till 
thonght will grow into madness. Ah, me, 
it is madness now !" 

She went on swiftly throngh the dark 
streets, swiftly as our feet hurry on to some 
great unmeasured joy, till she stopt before 
the well-known windows of Lady Adelaide 
Curzon, in Gr Square. 

There was a subdued light in the drawing- 
room. A shadow fell on the blinds, only 
one, tall, slender, stately. But oh, joy ! She 
is alone ! He is not at her side, and for a 
moment hatred and jealousy are lulled. A 
carriage draws up at the door, and, coming 
from a contrary direction, a dark cabriolet 
arrives, with a foreign servant behind it, as 
well as a diminutive tiger. The carriage is 
empty. It has come to take some one up. 
In the cabriolet is a gentleman in black ; he 
alights with a slow, languid step, as if bound 
on a task not a pleasure, and stands some 
minutes with his head uncovered in the cold 
night dew, pale, thoughtful, and melancholy. 
A poor woman is standing leaning against 

VOL. III. H 



98 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the railings of the house. She suddenly 
darts forward, with clasped, imploring hand-. 
She is a beggar asking relief, it is plain. 
Beggars are at every corner of the streets 
in London. The gentleman throws her a 
coin. She shrinks back with a dejected 
air, and forgets to pick up the dole. But 
still she must be in distress, for her low, 
choked sobs speak eloquently of misery. 
Another time that man would have stopt 
— would have drawn from the wretched 
woman her tale of woe, and snatched her 
from misery. Now, he is bent on other 
thoughts. 

" Lord Claude Douglas I" said Mr. Cur- 
zon's voice, as he passed over the threshold 
of his home, and there was more of displea- 
sure than of welcome in his tone. 

" In proper person," replied his Lordship, 
affecting an air of gaiety. ki How is Lady 
Adelaide this evening?" 

" I really cannot say. I believe yon have 
seen her since I have !" said Mr. Curzon, 
with marked emphasis. "Good evening, I 
am rather in haste to get to the Hone I 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 99 

suppose Lady Adelaide has pressed you into 
her sendee for the opera!" Mr. Curzon 
entered his carriage, which immediately 
drove off, and Lord Claude, with a slow step, 
went into the house. There are two shadows 
now upon the blinds in the drawing-room, 
and there is a poor frail woman still clinging 
to the railings ; and as she fixes a charmed 
eye on the window, the two within are 
startled by a long, wild shriek from the dark 
street. There is a tragedy in that prolonged 
agonizing cry, the climax of a dark drama ; 
but they know not its history nor meaning. 
It is the mendicant that Lord Claude re- 
lieved. She is drunken. He has thrown 
alms to an impostor. A bitter smile crosses 
his haggard face as he repeats, " the world 
is full of cheats." 

" Her voice is like Miss Sherwood's when 
she acted," said Lady Adelaide, looking hard 
in Claude's face to see the impression her 
words made. 

" Yes, yes, when she acted !" he rej^eated, 
while his eye glared, and his face writhed 
with suppressed rage. Was that fierce anger 

h 2 



100 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

against lier — Adelaide? or was it against 
Annie Sherwood ? She did not know ; she 
did not feel sure whether she would like to 
know. But he was angry, fierce as a whirl- 
wind ; he did not act, all was real then with 
him. 

The cabriolet still stood at the door, the 
horse impatiently pawed the ground. The 
tiger, he was newly in Lord Claude's sendee, 
forgot his manners, and began to hum rather 
loudly — 

" I'd rather own that car, sir, 
With Peggy at my side, 
Than a coach and four with gold galore, 
And a lady for my bride ! 
The lady would sit fornenst me 
On a cushion made with taste," &c, &c. 

" I say, good woman ! you'd better be off, 
unless you'd like a trip to the police-station. 
What business of yours is it watching your 
betters, and making a disturbance ? Only 
let my lord catch you when lie comes out, 
that's all !" That was without. Within — 
" Come as you are," and it was rougrhlv. 
almost brutally spoken. " I must have a 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 101 

cloak ; let me get a cloak ; I shall be so cold, 
Claude !" 

" Cold ! nonsense ! You can't be cold ; 
I am hot, burning lava ! a furnace within 
and around me. Come, I say ; it is too late 
to think now ! An abyss before us — behind, 
hell and destruction !" and he spoke through 
his clenched teeth. 

They passed quickly down the staircase, 
out of the hall- door, and into the cabriolet. 
The beggar woman was still there ; she 
rushed forward; she tried to gasp a word 
whose utterance choked her, it might have 
been a benediction — it might have been a 
curse ! Lord Claude threw her no alms this 
time ; no, he threatened her with the lash of 
his whip. Once more the heart-breaking 
shriek ran through the dark night, and the 
quiet passers-by stared, as they saw a frantic 
woman rush forward in pursuit of the quickly- 
driven cabriolet, till spent and exhausted 
she stumbled against a lamp-post, and fell 
down. 

'i* 'e* *|\ V ">fT *w 

" You have deserted us for two hours, Mrs. 



102 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Annesley !" exclaimed one of her guest-. as 
the young widow walked into her brill iantlv- 
lit drawing-rooms. 

u Have I P" said she, slightly laughii _ 
" I had no idea I had been so long 
rude." 

" You have been taking a beauty sleep '." 

" No, indeed ; nor inventing a new sleeve." 

" Writing ?" 

" I have been to the play !" 

" Impossible V s 

u I assure you I have." 

" Who has had the privilege of attendii g 
you? 

" Ah, now you are cross-questioning un- 
fairly," said Annie, smiling; "but to tell 
you the truth, I have been putting the finish- 
ing stroke to a tragedy of my own." 

"Delightful! When will it be seen ? 

"I don't know ; it may appear before the 
critical world later, but possibly in a day or 
two. To make up for my inhospitable deser- 
tion, suppose I give you a little Shakspearian 
reading?" Everyone seemed delighted at 
the proposition. Some one askftd for "the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 103 

Merchant of Venice." " No, no, not that !" 
said Annie, shuddering visibly. 

" You are not well !" said a friend, 
anxiously. 

"Quite well, thank you," said Annie, 
" only rather cold. Be good enough to ring 
for a shawl. But to return to our play. 
Let us have nothing tragic ! I have just 
finished 'my dismal scene/ you know. 
I cannot afford to ' sup on horrors' a second 
time. Let us have the antipodes of tragedy. 
What say you to Midsummer Night's Dream?" 
So that was the chosen play; and Mrs. 
Annesley read, or rather recited, the varied 
scenes, as if with spirit attentive, and mind 
wholly disengaged from other thoughts. 
But now and then a shivering crept over 
her frame, and a sudden pallor suffused her 
cheeks. She said she had caught cold, and 
drew her shawl more closely round her. At 
supper, her spirits were even more than 
usually brilliant, and her cheeks flushed the 
deepest crimson; still the strange shiver 
every now and then ran over her. She 
would not consent to let her guests depart 



104 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

till a very late hour; indeed, riot till half 

the night was consumed. AVhen, at last, 

they retired, each and all declared her the 

most fascinating woman living, and — the 

happiest. Among her visitors had been a 

very young man, named Beresford, whose 

eyes followed her with a kind of wondering 

adoration. Towards him Annie displayed 
distinguishing kindness ; to him she spoke 

with a gentler gravity than was her wont ; 
and was day by day bending his plastic spirit 
into a shape that would make of him a dis- 
tinguished man. Annie had an affection for 
that youth — an affection like a young 
mother's — and he loved her with the ro- 
mantic enthusiasm of young life, a passion 
which would one day calm down into 
respectful friendship, one day when he had 
done reading " Froissarfs Chronicles" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 105 



CHAPTER VIII. 

An elopement in high life seems rather a 
matter of pleasurable excitement, breaking 
through the monotony of an unvarying round 
of empty conventionalities, than the subject 
of grave wonder or regret. The disappear- 
ance of Lady Adelaide Curzon from her 
domestic circle, had been first published by 
means of Miss Dobson, who had been " most 
shamefully left behind/ 5 Mr. Curzon was 
during three days ignorant of his wife's 
desertion. He had been absent, having left 
town the same evening it took place, without 
first returning from the House. Miss Dob- 
son and the butler, directly the fact was 
ascertained of Lady Adelaide's flight, and 
even before it was quite certain, concocted 
the following pathetic paragraph, which, 
from its interesting nature, of course gained 
immediate insertion in the earliest paper : — 



10G ANKB SHERWOOD. 

"Elopement in high life. — The fashion- 
able world will learn with equal regret 
and surprise, that the domestic happine 

of the respected Member for has be< 

abruptly interrupted by the elopement of 

Lady A C . The partner of her 

flight is understood to be Lord C 



D . The unfortunate husband is already 

in pursuit of the fugitives, who, it is sup- 
posed, have taken the route of Italy." 

Miss Dobson desired revenue for having 
lost her lucrative place of toad-eater, and 
the butler desired revenge on Lady Adelaide 
for her pride. 

Of course the paragraph created a great 
sensation ; it could not do otherwise ; but 
the commentaries usually wound up with 
" There will be a divorce ; Douglas will 
many her. She will be Marchioness of 
Brytrargh some day ; no doubt had an eye 
to it all the time! The opinion, however, 
was very general, that Lady Adelaide bad 
rather drawn Claude Douglas into her 
snares, than been led astray by him ; and 
those who bad hearts at all, heard with real 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 107 

pain of the first stain on the hitherto un- 
blemished reputation of the admired Lord 
Claude Douglas, who, in an age of fashion- 
able vice and levity, had always been con- 
sidered above reproach. It was a sad fall 
for the hero of so many imaginations — a 
sadder one for himself; for Claude Douglas, 
though a man of fashion, had strict notions 
of o/^-fashioned honour, and though a man 
of impulsive passions, had even held a reli- 
gious abhorrence of immorality until lately. 
He had never loved — never even admired 
Adelaide Curzon. The mystery of their 
guilty flight was a mystery indeed, and as 
such must remain. After a while the 
curious and the kind-hearted alike dismissed 
from their thoughts the man who had be- 
trayed his friend — the woman who had 
shared in the guilty treachery, and who had 
recklessly abandoned husband, children, and 
all the sanctities of home. 

-'- £<, Sir. *'jl _-'-. 2I1 i'.'. 

/,■» *|* /,* *,> •,- ^ 71* 

" The Honourable Mr. Curzon," said a 
page, throwing wide open the door of the 
drawing-room, in which Mrs. Annesley was 



108 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

seated. She was in a fauteuil, apparently 
engaged in reading a folio, which rested on 
her knee, but in reality her hands were 
clasped on her closed eyes, and her features 
were agitated by painful thoughts. At the 
name of Curzon, Mrs. Annesley started and 
changed colour, but ere the visitor entered, 
her countenance had recovered its usual 
serenity, and she received him with quiet 
dignity. 

Mr. Curzon was frightfully pale, and his 
haggard, distracted appearance would have 
struck any one with compassion ; perhaps 
Mrs. Annesley's heart was quite hardened, 
for she displayed none. 

" I have called to ask you a favour — a 
very great favour, Mrs. Annesley," said Mr. 
Curzon. "I hope you will pardon the 
liberty I take." 

Annie bowed in a cold, polite sort of way, 
which seemed to imply, " pray proceed." 

"You know of my — you have heard of — 
of that wretched woman's desertion of her 
home?" 

" My acquaintance is almost entirely con- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 109 

fined to literary people," said Mrs. Annesley. 
" I know nothing of what is going* on in 
more pretending circles, to which I have 
neither the right nor the inclination to be- 
long. I seldom read the papers, nnless the 
political articles." 

" Can it be possible that yon do not know 
— that yon have not heard that my wife, 
the mother of my children, has gone from 
me 1 — Gone from me ! flying with the heart- 
less villain Avho called himself my friend ! 
Yon shndder, Mrs. Annesley ; no wonder, a 
noble heart like yonrs cannot hear of such 
things without horror ! Yes, she is gone ! 
and my boys, — my poor boys. But it is of 
them I came to speak. Can you — will you 
take them under your protection till I — till 
I return, — if I ever do return?" 

" Assuredly I will, Mr. Curzon," said 
Annie. " But you, sir — (she called him ' sir 1 
from habit, he had once been her master) — 
where would you go ? — for what ?" 

" Can you ask ! you that know what 
pride and honour are ! To pursue that 
villain Douglas ! — To tear her from him ! 



110 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

and wash the foul stain off from my name 
in his blood or mine !" 

" Oh, for pity sake, pause ! — hesitate, ere 
you spill a life so precious — so precious 
still," gasped Annie, in a voice of such in- 
tense anguish, that Mr. Curzon, even in the 
midst of his paroxysm of just resentment, 
started and looked at her with interest, 
curiosity, and admiration, — yes, all three ; 
for he did not, he could not looLf into her 
heart, — he could not see anything beneath 
the surface. He saw only the pale, clasped 
hands; the face of intense, agonized emo- 
tion j the bloodless cheeks and lips ; the 
supplicating looks; and (oh, vanity!) he 
someway interpreted all he saw into an earnest 
anxiety for his own safety. The flattering 
assurance of Mrs. Annesley's regard, did 
much to soothe his agitated mind. " Ah ! 
if Adelaide had had a heart like yours," he 
sighed. " But I must pursue them ; his 
death or mine alone can satisfy the world's 
justice, or my honour." 

" Oh, no, no !" cried Annie, " it would but 
add folly to crime, and sacrifice a life worth 



ANNE SHERWOOD. Ill 

a universe of lives !" and, utterly forgetful or 
regardless of appearances, Mrs. Annesley 
poured forth such a torrent of tears and pas- 
sionate supplications, that Mr. Curzon would 
not seek a hostile meeting with Lord Claude, 
that she succeeded in wringing a promise 
from him to that eifect. 

Utterly unconscious was Annie of the 
interpretation which Mr. Curzon had given 
to her words, or her extreme emotion. Un- 
conscious, too, that ere he departed, he had 
thrice raised her trembling hand to his lips, 
only relinquishing it as he departed. When 
alone, she had but one impression distinctly, 
and she exclaimed several times aloud, " I 
have saved him ! I have saved him ! but must 
it be for her ? to live for her ? for her only ? 
No ! no ! let them both perish. I will recall 
my words ! Let him die ! Die ! my Claude 
die ! No ! no ! Let him live at any price, 
at any cost of misery to me 1" 

The Curzon boys came to stay some time 
with Mrs. Annesley. She received them 
kindly ; she knew exactly what would con- 
tent their selfish, sensual natures. She could 



112 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

not talk to them much as she would have 
talked to other children; they could not 
have understood her. Sydney was at Har- 
row, they said. "He would he sorry ahout 
mamma's running away, for she used 
to take him out in the carriage, and to the 
Opera ; as for them, it was quite a different 
thing. That nasty thing, Dobbie, was gone, 
so they would be rather better off for the 
change !" They thought Mrs. Annesley's 
desserts nicer than theirs at home, and her 
carriage had softer cushions ; besides, she gave 
them money, and cakes, and toys, and let 
them talk as much as they liked ! On the 
whole, it was rather nice that mamma had 
run away ; if she had not, they would never 
have visited Mrs. Annesley ! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 113 



CHAPTER IX. 

Mr. Curzox had interest : his divorce was 
hurried on, as never before divorce had been ; 
and while the business was pending, he was 
a grave, silent man, entirely withdrawn from 
society; indeed, almost invisible. During 
weeks, and even months, the motherless 
children were left under Mrs. Annesley's 
care, as much as if they had been literally 
orphans. Their father became the most 
attentive and affectionate parent in the 
world : he came to see them every day. They 
coaxed and wheedled him out of everything 
they wanted ; and in some way connecting 
their recent indulgences with their mother's 
disappearance, and Mrs. Annesley's protec- 
tion, they arrived at the conclusion that 
from her all their good fortune emanated. 
" I wish, papa," said the youngest, in Mrs. 
Annesley's presence, one day, " I wish, 

VOL. III. I 



114 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

now mamma's gone, you would marry Mrs. 
Annesley !" 

How Mr. Curzon started at those words ! 
How the old forbidding, haughty look of old 
times returned to his aristocratic feature- I 
The next minute it was all gone, and he bit 
his lip with vexation, hearing Annie's cool 
reply, " That would not exactly suit me, my 
dear j I have all the fortune I require, and 
if I marry again, I expect a title 1" 

Mr. Curzon looked at the ci-devant gover- 
ness, as if he had never seen her before, and 
remarked that " Diogenes might have taken 
his lantern in search of a disinterested woman 
rather than of an honest man !" 

" Disinterestedness does for the age of 
romance," said Annie. " Later in life, it is 
absurd to assume a sentimental generosity, 
which has probably died a natural death long 
before. Besides, a person in my position, 
and with my present character (for I sup- 
pose every one knows that 1 haw rubbed 
years enough against the world's rough 
edges, to become harder than nature made 
me), has attained to all the world can oiler, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 115 

short of rank. That must form the apex 
of my pyramid, which stands on the uncer- 
tain foundation of newly-acquired literary 
distinction. I think a coronet would, though 
a bauble in itself, have weight enough to 
steady the edifice. Don't you agree with me, 
Mr. Curzon ? I dare say you do." 

u Mrs. Annesley, you have the art of 
making every one agree with you I" said Mr. 
Curzon, sighing. He was rather disappointed, 
and beginning to think that the interest for 
himself, which he had imagined to exist in 
the mind of the fascinating widow, w T as more 
fanciful than real. Like all weak-minded 
men in similar circumstances, he was piqued 
by her coolness, and vainly strove to account 
to himself for the violent agitation she had 
evinced, when he had proposed following the 
guilty fugitives. Could it have been love for 
Lord Claude? No ! impossible ! The phrensy 
of jealous passion could never live under that 
habitually calm exterior, whose only alterna- 
tion was now lively sallies of gaiety. It re- 
mained an unsolved problem, and there were 
few problems which the mind of Mr. Curzon 

i 2 



116 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

was acute enough to solve. To say that the 
abandonment and degradation of the woman 
who bore his name had not been a shock to 
Mr. Curzon, w r ould not be true ; but his love 
for Adelaide had long before perished, and his 
pride was much more wounded by her deser- 
tion than his heart. Miss her he did not ; 
but he did miss the eclat which her stately 
beauty had thrown round her name, and re- 
flected upon his. His house looked naked and 
desolate without that grand, cold statue, that 
had walked off its pedestal, leaving nothing 
to fill the empty place. Yes, the house 
looked gloomy enough ; perhaps that was one 
reason that drew Mr. Curzon so constantly 
to Mrs. Annesley's more cheerful dwelling. 
There was something in her which made time 
pass smootlily and pleasantly, and in her 
society he sometimes forgot his trials. He 
could not tell in what her charm consisted, 
for he could not enter into her mind or 
nature; but still he had the capacity of 
being influenced by them, and to spend 
some time near her daily, became at last an 
absolute necessity. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 117 

It has been said the divorce was pending. 
At first there was no appearance of Lady 
Adelaide's being desirons to oppose the pro- 
ceedings. Of conrse there was not : even in 
the very depth of confusing guilt, Adelaide 
could calculate : her reputation was ruined. 
After the divorce, Lord Claude would be 
compelled to marry her ; the world's code 
would force him to do it. By degrees, she 
reasoned, — by degrees, she might reascend 
the social scale, and reach to something 
higher than the position she had forfeited. 
The old peccadilloes of Lady Adelaide Cur zon 
would scarcely be visited on the head of the 
wealthy Marchioness of Dryburgh. The 
sooner Mr. Curzon divorced her the better : 
she would certainly throw no obstacle in his 
way. 

But events occurred which modified the 
lady's views. To the inexpressible chagrin 
of Adelaide, the Marquis of Dryburgh mar- 
ried, and almost simultaneously Mr. Curzon 
was raised to the peerage, for no particular 
merits of his own, be it recorded, but simply 
to help forward some pet measures of a 



118 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

minister, which required casting votes in 
the Upper House. 

The Earl of Ellaby was as pleased with 
his title as a child with a new bauble, and 
held his head aloft in society, as though his 
name were as untarnished as his new laurels ; 
while the Countess (for such she would be 
till the divorce was accomplished) bitterly 
lamented the faux pas, which would only 
allow her the use of a well-sounding title, 
until her marriage should be dissolved. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 119 



CHAPTEE X. 

To retrace a few steps. It was a lovely 
spot on the banks of the Arno which the 
fugitives had chosen for their first retreat ; 
but to both it proved repugnant ; for where 
can guilt find rest ? — Not in Heaven itself, 
could it obtain entrance there. They moved 
on to Venice, by Claude's choice. Lady 
Adelaide was installed in a magnificent 
palazzo on the Grand Canal. She was sur- 
rounded by magnificence ; nor that alone : 
everything that could charm the most fas- 
tidious taste was hers, but she was discon- 
tented and repining. It was not repentance ; 
it could not be called sorrow ; but she had 
lost all her old, calm, proud bearing, and it 
was replaced by fitful ill-humour and jealous 
exactions. "While lavishing on her his for- 
tune, and devising daily some fresh indul- 
gence for her whims, the unhappy Claude 



120 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

fled from her society as much as he could. 
To him life was a burden, and but for that 
something unknown, — that terrible secret of 
an eternal world, — he would joyfully have 
rushed on death to avoid present misery. 

This will be thought an exaggerated pic- 
ture of a man of the world : it is a time one, 
nevertheless, of the individual here por- 
trayed. It was not a trifle to Claude Douglas 
to have survived honour and reputation, to 
have wronged a friend, and to have forfeited 
every good man's esteem, as well as his own 
approval. 

" I wonder when this tedious business 
will end !" exclaimed Lady Adelaide one 
day, looking up from reading a newspaper. 

" What business ?" asked Claude, abstract- 
edly. 

" Why, mine and yours ; both our busi- 
ness, I suppose I" said Adelaide, impatiently, 
and throwing the paper on the floor. 

"Surely you have not been reading it ?" 

" Beading it ! — of course I have, if by ' it' 
you mean Mr. Curzon's proceedings. But, 
do you know, 1 begin to fear that he is not 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 121 

in earnest, the affair is so slow. I wish it 
were over." 

" Of course, the sooner it is over, the 
sooner we may hope to be forgotten." 

" Forgotten ! Oh, that's not to be thought 
of yet, — at least, not till some one else makes 
dbfaiLv pas. By-the-bye, I hope you're pre- 
pared for heavy damages." 

Claude fixed his eye on the speaker with 
something between wonder and disgust. She 
read his meaning. 

" You look shocked, my Lord." 

" I am shocked, Lady Adelaide ; though, 
God knows, I have little right to be so, 
fallen as I am from all honour and " 

" Virtue ! I suppose you mean," said Ade- 
laide, with a sneer. " But it is quite worthy 
so weak a mind as yours to go drivelling 
through the world like a penitent monk, in- 
stead of justifying your own actions." 

" I cannot justify them ; they are unjus- 
tifiable !" said Claude. 

" Then make the best of them." 

" The best of them ! I am so wretched 
that the Arch-fiend himself might pity me. 



122 ANNE silKRWOOD. 

I, that looked and aimed so high ! Well, it 
is just retribution for my first step in evil." 

" Pray cease annoying me by cant, Lord 
Claude ; if there is one thing I detest more 
than another, it is that. The thing is done — 
must stand as it is. When I am your wife, 
I hope I shall teach you to he a little more 
manly and rational. We shall he more 
together than Mr. Curzon and I were. I 
mean you to get into Parliament and oppose 
mi. 

"More together! my wife!" repeated 
Claude, with an involuntary shudder, con- 
templating the possibility of being chained 
for life to that hard, stony woman. 

" Yes," said Lady Adelaide ; " I suppose 
your boasted honour Avill not let von escape 
from making what reparation you can for 
the ruin you have brought upon me. 

"My honour! — it is gone, dead, trampled 
in the mire !" exclaimed Claude, passionately, 
adding, more calmly, " Of course, Lady Ade- 
laide, if you wish to share my unhappy 
name, I shall comply with that, or any other 
request you may make — as a duty. Pshaw ! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 123 

I defile a holy word, as a sacrifice to your 
interests/' 

" I am glad to find you so complying, my 
Lord ; and, to mark my sense of your ex- 
treme liberality, the first request I shall 
make, the first sacrifice to my interests, shall 
be a very small one ; of course it will be ac- 
corded, after the declaration you have made." 

" Certainly." 

" Thank you. Give me the packet of 
letters that I saw you take from your desk 
this morning, and put in your pocket, when 
you went out into the gondola." 

" The packet of letters !" 

" Yes ; I suppose }^ou don't mean to deny 
having had them ?" 

" I mean to make no assertions on the 
subject. I believe you have no interest in 
the matter." 

" But I have the greatest — you shall give 
them to me !" 

" I cannot, — shall not !" 

" Shall not !" repeated Adelaide, in a fury. 

" No, shall not. You had better give up 
this foolery." 



124 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Do you mean to insult me, my Lord ?" 

" Far from it ; but I am wretched enougli 
without these petty annoyances." 

" You are wretched, Claude Douglas ! — 
then what do you think 7 am?" said Ade- 
laide, passionately. 

" Your situation is, of course, most pain- 
ful," said Claude, softening ; " nobody — you 
yourself — cannot feel that more than I do." 

" My situation, — nonsense ! that may be 
got over. But, after all I have sacrificed for 
you, my Lord, do you think I will tamely 
bear your shameful neglect ? Do you think 
I will sit here in this dismal solitude, while 
you are roaming over the water, like a sen- 
timental schoolboy, devouring that woman's 
letter for the hundredth time." 

" What woman ? you are mad !" 

" No, you would make me so ; but I am 
not the tame idiot you take me to be, if you 
think I will bear this any Longer. So, you 
thought I Avas hoodwinked — that I had never 
seen her writing, perhaps ! You Forgot how 
often I had paid her wages and had her 
receipt 1" and while Adelaide spoke, a gleam 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 125 

of malignant exultation crossed her face. 
" Come, yon may as well give them to me. 
I know every word of their contents already." 

" How ? have yon dared !" 

" Dared, my Lord ! Do yon threaten me ? 
Give me those letters, or yon may repent it !" 

" Yon shall never pollute them with a 
touch. " 

" Give them to me !" vociferated Adelaide, 
"or I will throw myself into the canal be- 
fore your eyes !" 

Claude's face writhed with passion as he 
hastily threw the contested packet into the 
fire, and forcibly holding it down, watched 
the consuming flame till the record of a once 
noble heart was reduced to impalpable ashes. 

" I am satisfied," said Adelaide, coolly ; " I 
knew you would hear reason at last. I did 
not the least want to have that mass of 
absurd rhapsody — I merely wanted to make 
you ashamed of carrying about with you 
sentimental mementoes of Mr. Curzon's 
mistress." 

Claude's face became livid with rage. 

" Unhappy woman !" he exclaimed, " will 



126 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

nothing suffice you, but bringing down every 
noble character to your own level ?" 

" Little need of bringing down a creature 
already so low !" said Adelaide, contemp- 
tuously ; "the very servants were witnesses 
of her improper conduct with Mr. Curzon, 
and saw the letters that passed between 
them, at the very time you also were pouring 
out your sentimental effusions to the vulgar 
little thing. It was well known, too, that 
she frequently met Colonel Annesley out of 
the house before she entrapped him into the 
marriage. I never could keep her in at 
night. If she was not your mistress, it was 
only because your offers were not liberal 
enough to tempt her avarice." 

"It is false ! all, absolutely false ; she did 
nothing of what you impute to her !" 

"She did all, and more, and you know 
she did." 

"I know nothing of the sort, and will 
never believe a word breathed against her. 
She is as much above you as the sky is 
above yon muddy water that defiles its 
reflection ; and but for my cowardice, — my 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 127 

guilt, — would never have been driven into a 
marriage which her soul abhorred." 

" Indeed you are growing quite heroic in 
defence of your immaculate heroine ! What 
should you say if I were to tell you, that her 
present intimacy with Mr. Curzon is the 
talk of the whole town?" 

" I should not believe it." 

" But if I had proofs — unanswerable 
proofs ?" 

" No more, Madam, no more !" exclaimed 
Claude. " The name of Mrs. Annesley is 
defiled by your lips or mine ! Oh, Annie ! 
Annie !" he cried, passionately, as he left the 
room, " you are revenged ! — deeply, bitterly 
revenged !" 

The splashing of oars was heard on the 
canal. 

" Where are you going ?" asked Adelaide, 
rushing down the broad staircase after Claude. 

" Going ! Nowhere ! — anywhere, I mean ; 
out in the gondola. I ' 

"I shall go too, then." 

" You had better not. I shall stay out 
all night." 



128 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" If so, I shall do the same !" and Lady 
Adelaide stept resolutely into the gondola. 

"Not silent rows the Adrian gondolier." 

The man had a melodious voice. He took 
that splendid specimen of manhood and that 
beautiful woman for lovers, and while he 
thrust the gondola from the marble steps of 
the palazzo, he began to sing a Venetian 
love-song. The words occurring most fre- 
quently, and given with the most pathos, 
were "Amore" and " Onore ;" and as they 
smote on the ears of Claude Douglas, he 
buried his face in his hands and wept like a 
woman, as he murmured, " Amore ! Onore !" 
" I have lost both ! — for ever ! for ever !" 

The very next day arrived the news of 
Mr. Curzon's elevation to the Peerage. It 
threw Adelaide into a fit of gloomy dis- 
content. Alternately she wept sullen tears 
and reproached Claude, not with her fall 
from high or holy principles, — not with 
her degradation in her children's eyes, — not 
witli the loss of husband, home, or kindred, 
and kindred love; but with the loss of 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 12& 

rank and honours. To complete her 
wretchedness and despair, came the marriage 
of the Marquis of Dryburgh. Immediately 
that the fatal intelligence (for such she con- 
sidered it) was communicated to her, she 
began with a sort of despairing energy to 
sift out means of opposing Mr. Curzon's suit 
for divorce, and of rendering that impossible, 
which she had so long and so ardently 
desired. She clung so wildly to the slender 
hope of being called a Countess, more, per- 
chance, than one would to whom the baubles 
and trappings of rank were entirely strange. 
Claude listened to her now with some satis- 
faction ; his only aim in life was to throw 
off the guilty burden he had brought upon 
his head, and to hide his sorrow and repen- 
tance in an obscurity that the world's eye 
could never penetrate. But vainly he clung 
even to such hopes as these ; he had not yet 
drained the last dregs of misery's cup, and in 
the meantime, each hour of life was torture. 



VOL. III. 



130 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XI. 

The Earl of Ellaby was free ; once more a 
fair mark for match-making mothers, and 
ladies en recherche for an establishment. 
Moreover, there was now the added lure of 
the title; and bets w r ere made as to who 
would succeed in carrying off the new peer. 
Lord Ellaby's attentions to Mrs. Annc-- 
ley were remarked on by everybody, before 
he had the least idea of remarking on them 
himself. Then the proud mans pride started 
as from a sleep ; he remembered what Annie 
had^been in his own house, too — something 
scarcely equal to an upper servant. He 
began to grow prudent, and gradually to 
diminish his visits, but habit is very strong. 
His weak mind had acquired that oi % leaning 
on Mrs. Annesleys judgment, as well as 
seeking consolation in her society, and ere 
long he returned as often as usual. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 131 

Lord Ellaby's children were still at Mrs. 
Annesley's, because they coaxed to be left ; 
and he, quite unaccustomed to their gui- 
dance, found that yielding to their wishes was 
a great convenience to himself. They had 
a governess with them, a quiet, meek crea- 
ture, over whom they tyrannized when Mrs. 
Annesley was out of the way 

Annie had not forgotten what she had 
been. She was not yet hardened enough in 
worldliness to wreak on an unfortunate 
dependent what she had herself suffered. 

And yet she was sadly altered. She 
walked through the world with as cold and 
heartless, if not as proud an air, as Adelaide 
had ever borne. Nothing seemed to ruffle 
the calm surface, except the electric play of 
intellect, or the flash of wit, and they were 
cold sunshine ! The heart said nothing ! 
Sometimes Ellen's letters would lie unopened 
for days. Perhaps that was not all from 
heartlessness. Perhaps Annie would not 
trust herself always face to face with that 
holy, loving nature, which would, despite 
herself, make the heart throb, and the eyes 

k 2 



132 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

fill. " I will forget myself to stone;" yet 
many, many were the secret conflicts with 
her better nature, ere unmixed evil prevailed. 
If something momentarily softened her, the 
next minute the remembrance of Adelaide 
would make of her a perfect Nemesis. 

" Ah !" she exclaimed, " she is with him 
hour after hour, day after day ! For her he 
lives ! together they will always live. Can 
I do nothing? positively nothing? Must I 
sit dowm in my wretchedness and bear it all '. 
— all ! She has no heart to break. Sorely 
I can find some means, some way to make 
her feel a tithe of what I have suffered. 
~No, no ! she can feel nothing — she never 
could ! And I — I am fast forgetting what 
feeling means. Her husband? No, she 
never loved him. I have wearied myself 

■ 

with his sickening company to no purpose ; 
she cannot be jealous of him. Stay! I for- 
get, he is not her husband now ! A light 
breaks in upon my mind !" and Annie rose, 
clapping her hands as if for joy, while her 
pale cheek and dilated eve spoke more 
suffering than gladness. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 133 

" Heaven is merciful — or the powers of 
darkness help me to revenge ! I will be the 
Countess of Ellaby, and wear the honours 
she has forfeited. That she will feel ; she 
Avill writhe to know me wearing her lost 
coronet. But I shall be weak ; I shall fail 
in my resolves, unless I tell myself over and 
over again, ' I had one treasure — one, only 
one in the wide world ! She took it from 
me — defiled — ruined it ! She — she made 
me what I am, and her work turns against 
herself. But for her, Claude would have re- 
pented of the base wrong — the outrage he 
offered me. He did repent — he did return ; 
and she, fiend — demon — snatched him back, 
and trampled me in the dust ! And at last — 
at last he held his whip, threatening, over 
my head ! But did he know me ? Yes, 
yes ; and she directed him how to strike. I 
will not hurt one hair of his head — not one ; 
but she shall writhe. Vengeance, I am all 
thine ! No more soft relentings ; no more 
coward pity ! My hand cannot reach her, 
but my hate shall l' " 

" Lord Ellaby, did you say ?" she asked 



134 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

eagerly, us a servant entered. " Tell him I 
will be with him directly." 

Before Mrs. Annesley descended to the 
drawing-room to receive her noble visitor, 
she had scrupulously adorned herself most 
becomingly, not with over-dress, nut with 
rich apparel, but with that noble simplicity 
which best became her intellectual coun- 
tenance. Never had she taken such pains 
to charm and captivate — never had her soft 
voice been so exquisitely modulated to ten- 
derness ; no, not when she talked of love 
with Claude Douglas in the green wood ! 
Never had her expressive eyes beamed with 
such feeling. Lord Ellaby had long admired 
her ; now he was thoroughly taken captive. 
Mrs. Annesley consulted him on a great 
many points, on which she averred that her 
own judgment could not pronounce. She 
appealed to him for abstract pieces of in- 
formation, of which she professed herself 
totally ignorant. She was so gratified to 
find he had read and appreciated her works, 
to him they must seem so light and triflin-. 
she had scarcely dared to hope for his ap- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 135 

proval. Then Mrs. Annesley took up and read 
a few pages of a new poem, and when she had 
finished, confessed that she had read it in 
the hope of luring him from the House that 
day. The House ! Lord Ellaby had for- 
gotten its existence ; all the peers, temporal 
and spiritual, might be consigned to Erebus 
for him ; and Mr. Curzon — no, Lord Ellaby 
pulled up his shirt-collar, looked sideways 
in the glass, re-arranged his curly hair, and 
mentally decided that he was still a very 
handsome fellow ! That day was entirely 
devoted to Mrs. Annesley, and the next, 
and the next too, and each one in succes- 
sion. 

" I am a good actress !" said Mrs. Annes- 
ley. " Ellaby is the profoundest of fools ! I 
half pity him, and wish I could arrive at my 
end without making his simple credulity the 
means !" 



13G ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XII. 

" They are still together, still in Venice, 
soon to be married, I hear. Did you ever 
see Lord Claude Douglas, Mrs. Annesley ?" 

" I have met him." 

" He was a very fascinating man ; don't 
you think so ?" 

" Oh, of course ! Have yuu read the new 
poet, Mrs. Wilmington ?" 

" Every one has. What do you literati 

say? 

" I think — I cannot answer for others' 

opinions — I think him ' un ange, mais an 
ange dechu ;' but he is really a genius. His 
misfortune seems to me, to have pondered 
Shelley too closely, copying the faults which 
corrode his style, till he imagines far-fetched 
images and impure ideas the height of per- 
fection. Still he is a bright star, though 
lingering too much on the earth-bound 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 137 



horizon, and every poet cannot be Hype- 



rion. 



" I have been reading your last book, Mrs. 
Annesley ; everybody is enchanted with it !" 

" Are they ?" said Annie, with real or 
affected indifference. " People are all going 
to see the Earthmen, and Azteks, and they 
are enchanted with them ! How do you like 
the new bonnets ? the papers say her Majesty 
wears hers on her head." 

" Here conies Lord Ellaby ! he is ex- 
tremely handsome ! how dignified ! Don't 
you admire him, Mrs. Annesley P" 

" What a question to ask of such a man!" 

" Ah, I see the report is true !" 

" What report, Mrs. Wilmington ?" 

" About him." 

" Is there anything new about Lord 
Ellaby? ' asked Annie, coolly. 

" Well, not exactly new ; they have said, 
for some time, that he was going to be 
married." 

"Oh, is that all? I have heard vague 
reports of the kind myself. We shall see. 
But don't you dance ? Shall I find you a 



138 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

partner ? Mr. Beaufort will be happy if you 
will accept his hand/' 

" Mrs. Annesley, indulge me, pray, by 
telling me who that beautiful girl was whom 
I saw here tins morning," said a young 
man, approaching Annie. 

" My sister, my younger sister," replied 
Annie, her face lighting up with its old ex- 
pression of tender, sisterly love. 
" But she is not here to night ?" 
" No ; she is rather delicate, and not fond 
of a crowd. She prefers the solitude of her 
dressing-room, where she may dream of her 
absent husband and children." 

" Husband and children ! can she be mar- 
ried ?" 

" Yes," said Annie, smiling; and she added, 
fervently, " Thank God, her husband is one 
who, like herself, lives above this empty 
world. You look surprised, to hear a poor, 
whimsical pleasure-lover like myself speak 
thus ; but I assure you I can admire what I 
have no intention of Imitating. My sister 
is an angelic spirit, and the happiest of 
mortals/' 



ANNS SHERWOOD. 139 

" I thought you were the happiest." 

" I ! Oh yes, of course, I am extremely 
happy, but quite in another way, you know. 
Pray excuse my leaving you ; I see a very old 
friend coming in, one whom I knew in less 
prosperous clays. Do you know Dr. Sinclair ? 
he is very, very good, but eccentric. I value 
him beyond everything ; he is the only man 
I know who ever tells me I am wrong ! Ah, 
-my dear Doctor, how kind of you to come !" 

" I did not come to see you'' growled the 
Doctor; "I came to see Ellen. Where is 
she? you don't want me !" 

" Ellen is in her dressing-room ; but I tell 
you I do want you. Just feel my pulse." 

" I shall do nothing of the kind ! I wil 
never attempt to prescribe for you, while you 
lead this life." 

" Come, come, Doctor, don't scold. I am 
going to alter my ways ; indeed I am, some 
day." 

" And meanwhile you're destroying your- 
self, turning day into night, and night into 
day ! I hear you dance till two in the 
morning, and sit up till sunrise, writing your 



140 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

trashy novels, that hav'n't one grain of sense 
in them !" 

" Yet you seem to have read my trashy 
novels?" 

" Yes ; like swallowing a bitter pill ! I'll 
tell you what — you hav r e never been good for 
anything since you went among those whis- 
kered foreigners. I knew it would come to 
no good, when you crossed the water ; I told 
you so, you know I did !" 

" Doctor ! Doctor ! you are really insuf- 
ferable !" 

"And you? What are you? An empty- 
headed woman, with all your boasted abi- 
lities, and your genius, forsooth. I say, 
what is that fellow doing for ever at your 
elbow ?" 

"What fellow?" 

" Why, that descendant of the Lumley 
family, of whom Adam was a younger son, 
that Curzon !" 

"Oh, Lord Ellaby ! Do give him his 
new title ; it is so pretty ! What is lie 
doing? really I don't know — shall we ask 
him ?" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 141 

"Annie Sherwood! Annie Sherwood!" 
said the old man, solemnly, his voice softened 
from his usual asperity. 

Annie started to be called by the old 
familiar name ; it brought back with it 
so many old feelings and situations ; half 
forgotten, wholly buried. " Don't call me 
by that name !" said she, in a voice of hurried 
agitation. " Do you remember when Ruth's 
mother-in-law says — ' Call me not Naomi, 
but Marah ?' Not pleasant, but bitter. 
Bitter things have been written against me, 
as they were against Naomi ! But come, 
Doctor, let us go and see Ellen." 

" You need not come; I don't want you % , 
you may stay with your fine company." 

" But I mean to come !" and Annie took 
the old Doctor's reluctant arm, and led him 
to her sister. " As kind as ever, dear Doc- 
tor !" said Ellen, with an affectionate smile, 
and putting both her hands into those of 
her old friend. 

" And so you came up to consult me, 
Ellen !" said he, very differently to the way 
in which he had spoken to Annie. 



142 ANNE SJJKRWOOD. 

"Not exactly," said Ellen, hesitating. "I 
came up partly to peep at Annie, and to coax 
her into spending a few weeks with us ; it is 
so long since we have been together !" 

" Very long," said Annie, with a deep sigh. 
*' I told you, dear Ellen, that our paths were 
wide apart." 

" Oh ! pray — pray don't say so, Annie ! 
Doctor, do — do talk to Annie ; do persuade 
her !" 

" I persuade her ! a very likely story. I 
tell you she's as obstinate as half a dozen 
mules put together ! I wash my hands clear 
of all her concerns." 

" No, you wont," said Annie, laughing ; 
" so you need not attempt it ; and what is 
more, Doctor, you will never succeed in 
making me angry with you. But pray let 
us say no more about my going down into 
the country. It is quite impossible for me 
to leave London. I have too many engage- 
ments there ; indeed, business oi % the utmost 
importance. Besides, rural life would not 
at all suit me in my present humour: and 
though T don't say exactly 'Oh, odioix. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 143 

odious trees !' like Lady Montagu's woman, 
I have no wish to renew my acquaintance 
with any other arborium than the painted 
one at the Opera. I assure you, they are 
done to the life, and one enjoys country 
scenes without getting sunburnt in going 
after them. A moment's truce, Doctor, and 
see what is the matter with Ellen." 

" Nothing beyond a little nervousness pro- 
duced by anxiety," said the Doctor. " My 
prescription for her is to give you up." 

" I believe you are right," said Annie ; but 
with so sad a voice and look, that it brought 
tears into the eyes of her sister, who threw 
her arms round her, and embraced her almost 
convulsively, while she exclaimed, " Rather 
would I part with life, dear as life has now 
become to me !" 

"No; she will never give me up!" said 
Annie, looking up at the stern old man with 
a gleam of joy and pride. " Come what 
will, I have always a refuge in Ellen's heart ; 
and while that is open to me, heaven's own 
gate is not finally shut ! I shall come to 
you one day, Ellen ; I shall come one day — 



144 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

I know I shall ; perhaps soon ; at present, 
you must leave me to a wayward destiny." 

" Well, I must be gone," said the Doctor, 
rising, " and of course Mrs. Annesley is 
going back to her fine company." 

" No, I am not going back yet," said 
Annie. " They will not be offended at my 
absence. They are nearly all literary people, 
or artists, and, like myself, dispense witli 
ceremonious observances. I often run away 
from my guests for an hour or two, and 
write a chapter ; no one thinks it strange. 
Don't go yet, Doctor ; pray don't ; it makes 
me think of dear old times to see you sit 
there beside Ellen ; only I miss the little 

parlour in N Street, with its clean, 

shabby furniture, and '' 

"A pity you weren't there now !" muttered 
the Doctor. 

" I say Amen l" responded Annie. " All ! 
I was much happier then ! Do you re- 
member, Ellen, the evening I brought home 
my first bundle of work from Wilson's?" 

" Ah ! yes," sighed Ellen ; ' k how happy 
we w r ere then, Annie !" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 145 

" Happy, indeed !" said Annie ; " though 
in tlie midst of poverty and privation. There 
is nothing absolutely heart-breaking in un- 
deserved misfortunes — troubles in which no 
self-reproach mingles. In privations such 
as those we endured, a little help, never so 
small a relief, seems a countless hoard." 

" I wonder what has become of the Wil- 
sons !" said Ellen. " The poor man went 
to prison. I have often thought of him 
since. He was so grateful to you for saving 
his child ! I don't think you ever heard all 
about what Annie did, Doctor," added Ellen, 
ready to burst forth with a glowing tale. 

" Oh yes, Ellen, the Doctor knows it by 
heart. You have told him the story twenty 
times over. Poor Wilson managed to get 
clear of his embarrassments, and is now in a 
flourishing; business in Oxford Street." 

" How did it come about ?" asked Ellen, 
eagerly. 

" Oh, some friend helped him !" 

" Who could it be ?" 

" He says it was done anonymously. He 
has never been able to discover his bene- 

VOL. III. L 



146 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

factor. No doubt it was some sinner labour- 
ing under the delusion that alms-giving 
atonement and expiation." 

" It was you, Annie ; I am sure it \va\" 

" Ah ! you think the description of the 
sinner suits me, then ?" 

" The act suits you/' said Ellen, fondly. 

" You see, Doctor, you can't hope to make 
Ellen give me up ! Fire and the sw< >rd 
would fail in doing it, as they fail in extir- 
pating heresy. Here she is, endowing me 
with all the virtues of a Dorcas," said Annie. 

"And you are always misrepresenting 
yourself, denying or veiling all the good you 
do, and magnifying every trivial error," said 
Ellen. " I want you to do yourself justice." 

" None can think more harshly of me 
than I do of myself," said Annie. " The 
other day, I was in one of the most desolate 
regions of this benighted city, trying to 
relieve the most aggravated wants of some 
of its inhabitants. In one of those dismal 
dens of A r ice and misery I met a good man — 
I knew he was good, by the unmistakeable 
character of his countenance. He seemed 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 147 

pleased to see a lady in such a locality — 
spoke of the good I might effect, and offered 
me a bundle of tracts to distribute in similar 
places. I felt constrained to refuse them. 
He looked hurt ; not offended, but grieved. 
Perhaps he thought me proud ; he could not 
guess that I refused, because I felt utterly 
unworthy to be the bearer of anything 
beyond mere physical relief to the poor. 
Poor, good man ! — he looked so sorrowful, I 
could not forbear turning back and telling 
him the truth. He smiled kindly at me, 
and answered, ' Thou art not far from the 
kingdom of Heaven/ How little he knew 
me, Ellen !" 

" Say, rather, how much better he knew r 
you than you knew yourself!" said Ellen. 

"'No, indeed he did not know me, dear 
Ellen ; nor do you. I had once good im- 
pulses, and a high sense of honour ; but I 
have verified that £ l'experience du monde 
brise le cceur, ou le bronze !' My heart was 
too proud and stubborn to be broken ; so it 
is hardened, like the nether millstone. But 
let us talk of something pleasant." 

l2 



1 4S ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Oh yes, do !" said the Doctor — " of 
Mr. Curzon !" 

" Don't call him so !" cried Annie, has- 
t ily ; " that name is hateful to me." 

" The Curzons were very unkind to 
Annie, " said Ellen, apologetically. 

" And yet she lets this fellow hang about 
her !" said the Doctor. 

" You are wrong to speak of him thus, 
Doctor," said Annie ; " Lord Ellaby is the 
most harmless creature living ; he has not 
wit enough to be wicked, and his pomposity 
rather amuses than galls those about him." 

4 'But I thought Ellen said they ill- 
treated you." 

" Not he," said Annie. " I was two years 
in his house before he took any more notice 
of me than he did of the scullery-maid." 

" Then it was Madame Juno !" said the 
Doctor. 

"Oh, don't— don't talk of her!" said 
Annie, with an involuntary shudder. " You 
proposed a pleasant subject !" 

" Annie ! dear Annie ! do tell me," said 
Ellen, when the sisters were alone ; " tell 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 14$ 

me, is there any truth in the report that you 
allow Lord Ellaby to be almost constantly 
with you f 

" And if it be true, Ellen, what then?" 

" It will strengthen the belief that you 
mean to marry him !" 

" Nonsense, nonsense, Ellen ! the world 
is doting !" 

" But you would not — surely you would 
not marry him, Annie ?" 

" I will think about it, and let you know 
when he asks me !" 

" Oh, Annie ! the very thought of such a 
marriage makes me shudder !" 

" Indeed, dear ! It has a contrary effect 
on me. It makes my heart dance joyfully ! 
You are unkind, Ellen, not to wish me a 
coronet." 

" Promise me, Annie — oh, do promise 
me " 

" To think over it ? Of course I will. 
Good night, dear child ; sleep and happy 
dreams ! I must go to my company !" 



150 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XIII. 

A wedding, — but this is not a joyous one. 
The bride looks cold and uninterested in the 
ceremony. The bridegroom has a knitted 
brow, and a sort of air which says, " I defy 
the opinions of the world !" while all the 
time he is writhing under the possibility of 
being ostracised. Yet the wedding has been 
splendidly appointed, and the guests are 
numerous. 

A year and a day are gone since the same 
bride stood at the same altar, and took the 
same vows. Death had dispensed her from 
their fulfilment, ere an hour had passed for 
their echo to die away. Would it be thus 
again ? No, no ! — the bridegroom is not a 
worn-out old man, but one in the vigorous 
prime of life and strength. The unloved 
bridegroom will cling to her through life, 
and perhaps see the grass grow green upon 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 151 

her grave. And yet she shuddered not at 
having made the sacrifice. She would have 
shrunk from nothing that could w r ring a 
pang from Adelaide Curzon. There is 
nothing stronger than a woman's hate, un- 
less it be a woman's love. 

A smile of dark meaning — a smile quite 
unwonted for him — passed over the face of 
the bridegroom when the irrevocable words 
were once spoken. He knows something of 
Claude Douglas's real love, and feels that his 
own wrongs will be avenged when he hears 
who bears the title of the Countess of 
Ellaby. 

Several friends, and a few relations who 
had reasons for obliging Lord Ellaby, were 
present, at his request. The reasons which 
made them consent to sanction the marriage 
with their presence were strong enough to 
induce them to show at least outward civi- 
lity to the parvenu bride, who w r as, never- 
theless, at the same time undergoing the 
censorship of envy and ill-nature. 

How well did Annie discern their 
thoughts ; how well she knew the remarks 



152 ANNS SIIEKWOOD. 

that were passing on her ! but how little did 
she feel the tiny stings that assailed her, 
whether from the dilated nostril of pride or 
the curling lip of contempt ! The calm, 
quiet dignity, which no one better knew 
how to wear, made her appear utterly un- 
conscious that any one was observing her at 
all, while it quite dispersed the preconceived 
notion that she would be dazzled by her 
elevation. 

*.- "I* ^» n* 

And now the happy bride and bridegroom 
have left their friends behind them, to carp, 
cavil, and criticise ! Lord Ellaby handed 
his bride into the carriage, entered, and 
seated himself beside her. For some time 
he seemed lost in thought ; woke up at 
last, and called her " Miss Sherwood !" 
started, coloured, and made a blundering 
apology. 

" It is not necessary to apologize, Mr. 
Curzon," said Annie, laughing, u tor Mr. 
Curzon you will always be to me ; nothing 
more nor less ! Miss Sherwood I shall 
always be to you; your children's governess, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 153 

once deemed unworthy of your aristocratic 
notice I" 

" Why will you recal such painful things, 
Octavia?" for by her second and higher 
sounding name Lord Ellaby chose to call 
his w r ife. 

" I will tell you when we get to Paris, 
my Lord." 

"What is this caprice for?" exclaimed 
Lord Ellaby, with the petulance of a school- 
boy, as Annie withdrew a hand on which he 
had sentimentally seized. 

" I will tell you when we get to Paris, 
my Lord," she once more replied. Then, 
with much the same look with which she 
had been accustomed to quell a school-room 
rebel, she handed a book to Lord Ellaby. 

" Be so good as to look through that 
book, my Lord. I shall be glad to know 
your opinion of it — when I wake !" and 
Laby Ellaby closed her eyes and slept ! 

The bridegroom did what he was bidden, 
very much like a child who had an appointed 
task. Only now and then he looked at the 
face of his companion, its firm, broad brow 



154 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

slightly knitted, its peculiarly cut lips, i 
chin, such as no woman ever had without 
possessing a most determined will ; and 
though he said nothing, his own face plainly 
-poke thus: "Humph! I shall not dare to 
say my soul's my own, I suppose ! But she 
is a charming creature, nevertheless, and 
born to tread on necks. Kot exactly hand- 
some, — but, how everybody admires her ! 
Then, what a mind she has ! How univer- 
sally her works are read. I wonder whether 
they will think she meant Fitzorme for me ! 
(Fitzorme was Annie's last and most charm- 
ing hero.) T wonder whether she did mean 
him for me ! Let me see ; she makes him 
to be in Parliament, and about my height ; 
dark, too, a little younger than I am ; but 
then I don't look my age, and she does not 
know it. Certainly she appreciates my 
talents ! Dear me ! it seems only y« sterday 
that she cut that piece out of the newspaper, 
with my speech in it! How many things 
have happened since then I" — and here Lord 
Ellaby looked sad and care-worn enough to 
show that he had really Buffered ; but he 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 155 

soon resumed his cogitations. " I wonder 
what she will say to it! (he meant Adelaide). 
If anything will touch her, my marriage will, 
though she never pretended to love me. 
And on him — on him my revenge is yet 
more complete !" — and Lord Ellaby actually 
gnashed his teeth at these thoughts. " Be- 
sides," he mentally continued, " I am re- 
warding the sincere attachment which Oc- 
tavia has shown me in a thousand ways ; and 
if she is a little coy, she only looks the more 
charming for it. In a day or two she will 
be less afraid of me !" Afraid of you ! Ah, 
poor Lord ! did your bride read your thoughts 
under her closed eyelids, that her lip curled 
into a smile of the most ineffable contempt ? 
Go on with your book ; she does not choose 
you to look at her, and somehow your 
thoughts (you know they have) have tra- 
velled back to the starting point. " Well, 
I suppose I sha n't dare to say my soul's my 
own !" Unfortunate nobleman ! Poor de- 
luded peer of the realm ! You are not 
alone ; a coronet rests on the brow of many 
a henpecked husband ! 



156 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTER XIY. 

A rainy day in Paris is dull as a rainy day 
anywhere else. So thought Lord Ellaby, 
as he walked up and down one of the most 
magnificent apartments in Meurice's Hotel. 
He was alone. Lady Ellaby was writing in 
her dressing-room ; she had notified that she 
could not receive him — could not see him 
at all till dinner-time. They had not met 
since their arrival, even to exchange a word. 
They had travelled day and night from 
London at the bride's request, and her re- 
quests, though uttered in the gentlest, most 
measured voice, had usually the character of 
a command. She had already seized the 
reins, and the bridegroom thought that Bhe 
meant to continue to hold them. 

Lord Ellaby, as he paced up and down 
the room, raised his eyebrows, and revolved 
various little dignified speeches which he 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 157 

meant to make to his wife, but which as- 
suredly he never would find courage to utter. 
Then he took more hasty strides, and, as he 
did so, bit his nails. It is quite a fallacy to 
suppose that well-bred people never bite 
their nails, though mammas, and aunts, and 
governesses, are always trying to impress 
that erroneous opinion on the young heirs 
of creation. Yes, Lord Ellaby bit his in a 
very sullen humour, and prognosticated that 
Lady Adelaide's sway had been nothing to 
that which Lady Ellaby's would be if he 
did not assert a becoming and dignified de- 
gree of authority ; he certainly ought to do 
so, and he certainly -would do so ; he would 
show Octavia that he was not to be trifled 
with, &c. 

At dinner nothing could be more charm- 
ing than the bride. She evidently was 
intent on pleasing, and her sparkling anima- 
tion dispersed the shadows on his Lordship's 
brow, in an incredibly short space of time. 

" Dearest Octavia !" said Lord Ellaby, 
seating himself beside his smiling wife, when 
he had joined her in the drawing-room. 



158 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Dearest Octavia I" and he approached with 
the intention of embracing her most ten- 
derly. 

" My Lord !" exclaimed the bride, eluding 
his embrace very quietly, and rising from 
the sofa ; " My Lord !" and she looked at 
him fixedly, without a frown, indeed, but 
with a cold, chilling air, that drove him 
back from her ten times more than anger 
would have done. 

" Octavia !" said his Lordship, looking 
very much as if he were corporeally stung. 

"Plain Anne, at your service, Lord Ellaby : 
if you call me ' Octavia,' I shall fancy you 
mistake my character. I am plain Anne, 
Anne Sherwood still, jusqiiaux boirts des 
ongles ! But I promised you an explana- 
tion in Paris ; I am ready to give one." 

" Then, in the name of common sense, is 
this farce to continue, madam ?" 

" Yes, my Lord, if it is agreeable to you." 

" But it is not at all agreeable to me ; if 
we are to live on these terms, why did 3-011 
marry me? By Heaven, I shall begin to 
think you never loved me I" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 159 

" Loved you!" repeated Annie, three 
several times, and each time with an in- 
creasing emphasis of wonder and scorn, while 
she seemed measuring the littleness of the 
soul in her presence. " Oh ! surely you 
never, never thought such a thing ! Did I 
say so — did I ever say so, my Lord ?" 

"A thousand times, hy act, look, and 
tone I" 

" But by words, never. No, my soul is 
clean of that falsehood ! I would it were as 
white from other sins !" 

Lord Ellaby paced the room with rapid 
strides, stopped, looked at Annie, resumed his 
walk, and at last exclaimed, " Then a second 
time I have been the aim of a mercenary 
woman's search for fortune !" 

"Not so, my Lord," said Annie, very 
calmly ; " in that supposition you wrong me, 
and forget that my fortune more than equalled 
yours; nor did I ever suggest any settle- 
ments which would have secured it for my 
own use. Money is beneath my ambition." 

" Then it was this miserable title I" 

" It was not that," said Annie, slowly. 



1G0 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Speak, then, speak !" cried Lord Ellaby, 
passionately ; " say why you have made me 
the most wretched of men, as you are the 
most forsworn of women. What was it 
for ?" 

" For — revenge !" said Annie Sherwood, 
in so deep and unnatural a tone, that Lord 
Eilaby started and stood still, and the two 
were face to face, each looking into the 
other's eyes. " Listen !" said Annie, in a 
voice whose very calmness was that of con- 
centrated passion. " They say, if you tread 
upon a worm, it will turn and sting you — if 
it can ! it must be crushed, annihilated, if 
you would not have it turn. My Lord, I 
was the dependent of your rich mansion, the 
slave of your proud wife — if you will, your 
servant ! The most loathed beggar craving 
alms at your gate was not treated with the 
scorn I was !" 

" Not by me, I swear, never by me '. 

" Yes, by you, my Lord, — by all ! All ! 

from the pampered menial, up to the proud, 

beautiful lady, who trampled on me as if I 

had no human feelings — as if the governess 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 161 

were a thing, without the life-blood that 
fills other veins — without the pulse that 
makes other hearts beat with love, pride, 
joy, or sorrow ! The wretch into whose cell 
no ray of sunshine bursts, upon whose soli- 
tary ear the music of the human voice never 
sounds, was not more lonely, scarcely more 
wretched than I. The gloom and austerity 
of the convent were mine — not mine its 
sanctity and repose ! And this, all this, 
I bore — and fulfilled my duty to your 
heartless, unloving children ; nor did I ever- 
seek to retaliate on them the refined cruelty 
exercised on myself. And this — this was 
not enough " 

"And to revenge these petty slights," 
said Lord Ellaby, with a look that would 
have been contempt, had he dared to show 
contempt to that resolute woman ; " to 
revenge these petty slights, shared in 
common with " 

" Shared in common with almost all my 
unfortunate class," said Annie. " But you 
are wrong, Lord Ellaby, — as ever, wide of the 
true mark ! No, no ; not for this ! This 

VOL. III. M 



162 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

systematic cruelty — this studied inhumanity 
— woke up all the slumbering strength of 
my soul. I saw dozens, ay, hundreds, of 
women, with hearts, souls, and minds, 
trampled on worse, even worse than I was, 
and that — shame upon them — by their own 
sex! I knew that from some indignant 
heart would burst forth a cry of wrong and 
injury, that would tinge many a cheek, un- 
accustomed to blush, with the crimson of 
public shame. I felt within me the power 
to lift up that cry — felt that mine was the 
strong voice that would utter it some day. 
And when my heart (it could feel then) was 
full to overflowing, my desires for vengeance 
never went beyond the hope of exposing a 
wrong that cries to heaven as much, 
at least as much, as the groans of the 
black slave sweating to death in the cotton 
fields of South Carolina. For the black 
slaves a trumpet voice bad risen; a voice 
that might wake the dead. I said, Shall no 
one dare to speak for the white slaves of fi\ 
England? and I resolved to gird up my 
strength and speak for them ; perchance I 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 163 

might be the instrument to rescue the 
suffering from the oppressors, ' on whose 
side was power !' My talents, my life, my 
whole being were to be devoted to that 
purpose." 

" Pray go on, Madam ; I believe you 
have yet more to say," said Lord Ellaby, 
folding his arms, and leaning against the 
chimney-piece. 

" I have more to say, my Lord," said 
Annie. " At the time I speak of, your house 
had become insupportable to me ; I resolved 
to leave it. There was a man once who 
grew fond of his dungeon, because a bird 
had come to dwell with him in it, and had 
given him something to love — and even so, 
when all human feeling seemed fast perish- 
ing within me, from oppression and ill- 
treatment, God sent a ray of Heaven's own 
sunshine and glory to light my soul, and 
my prison became a palace. His love came 
to me ; and to live in the light of that love 
I would have spent eternity upon the rack ; — 
so I remained in your house. He loved me, 
and I returned to all the confiding tender- 
er 2 



1G4 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

ii ess of untried girlhood. But I was your 
wife's dependent — the despised governess ! 
Some fiend whispered the remembrance in 
his ear, stung his family pride with the 
thoughts it suggested, and he — he who had 
been to me instead of God, upon whose 
honour I would have staked my soul — 
ashamed to make the governess his wife, in- 
sulted me by the proposition of becoming 
his mistress ! The position was good enough 
for — for a governess ! She who had been 
treated as a menial in Mr. Curzon's house, 
had no right to aspire to anything better ! 

" I met his proposals with the scorn they 
merited ; but I loved him — loved him still ; 
madly loved him ; and in the struggle to up- 
root that love my reason nearly forsook me. 
And he — he loved me too ! He repented of 
the wrong he had done me — bitterly re- 
pented of it ; and overcoming his false pride, 
was coming back to be reconciled io honour 
and to me — when she, — she, your wife — 
like an incarnate Satan, snatched him from 
me by her demoniac cunning, and made of 
him the slave of her licentious will : the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 165 

renegade from honour, virtue, and all tilings 
sacred to God and his holy angels ! I had 
but one treasure in the wide world," continued 
Annie, passionately, and dashing away the 
tears that would start to her proud eye — 
" his love, his precious love ! She robbed 
me of it, and made me what I am ! In my 
despairing misery I gave myself to that 

poor wretched old man for my revenge 

I gave myself to you I" 

" To revenge yourself on that accursed 
villain ! doubly, doubly accursed may he 
be !" exclaimed Ellaby. 

" No, no ; not on him — on her ! Her heart 
I could not reach ; she has none ; but I 
knew that she would writhe at my wearing 
the title that she has forfeited. " 

" And so you made of me the stepping- 
stone, the tool?" 

" I did ; but not in revenge on you, my 
Lord. You, I pity ! You have always 
seemed to me more weak than wicked ! I 
am sorry to have had no other means of 
attaining my object, sorry that you have 
been made the victim of others' vices. But 



166 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

now you must perceive that there is no 
remedy but patience." 

"Patience I" repeated the infuriated aris- 
tocrat, accompanying the exclamation with 
a very strong addition, which need not be 
repeated. " Patience ! — patience ! Do you 
talk to me of patience, after the insults and 
injuries you have heaped upon me ?" 

" I do talk to you of patience, my Lord," 
said Annie, calmly ; " and I remind you, 
that when your wife, the mother of your 
children, — the woman }^ou had once fondly 
loved, to whom 3^011 would have sacrificed 
anything in barter for her love, — when she 
abandoned you and her offspring, you had 
something more to forgive than now !" 

"Does anyone dare to say I have tor- 
given her?" cried Lord Ellaby, furiously. 

" I suppose you have, since you are pre- 
paring a triumph for her I" 

"Be more explicit} madam." 

"I will Do you think it will be no 
matter of exultation to her — to him — to 
know that dissensions have already risen 
between you and me ? — dissensions which, if 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 167 

they continue, will inevitably lead to a 
public separation. Now listen to me, my 
Lord — calmly, if you can. I know I am not 
your wife in the eyes of Heaven; for, to 
make a marriage, God must be the priest, 
and join hearts and souls. Are ours joined? 
No ; I am not your wife ; I will not live dis- 
honoured. I have vowed to Heaven that 
none shall ever touch the lips on which the 
kisses of Claude Douglas are not yet cold, 
though our love be in ashes. Mine is not a 
spirit to turn away from the banquet of the 
gods and feast on carrion ! I am not your 
wife ; I never will be ! But your interests, as 
well as mine, such as they are, make it desir- 
able that the masquerade should continue. 
Let us, at least, appear on good terms. I 
have not one feeling of ill-will towards you ; 
on the contrary, I am sorry for you, as I said 
before — heartily sorry. You shall not find 
me in the world's eyes beneath the dignity 
to which you have raised me. You shall 
never have to blush for the woman who 
bears your name. If I am cold to you, I 
will be at least as true as cold, and true to 



168 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

my own proud heart. I will never fail wil- 
lingly in any actual duty to you or your 
children ; I will be better to them than the 
mother they have lost : I have been so 
.already. Yet more, I aim at exercising no 
petty feminine tyranny. You shall be 
master in your own house (a fact of which 
your looks often express a doubt) ; and pro- 
vided you make no further absurd preten- 
sions to the character of a lover, we shall, 
I am sure, be friends. Come, it is a com- 
pact ; we will shake hands. Let me go on 
reading Ancillon to you ; — where did we leave 
.off?" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 109 



CHAPTEE XV. 

"Lord Ellaby has taken the box you 
wanted, for the season, Flora," said the 

Marquis of to his very fashionable 

wife. 

" Dear me ! has he ? how tiresome ! To 

resign it to any one on Gr 's last nights 

would be tiresome : but when we think of 
the low creature that is to figure in it !" 

"She is a woman of great genius," said 

the Hon. Ernest , the brother of the 

Marchioness. 

" Pshaw ! you really are quite absurd, Er- 
nest," said the lady, impatiently ; " genius, 
indeed ! — were it true, that would scarcely 
atone for her effrontery, in thrusting her 
vulgarity into public. I have not the least 
doubt but that she will appear in all the 
colours of the rainbow, and loaded with 



170 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

jewels wheedled out of that poor silly El- 
laby." 

" It is impossible for her to be vulgar," 
said the young man. " Gaucher ie would 
be pardonable in a person who has risen 
from an obscure station. Do you know, 
Flo', as we are distantly related to Lord 
Ellaby, I do think we ought to call upon 
her." 

" Call upon her !" exclaimed the lady — 
" are. you mad, Ernest ! — do you know what 
is said of her?'' 

" Of course I do — every one does ; for her 
name has long been in every one's mouth. 
They say she was some poor country parson's 
daughter." 

" Ah ! but that is nothing compared to 
the truth. "Why, she was actually a sort of 
bonne or governess in the Curzons' family 
for some years, and like many, indeed most 
of that sort of people, a complete snake in 
the grass. It was her vile going OQQ that 
drove poor Lady Adelaide to make that un- 
happy fau.r pas!" 

" That could not be," said Ernest ; u she 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 171 

was Mrs. Annesley months before the elope- 
ment took place." 

" At all events, every one knows she had a 
great deal to do with it." 

" Yet a great many people visited her as 
Mrs. Annesley." 

" No respectable people, Ernest." 

"I beg your pardon; nearly all the 
known authors and distinguished artists 
did." 



" How absurd to bring them forward as 
criterions for us ! ' said the Marchioness. 
" You know artists and authors are pro- 
verbially immoral. Besides, whence do they 
spring themselves ? how very rarely are they 
well born?' 

"Oh Flo'! Flo'! what an admission ! " said 
Ernest, laughing. " So birth and genius are 
never wedded; I am afraid your compli- 
ment to the aristocracy has some foundation ; 
genius seldom is born in noble houses, or 
nurtured there, if bom." 

" Ernest, you are a complete radical ! I 
shall expect to hear of your attending a 
Chartists' meeting one of these days. But 



172 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

pray, whatever your own inclinations may 
be, or your own acts, don't ask me to coun- 
tenance that low woman, — Lady Ellaby I 
will not call her." 

" Do you know, Flo', I am apt to think 
that she would consider it a condescension 
to know you or me." 

" Don't talk nonsense ; do you know who 
she puts me in mind of?" 

"I really can't say; Aspasia, perhaps?'' 

"I don't know any Aspasia," said the 
Marchioness, looking a little perplexed ; " I 
suppose you got that name from some opera 
dancer, or out of an exploded romance. The 
person I mean is that vile w T retch, De Luzy, 
who set the Duke de Praslin on to murder 
his wife; she w r as a governess, you know, and 
mixed up with the family in some absurd 
way. Abroad, they don't appear to know 
how to keep those people in their proper 
place, as we do in England. If this Mrs. 
Annesley had been in my house, things 
would not have gone on as they have ; if she 
had been my governess, I would have broken 
her spirit. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 173 



» 5) 



" I don't in the least doubt it, Flo',' 
said the young man, laughing. "By the 
way, talking of governesses, w T hat a dis- 
tressing cough that poor creature has, up- 
stairs ; it sounds all the way down here, 
from that attic where you keep her. Why 
don't you let her come down some- 
times?' 5 

" Just like the whole intriguing set !' ex- 
claimed the lady; "trying every cunning 
artifice to create an interest in them. I'll 
teach her to sit with her door open! About 
this woman, Ernest. If you like to call, of 
course nothing can be said ; but for me, you 
know, it is quite out of the question. And, 
moreover, I have no intention of finally 
breaking with Lady Adelaide." 

" You cannot mean that, Flora!" 

" Yes ; I do mean it. Of course I can't 
countenance her just at present — at least, 
not under existing circumstances ; but when 
she is married, and a little time has gone by, 
I shall certainly see her, if only to get at 
the bottom of this 'intrigue. Subsequent 
events plainly show she was the aggrieved 



174 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

party. We ought to uphold our own 
class — it is only womanly in me to do it. 
Poor Lady Adelaide has been driven to des- 
peration, completely sacrificed for that low- 
born intriguante. One day, no doubt, Lady 
Adelaide will be Marchioness of Dryburgh. 
There is no likelihood of the present Marquis 
having an heir, and he is considered con- 
sumptive. Of course Lord Claude will have 
the marquisate, and then few will remember 
the faux pas of the Marchioness. But 
while I think of it, Ernest, I must beg that 
when Miss Elton comes down to luncheon, 
you wont make yourself so absurd with 
her, giving her a chair, offering her wine, 
and all that sort of thing. I can't afford 
wine for governesses, and she is uppish 
enough already. She quite fancies herself 
a beauty." 

"Well, you know, Flo', she really is a 
very pretty girl, and quite lady like and 
refined in her manners." 

"As for her being pretty, it's impossible, 
with that sallow complexion. That, I don't 
doubt, she has brought on herself by por- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 175 

ing over novels every evening, till I don't 
know what hour." 

M Poor thing ! what can she do in her soli- 
tude but read?" 

" She should improve herself; I have often 
told her so. She ought all through the 
evening (which she has quite to herself) to 
be going over what she is to teach the 
children next day. These people have no 
notion of doing their duty faithfully; but if 
you don't let them go to church twice a day, 
they begin to whimper and talk of their 
consciences. As for Miss Elton, I really am 
sick of scolding her, and my scolding pro- 
duces nothing but hysterical tears and ner- 
vous starts ; the children don't seem to get 
on at all the better for it." 

" Then why don't you give up scolding? 
she's only a girl, Flo', after all." 

"Girl! nonsense; she's beginning to turn 
grey — I have noticed that for some months. 
Who ever heard of a girl turning grey? 
Look at my hair!' 

" Good-bye," said Ernest. " I've a horse 
to look at;" and lie left the room, with a 



176 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

cool nod to his sister, mentally soliloquizing, 
as, no doubt, almost any man would on 
such occasions, " This sister of mine is a true 
woman — jealous, envious, and ill-natured. 

Now, if that poor d up-stairs had only 

had the small pox, or had red hair, she might 
stand a chance of meeting with a little more 
humanity. Grey hair! I wonder what Flo's 
would be, if it wern't dyed ; she's twenty 
years older than that girl ! It's no use pity- 
ing them, it always makes the women treat 
them worse ; but those governesses are 
worse off than negroes. Some of the blacks 
are cared for, as actual ' property ; ' but 
these slaves — who cares for them !" 

Tf\ "2jC '*,' *^fc ^ JJE ~' t ~ 

Curiosity overcoming patrician disdain, 
and yet more, prudent resolves and calcula- 
tions, the Marchioness of actually 

called on Lady Ellabv ! Bitterly disap- 
pointed was she to find her most plainly 
dressed, and without a single ornament ; yet 
more disappointed was she that the parvemte 
neither displayed gratitude for her con- 
descension, nor timidity at her aristocratic 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 177 

presence, but was only calmly sell-possessed. 
The Marchioness, all the time smiling most 
urbanely, proceeded to a subject which she 
was sure must overwhelm Lady Ellaby with 
mortification and confusion, by reminding 
her of her origin. "I hear you do a 
great deal in the way of schools ; of course, 
you are greatly interested on educational 
questions." 

"I ought to be," said Annie, laughing, 
" considering my experience in gOA r erness 
life." 

" Exactly so," said the Marchioness, smil- 
ing : " I was saying so the other day at Lord 
Belmont's, when we were talking of getting 
up a committee of ladies for a ragged school. 
I was saying, your experience would be of 
use to us. But I must ask you a personal 
favour, dear Lady Ellaby ; it is to give me a 
few hints for my girls ; their present gover- 
ness is extremely unfit for her office, and 
quite above her station." 

"I dare say your Ladyship has read Ma- 
dame de Genlis' ' New iEra ? ' said Lady 
Ellaby. 

VOL. III. N 



178 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

"Oh, yes ; the new work on education : of 
course ; yes, — ever}' one has read it." 

" Not quite newV said Annie, with a quiet 
smile ; " and it bears rather indirectly on 
juvenile education. But let me remind you 
of a passage, in winch some one, by way of 
recalling to Jules Delmour's mind that his 
uncle was a jeweller, asks his opinion of a 
piece of bijouterie, which the mischievous 
hero is so unprofessional as to break — by- 
accident, of course. I fear I should prove 
equally careless or unskilful, if called upon 
to supply any educational assistance. In- 
deed, I believe I was altogether unsuccessful 
as a governess, and no doubt should have 
been frequently turned off as 'an unpro- 
fitable servant/ only that those I served 
were too ignorant to discover my dehcien- 
cies ! 

Lady Ellaby spoke with such sancj-fro 
and self-possession, that her tormentor began 
to think she Avas invulnerable, and withdrew, 
very much discomfited, but almost immedi- 
ately she comforted herself In the determina- 
tion to wreak on one governess the defeat she 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 179 

liad suffered from another. If there were 
any one who did not know all the Countess 
of Ellaby's " antecedents," of course the 
Marchioness would have the pleasure of re- 
lating them at large, and where authentic 
narrative failed, she could fill up the gaps 
from imagination. She could, she thought, 
effectually disappoint the ambitious par- 
venue, if she had any hope of thrusting 
her w r ay into society. But the Mar- 
chioness knew little of the woman on 
whom she thus speculated ; what that 
woman had resolved, she would do; what 
Annie Sherwood had undertaken, she would 
perform. 

Though Lady Ellaby faithfully kept her 
promise of exercising no petty, feminine 
tyranny in her new husband's house, in any- 
thing which she deemed important, she in- 
variably succeeded in having her will and 
pleasure fulfilled by Lord Ellaby, though 
her demands were sometimes w T hat he con- 
sidered outrageous. 

One day Lady Ellaby requested his Lord- 
ship to procure her presentation at Court. 

N 2 



180 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Lord Ellaby felt and looked too astonished 
•to speak. At last he ejaculated, " Pre- 
sented !" 

" Yes, my Lord. Is there anything asto- 
nishing in the idea of your wife appearing 
at Court?" 

" No, certainly, Octavia, but " 

"You think, perhaps, I should not play 
the great lady w r ell — that I should discredit 
you ; but surely you know by this time that 
I am a good actress — at least, you should 
know it !" 

" But I tell you, Octavia, it is an impossi- 
bility." 

" Why, my Lord?" 

" Who have you to present you ?" 

" You will find some one." 

" Indeed I cannot." 

" My Lord, you must." Her imperious 
Ladyship turned and left the room, without 
waiting for a reply. Presently she looked 
in again, saying in her gentlest voice, 
" Give me the heads of the speech we were 
talking of, and I will string them together 
for you." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 181 

"Thank you, you are very kind. But 
about this presentation, Octavia " 

" My Lord, you know my wishes, and I 
know that they will be fulfilled I" 

Lady Ellaby's will was accomplished. 



182 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Every eye was fixed on a particular box in 

the Theatre. It remained vacant, 

however, offering nothing for the gratifi- 
cation of the curious, until the curtain had 
risen. Then the Earl and Countess of 
Ellaby entered. The lady seated herself 
composedly in front of the loge ; his 
lordship a little behind her. His manner 
was affectionate and attentive; hers, quiet 
and dignified. As they conversed from time 
to time, Anne's rarely beautiful smile lit her 
face, and she seemed to love the husband of 
her choice. 

Once more Lady Ellaby's appearance dis- 
appointed expectation. Her dress was sim- 
ple, very transparent white, without the 
smallest ornament, not even the garniture 
which women call " trimmings," while her 
black hair was wreathed round her head 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 183 

with classic taste. The tout ensemble was 
irreproachable elegance. 

Of course, there was plenty of staring, 
from those whose high breeding exempted 
them from the observance of common po- 
liteness, and countless glasses were levelled 
at the box of Lord Ellaby. 

Lord Ellaby bore it well — most wonder- 
fully well. He had caught a portion of the 
determination of the resolute spirit beside 
him; he did not now wince beneath a 
glance; he did not frown at a raised eye- 
brow; his old haughtiness was mere child's 
play to the self-reliant look he now wore. 
The whole man was transformed: he had 
expanded into something larger than him- 
self; his little weaknesses were hidden; 
people no longer found him prosy; some 
began to admire him; he was animated by 
a strange fire ; and he was proudly conscious 
of the change wrought in him by the in- 
fluence of a superior mind. 

Smilingly Lord Ellaby presented a glass 
to his wife. As smilingly she took it, and 
with the greatest sang-froid, she looked 



184 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

round the house, making her survey slow!}', 
her countenance all the while unmoved- 
She then turned her face towards the stag 
and from that moment seemed to have for- 
gotten everything but the performance. 

" Shameless effrontery !" said a lady of 
rank; and nearly all the women said the 
same. 

Women are always severe on their own 
sex; men are more tolerant, if not more 
charitable. Besides, they usually admire a 
woman who has had the misfortune to achieve 
notoriety. 

So the men admired Anne Sherwood, and 
talked of her grace, her elegance, her beaut}" ! 
Yes; the very men, who if they had seen 
her under other circumstances, would have 
named her " an ugly dowdy !" 

No one admired her more than Lord 
Ellaby. He was proud of his wife; and 
she, like Gallio of old, "cared for none o1i 
these things." For her there existed but 
two objects in the wide universe — Claude 
and Adelaide. For those two only she 
lived ; for those two alone, went through 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 185 

the bitter mockery of a life — one continued 
masquerade. AYhat was the rest of the 
world to her ? Nothing, absolutely nothing ; 
except that their sayings — their remarks — 
might reach Claude, and touch his heart; 
or might sound as a knell in the ears of 
Adelaide. For this Anne Sherwood led a 
life of inward torture. And she bore all 
proudly — calmly — as the Titan on the rock 
bore the mawing vulture. 

Lady Ellaby's face was turned towards 
the stage ; but it was merely to appear care- 
less of the audience, not in reality to listen 
to the play ; she had no thought of listening. 
But insensibly the voice of the gifted actor 
spoke to her heart; her heart so full of 
despairing love, of jealousy, of revenge, that 
it seemed no other emotions could enter there. 

Mr. C K is, perhaps, the only living 

actor who thoroughly realizes one's idea 
of Hamlet. There is a world of mingled 
majesty and tenderness in his look and tone 
sometimes. Annie had never seen him 
before: to her it was not acting — it was 
living, breathing reality. Her eye and ear 



180 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

were fixed — charmed. She forgot every- 
thing else but Hamlet; forgot Claude, Ade- 
laide, love, jealousy, revenge — all ! all ! and 

when Mr. K uttered the one word, 

" father !" which no one else ever pronounced 
as he does — "father!" it conjured up before 
the rapt listener and gazer the image of her 
own saint-like father, as he had died, martyr- 
like at the altar, and she burst into a passion 
of tears. It was long, very long, since she 
had wept. 

Lady Ellaby had forgotten the hundreds 
of eyes that were prying into her very 
heart; and the world — the world thought 
her emotion acting. 

Lord Ellaby turned to Annie with affec- 
tionate anxiety. His attentions woke her 
from her abstraction, and she returned to 
herself — to her world. Nor did she lose her 
self-possession again, till the words vibrated 
on her ears — 

"And I, the most unfortunate of ladies, 
That sucked the honied music of his yows V* 

Then once more her emotion became uncon- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 187 

trollable. A slight frown bent Lord Ellaby's 
brows, as he rose and led his wife from the 
box. " Forgive me, my Lord ! this shall 
never happen again!" said Annie. Those 
were the first humble words she had ever 
addressed to Lord Ellaby. He was a very 
good-natured man, was touched, and readily 
forgave her. 

As they were leaving the house, two men 
were also going forth : they came from the 
pit : both wore cloaks. " Waldo, I will 
speak to her ! Free my arm — I will speak !" 
exclaimed one. 

"How dare you!" said the other. 
" Surely, you have wronged Lord Ellaby 
enough!" The first speaker replied by a 
groan, and allowed himself to be led away 
passively. The tw r o men walked together 
some distance, and then entered an hotel of 
some note. As soon as they were within 
the spacious and cold-looking, though 
splendid apartment which awaited them, 
one threw off his cloak, and sank on a chair. 
His countenance was pale and haggard, his 
hair disordered, and his dress neglected in 



188 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the extreme; yet it was unmistakeably 
Claude Douglas. " I have seen her again/' 
he muttered, through his clenched teeth; 
" I have seen her again, and she is still 
mine — mine, heart and soul — I know it ! I 
read it at a glance !" 

" Douglas, remember to-morrow : re- 
member to-morrow's duties !" said Waldo, 
almost sternly. 

" Let me have some respite from such a 
bitter remembrance !" said Claude. "Let 
me at least think of her !" 

" No, I will not. You have no right to 
think of her, and she is a guilty woman if 
she remembers you !" 

" You are an unmerciful, inhuman tor- 
turer!" 

" No ; I am your best friend. The past 
cannot be recalled — banish it at once !" 

"Banish it! Well, I will." He ap- 
proached the table on which stood wine, 
and filling a large silver goblet with Bur- 
gundy, drained it completely. " Now.'' 
said he, laughing, "I shall be myself! Do 
you remember the scene in the Decamerone, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 189 

where — but why do you look so sad and 
severe, Waldo? I must teach you, amico 
mio, 

* Cueillons, cueillons la rose au matin de la vie-!' 

The quotation is from the immaculate 
Lamartine ; even you, stern moralist, must 
approve of him !" 

" 11 buono e il bello /" said Waldo. 

" So thought I once !" said Claude, with 
a sigh. " By-the-bye, do you know Andre 
Chenier? I don't mean the hacknied 
" Jeune Captive '," &c, but those charming 
little pastoral bits that sound so Greek 
(Andre's motherwas aGreek.) One begins — 

'Jeune berger aux yeux mourants et a la voix tendre, 
Cessez a mes baisers, cessez enfin de pretendre ; 
Non berger je ne puis, je n'en ai point pour toi, 
lis sont tous a Mceris ' 

The remembrance was suggested by — no 
matter what! Will you go with me to- 
morrow?" 

" To church? Yes, if you wish it." 
" No, no ; I don't mean that — I mean after 
it is all over." 

"Where can you mean, then?" 



190 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" To Scotland — I am going to Scot- 
land." 

" But probably Lady Adelaide will object 
to a third person's company." 

" She is not going." 

" Not going, Douglas !" 

" No, certainly not. The ceremony is to 
be gone through de rigueur; but after that 
I have no intention of leading a cat-and-dog 
life. I have said nothing about it yet, but 
she must solace herself the best way she can. 
I am going for some grouse shooting, or any 
other sport that comes in my way. She will 
bear my name, and can have as much of my 
fortune as she chooses. I think she wants 
no more. Now pray, Waldo, don't look at 
me so awfully! You really are fit for 
nothing in the world but to be a missionary 
to one of those primeval forests where your 
Puritan forefathers first pitched their tents ! 
Just now, when I drained that goblet, you 
looked at me as if I had broken every com- 
mandment in the Decalogue !" 

"I was shocked. You arc so unlike the 
Claude Douglas I once knew !" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 191 

" And once loved, Waldo !" 

u No, I will not say that, for my friend- 
ship will stand a few shocks. But listen, 
Claude, listen, if your head be clear enough ; 
I w r ant to tell you a story." 

"No romance, I hope?" 

" No, all reality. I was standing in front 
of St. Peter's one day, contemplating L the 
eternal movement and eternal repose.' My 
mind was full of beautiful, glowing concep- 
tions, softened down by a sort of gentle 
melancholy. I was thinking of my next 
work. I wanted to portray an angelic being, 
looking down from his own exalted purity 
on erring and suffering humanity, not with 
the scorn of superior virtue, but with tender 
pity. I knew of no model in nature — I 
could not find one in imagination sufficiently 
exquisite. I looked up, and saw a young 
man standing by the ' eternal motion' of 
the fountain, who realized — more than 
realized my dream; it was a spiritually- 
beautiful countenance, full of truth, tender- 
ness, and purity. I had found my model, 
and like a true artist, I loved it already. 



192 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Need T trace the rise and growth of our 
romantic friendship? No — but I must speak. 
I must tell how bitter was my disappoint- 
ment when my ideal fell. Oh, Claude! 
dear Claude ! I would give all my coming 
years of renown, all my dreams of glory, to 
bring back the Claude Douglas of that day 
before St. Peter's!" 

"And think you, Waldo, that I would give 
nothing?" said Claude, momentarily sobered. 
" You only half know me, if you think I can 
ever feel reconciled to the dishonour I have 
brought on my name ; the yet deeper stain 
on heart and conscience. With the world I 
know to-morrow's idle mockery will be a sort 
of expiation, which will re-open the portals of 
society to me ; through them I may, after a 
few years, manage to drag the woman who 
bears my name; but this is no consolation to 
me, none in the world. I have destroyed 
her and myself!" 

" I generally feel lenient to women," said 
Waldo, " and am disposed to lay the heaviest 
onus of reproach on the man's shoulders, in 
cases of this description ; but in this instance, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 193. 

I cannot help feeling that Lady Adelaide was 
much more culpable than you." 

" I was not thinking of her !" said Claude 7 
hastily; a but of Annie Sherwood." 

" She looks perfectly happy," said Waldo. 
" The emotion she showed to-night only 
arose from the play, and might have been 
similarly excited in any woman of sensibility. 
I was nearly shedding tears myself. That 
man's acting is so thrilling." 

" Looks happy !" vociferated Claude, as he 
rose and hastily paced the room. " Looks 
happy ! Ah, you never knew her, Waldo — 
never knew the depth of that woman's mind 
and tenderness, or you would not think she 
could shower all on that senseless idiot, and 
be happy !" 

" Passion blinds you, Claude. Lord Ellaby 
is no idiot. Physically, he is a magnificent 
looking man : he may be far from a senti- 
mentalist ; but he has undoubted talents — is 
one of the very best speakers in the House, 

and " 

" He was the laughing-stock of the House, 
and of society, too!" interrupted Claude, 
vol. in. o 



194 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" till he became her pupil ; till she animated 
his cold mind with a few sparks from her 
own, till she stirred up his languid energies 
as she once stirred mine." 

" And you think, then, that the very devo- 
tion of her thoughts and energies to her hus- 
band's improvement is no proof of love?" 

M Do not speak of him as her husband !" 
cried Claude, fiercely. M I will not, cannot 
bear it. She is mine, mine eternally ! Did I 
not tell you she was ? Oh, Waldo ! Waldo !" 
he continued, a you do not know — you 
cannot conceive what I suffer. Tortures of 
remorse, jealousy, despair! Life is unen- 
durable! And to think that this woman, 
with a heart and mind so transcendently 
superior to all I ever knew — so tenderly 
devoted to me, too — to think that I sin mid 
have insulted, and driven her to what. I 
shudder to think of — and only, only because 
I had not courage to give my name to one 
the world would think beneath me in social 
position. Yet I loved her, Waldo ! I loved 
her madly. I would have given my life for 
her; ay, my very soul!" and burying his 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 195 

face in his hands, the unhappy man gave 
way to a passion of grief. For a few minutes 
he yielded to it, then said, with a sort of 
bitter calmness, " But it was the fault of 
society !" 

" Society !" repeated Waldo, with indigna- 
tion. " If Lady Ellaby was the woman you 
describe, what could society give you in ex- 
change for the sacrifice you made to its 
prejudices?" 

" But," said Claude, " I was afraid " 

M Oh, coward fear !" cried Waldo. " But, 
Douglas, you must consider her position, and 
your own ! The miserable mistake you have 
made, you must be content to forget. Think 
rather of the duties that bind her to Lord 
Ellaby, those which you owe to that w T retched 
Lady Adelaide." 

" She is not wretched," said Claude, 
sharply ; " she has neither heart nor con- 
science to suffer. It was she tempted me to 
my destruction. I never loved, never even 
admired her. She sought, she ensnared, 
ruined me, overcame my few weak principles 
of honour and rectitude, and all, all for the 

o2 



196 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

fiendish purpose of torturing poor Annie. 
She has confessed that and more to me, and 
exults in her success ! And am I to be tied 
to this woman for life ? I loathe her, detest 
the sight of her face, the sound of her 
voice !" 

" But yet you have no right to abandon 
her after what has passed." 

" Waldo, you talk calmly and coldly, like 
the chorus in the ancient dramas ! — You 
cannot enter into my feelings. I would rather 
be manacled to a corpse than live with her ! 
Listen," he added, more calmly. u I will 
tell you what I have done. She is merely 
marrying me to get my name and money, 
and to patch up her reputation. She tells 
me all this, and glories in it. The money 
she is welcome to — all, if she pleases. I used 
to spend some of it well once; but I am no 
longer worthy to be the almoner of Provi- 
dence, it would now seem hypocrisy. I wrote 
to her this morning, and gave her the option 
of remaining with me, on condition that she 
consents to my dropping the bauble before 
my name directly after the marriage, and to 



AXXE SHERWOOD. 197 

spend the rest of our lives in absolute retire- 
ment, as Mr. and Mrs. Douglas. Otherwise 
I am quite resolved that we part for ever 
at the church door, the moment the ceremony 
is over. A few hours will bring me her 
reply, I suppose." 

" At what o'clock must you be at the 
church." 

" At a quarter to ten. I was determined 
to be early, to avoid all gazers." 

" I shall go with you, certainly," said 
Waldo, with emotion ; " but it is already 
three, we have not many hours before us. 
Do go and get some rest, Douglas." 

" Rest !" said Claude, despairingly ; " who 
talks of rest to me ?" 

" At least go and lie down for a little 
time." 

" Impossible; but don't let me keep 
you from sleeping. Here, Waldo," he con- 
tinued, with a quivering lip, u take these 
two letters, and if I go to Scotland alone, 
directly I am gone, carry the one with the 
black seal to Lady Ellaby — to Annie ; don't 
post it, carry it yourself, put it in her hands. 



11)8 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

The other is for you, but not yet, not till I 
have gone to Scotland." 

Despite his agitation, or, perhaps, in con- 
sequence of it, Claude shortly after sank 
into a sleep, but his features were every now 
and then distorted with the traces of pas- 
sionate emotion, and his bosom heaved with 
deep, struggling sighs. He slept on easily 
till the clock struck nine. All the time of 
his sleeping, Waldo had sat beside the couch 
watching him with eyes that betokened 
the deepest interest. Reluctantly lie woke 
Claude, when admonished by the hour that 
it was more than time to prepare for the 
saddest bridal to which bridegroom ever 
went. "Why do you wake me?" said Claude, 
sharply ; M I was dreaming I was in Bru> 
or near it, in the Bois-de-la-Cambre. I was 
cutting Annie's name on a tree: we were 
like a happy boy and girl, and had made an 
Eden for ourselves. Why did you wake 
me?" 

" It is time," said Waldo. 

" For what?" asked Claude. 

u To prepare." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 199 

" I don't understand you !" 

" You said you had appointed a quarter 
to ten, Douglas." 

u Oh yes, to be sure ; yes, for my merry 
wedding. How the fiends will laugh !" 

" Douglas, you must go and dress." 

"Dress! I am well dressed; what more 
would you have?" 

" You know you cannot appear as you 
are." 

"Why, Waldo?" 

" It would be an insult to — " 

" Well, I shall see about it presently. I 
assure you Annie wont mind. She is above 
all this sort of trickery ; from her I learnt 
to despise it. I am so drowsy. That wine 
last night. — I remember drinking deeply. 
Let me sleep." And he fell off again into 
a heavy slumber, from which Waldo found 
it impossible to awake him even for his 
wedding, and the hour was fast approaching. 

Waldo looked at the letters; one was 
thick and heavy, addressed to the Countess 
of Ellaby, but in an unsteady hand; the 
other was shorter, and directed to himself. 



200 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Something impelled Waldo to open it. He 
had a presentiment of the contents. They 
proved to be directions for the management 
of Claude Douglas's affairs after his death, 
and a few earnest though incoherent ex- 
pressions of gratitude for his friendship. 

A dreadful suspicion crossed Waldo's 
mind that Claude had swallowed poison in 
the deep, full goblet of wine which he had 
quaffed so eagerly but a few hours before. 
There stood the goblet on the table ; Waldo 
hastily snatched it, poured the dregs that 
remained into his mouth, and tasted, as he 
thought, something metallic. In an agony 
of apprehension he rushed to Claude to 
awaken him; but he might as well have 
hoped to awaken the dead. Still Douglas's 
lips moved, as if speaking ; his hands were 
clenched, and a purple glow overspread his 
usually pale face. 

Waldo was about to rush forth to obtain 
assistance, when Heinrich, Claude's valet, 
entered, with such an air of delight in his 
honest German face, that Waldo stopped short. 
u Where is my master! — my master!" he 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 201 

exclaimed, in good English, and in the most 
eager haste. u Oh, sir! — oh, Mr. Waldo! 
such good news. Only think — my Lady's 
gone and got married to some one else !" 

" Thank God !" cried Waldo, fervently 
grasping Heinrich's hand. But the mo- 
mentary exultation was gone, as he turned 
to Claude, and remembered his late anxious 
fears. u But he is ill, Heinrich ; he is very 
ill." 

" Never mind, Mr. Waldo, he'll soon come 
all right again : it was only on account of 
that woman — that Lady Adelaide. Such a 
life — such a life she has led him ; but, now 
he's got rid of her, you'll see a differ- 
ence." 

u But look, Heinrich, — look what has been 
in this goblet ! — Look at the sediment 1" 

" In this goblet !" said Henrich, with an 
unsteady voice ; " Oh, Mr. Waldo, it is 
poison, sir ! — it is poison ! This is Miss 
Sherwood's doing. If she hadn't married 
that old Colonel, master would never have 
gone wrong at all." 

u But we lose time!" said Waldo, who 



202 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

was pale as a corpse. " Run, Henrich ; run 
for a doctor." 

"Who, sir?" asked the man, through his 
chattering teeth. 

" The nearest. Ask the people of the 
house, but say nothing of our suspicions. 
Run — don't lose a minute. My poor, poor 
Claude," he cried, hanging over that beau- 
tiful face — beautiful even in ruin. " And is 
this the end ! Merciful Heaven, spare him ! 
— spare him to return to himself and Thee." 

Lady Adelaide was indeed married. 
Offended at Lord Claude's proposition of 
living in complete retirement, she had 
eagerly accepted the offer of a young man 
of weak mind, who, dazzled by her beauty 
and nattered by her supposed preference, 
had thought that he could gloss over her 
tarnished reputation. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 203 



CHAPTER XVII. 

The lion of the day in London was Waldo, 
the American sculptor; feted, caressed, 
idolized, he owed his popularity (however 
great his merits) almost as much to the 
faultless beauty of his person as to his 
genius. But Waldo's was not a nature to 
spoil; and, keenly as a man of taste will 
always enjoy the pleasures of refined and 
intellectual society, the sculptor often 'with- 
drew from the charms of the circles he most 
delighted in, to soothe the solitary hours of 
one diseased alike mentally and physically. 

The second elopement, and subsequent 
marriage, of Lady Adelaide with Lord 
Durrant had been a nine days' wonder. 
Some had sympathized with Lord Claude 
Douglas's supposed disappointment and 
chagrin; others, with more reason, had 
congratulated him on what might be re- 



204 ANNE SHEEWOOD. 

gartled as a happy escape. Claude was 
silent on the subject, and quite heedless of 
sympathy springing from condolence or 
congratulation. A severe illness had fol- 
lowed the night of misery preceding his 
expected wedding; — whether really produced 
by some attempt to shorten an existence, 
which his own sins and follies had rendered 
insupportable, never transpired. He was 
moody and melancholy. Waldo watched 
over him for weeks with a tenderness ex- 
ceeding the love of woman. Not even his 
devotion to art — hitherto the master-passion 
of his life — could draw him from the couch 
of Claude ; and it was only when he had 
recovered his usual degree of health, that 
Waldo again appeared in society. 

He re-entered his apartment one day at 
the hotel, accompanied by the invalid, and 
found a note lying on his table. " I know 
that writing !" said Claude, in a voice of the 
deepest agitation ; " it is — it is — " 

" A card of invitation from Lady Ellaby, 
for the fifteenth," said Waldo. M Most ex- 
traordinary, as I don't know her at all !" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 205 

" Not at all extraordinary," said Claude, 
recovering himself in some degree, " not at 
all extraordinary ; a known artist is public 
property, and requires no introduction. 
Besides, you, like another Crichton, have the 
reputation of uniting the gallant cavalier 
with the genius. She is probably curious 
to see you ; perhaps is fulfilling a half-uttered 
prophecy which I heard from her the last 
time we met, and is becoming a woman of 
fashion in every respect. By all means go, 
Waldo." 

"No, I shall not," said the sculptor; 
" and I wonder that Lady Ellaby should 
think of inviting a friend of yours." 

" Ah, she does not know you — does not 
think of you in that character. Go, Waldo ; 
I beseech you, go!" said Claude, as if sud- 
denly struck with a new thought, " you can 
tell her—" 

" I can tell Lady Ellaby nothing from 
you, dear Claude," said Waldo; "why should 
you disturb her peace now? Let her be 
happy, and fulfil her sacred duties." 

" But even your severe principles," said 



20G ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Claude, dejectedly; "even your severe prin- 
ciples cannot make you refuse to explain to 
her—" 

" To what good could an explanation 
lead, Claude? Besides, you have really 
none to offer. In any case, I had better 
refuse." 

" But have you no interest in seeing a 
woman so celebrated as Annie — as Lady 
Ellaby?" 

" Ah, Claude, you are trying me with a 
bribe. Certainly I should like to see her, 
when I remember how often her beautiful 
thoughts have stirred the inmost pulse of 
my heart." 

" Then do go, Waldo ! — pray do go ! There 
is no law, human or divine, which can render 
it criminal for you to tell her of my deep 
repentance. Let her at least know that ! 
Tell her that if tears of blood could wash 
out sin, the recording angel would long ago 
have blotted out mine !" 

" I will go— I will tell her that !" said 
Waldo. 

" And you will ask her forgiveness for 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 207 

me ? — earnestly, beseechingly, as if you were 
the criminal ?" 

11 1 will, if you will promise me then to 
make no further reference to her — to forget 
this dead love, and look forward to a more 
healthy existence." 

" Dead love I" repeated Claude. " Dead, 
did you say ? Ah, no ! — love like ours could 
never die, any more than the souls it per- 
vades. No; even in my deepest misery I 
have had, I have now, that one ray of com- 
fort left, — our love is imperishable. We 
live in each other's hearts — she in mine — I in 
hers — for ever ! Yes ; even disguised beneath 
a mass of ruins, of anger and disdain, could 
you search the secret chambers of her soul, 
you would find me there ! I " 

" I am afraid you will again remind me of 
a likeness to my Puritan ancestors, Claude ; 
but I must tell you, as a faithful friend, — I 
must repeat to you again and again, — 
remember Lady Ellaby's ties, and respect 
them." 

" She is not his wife !" cried Claude, vehe- 
mently. " To wring my heart with late 



208 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

remorse, to touch that callous woman — she 
may seem so — but she is not. She is mine, 
mine for ever ! But I ask nothing, nothing 
but forgiveness. I well know I have for- 
feited all claim to her remembrance. The 
basest criminal is pardoned before he 
dies !" 

" But there is no appearance of your 
dying, Claude ! Believe me, if you would 
rouse yourself from this consuming melan- 
choly, this useless dejection, you might yet 
fulfil high and noble duties in life." 

" No, no, Waldo ! I have lost all self-re- 
spect. If I live, I shall try and reason my- 
self into callous indifference, or else I shall 
try the old thorny road of penance. I feel 
quite capable of giving all my fortune to 
some hospital, and either burying myself 
in the Eastern desert, like Hester Stanhope, 

or " 

" Or becoming a pillar-saint, like St. Si- 
meon Stylites !" said Waldo. 

u No; for then I should be in the eye of 
the holy Heaven. I would rather hide, were 
it possible, from God and man." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 209 

" But your desert scheme would not an- 
swer without a fortune ; for you know, when 
the said Hester Stanhope's money foiled, she 
was deserted by the formerly obsequious 
Arabs, and left to die alone !" 

" In any case, I must look forward to 
dying without one friendly hand to close my 
eyes!" said Claude. 

" You will have me, if I do not die before 
you, Claude !" said Waldo. 

" And I, mein meister. Do I count for 
nothing?" asked the privileged Heinrich, who 
at that moment entered. 

" No, dear Heinrich ; you count for a great 
deal ; you are the best friend I have in the 
world, except Mr. Waldo," said Claude, 
kindly. 

" And your brother?" asked Waldo. 

"Ah, my brother!" said Claude, sighing. 
" I believe he merely regards me as his pos- 
sible heir. We were quite separated in 
youth and childhood, and in after-life have 
rarely met. He is kind and friendly when we 
do meet, but there is no confidence between 
us; besides, he regards me (justly) now, as a 

VOL. III. P 



210 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

blot on the family escutcheon. He is right, 

quite right." 

***** * » 

Lady Ellaby was receiving her distin- 
guished guests with the high-bred air of a 
duchess, in the same splendid drawing-rooms 
in which Annie Sherwood had one day stood 
before Lady Adelaide Curzon, in the cha- 
racter of a candidate for the honour and 
favour of wearing her ladyship's distin- 
guished yoke of servitude. And did Lady 
Ellaby remember that scene? — remember 
the years of cruel bondage through which 
she had struggled to her present envied 
position I Yes, she remembered them well ! 
and even sometimes referred to them with 
such careless indifference, that they seumed 
to have left no sting behind in Memory's 
waste. 

Lady Ellaby was, as usual, undecorated 
by jewels or costly array. She was clad in 
black velvet, relieved by ermine. Her 
countenance was calm and quiet, and spoke 
nothing of suffering; but it was less proud 
than was its wont, and her carriage, though 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 211 

dignified, had less of imperious decision. 
She looked what she was — a woman of genius, 
far above those among whom she walked, 
yet careless of her elevation and distinction. 
Some change had come o'er the " spirit of her 
dream," perchance; but no one noticed it, 
and she moved about with quiet grace be- 
neath the flashing lamps of her gorgeous 
mansion — the aversion of some, the admi- 
ration of many, the envy of yet more. 

The crowd — there is a crowd, though a 
select one — is slightly moved near the en- 
trance of the department, as the hero of the 
night, the new star in the constellation of 
genius, appears. Every eye turns on Henry 
Waldo as he enters, for he is "eminently 
beautiful." Lady Ellaby starts from a slight 
reverie, and hastens to receive him, having 
forcibly subdued the momentary agitation 
produced by the first sound of a name, once 
so intimately coupled with that of her fallen 
idol. Never had Lady Ellaby been more 
brilliant and fascinating: she exerted her 
utmost powers to please, and completely 
charmed the young American. Ah ! Waldo 

r 2 



212 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

did not marvel then, that Claude had loved 
that woman. He only wondered that he 
could have sacrificed her to pride and the 
world ! 

Later in the evening, when many an object 
of enchantment had been discussed, and 
many a bright idea had fallen from the elo- 
quent lips of Lady Ellaby, Waldo contrived, 
though with the utmost caution and delicacy, 
to advert to his unhappy friend, and at 
length succeeded in bringing forth a few 
incoherent words of his mission of pacifi- 
cation. Lady Ellaby listened quietly to the 
end, and with no visible emotion, unless it 
were in the almost imperceptible quivering 
of her lip, — then, looking full into Waldo's 
face, she said, " Tell Lord Claude Douglas, 
Mr. Waldo, that Annie Shenvood no longer 
exists, and that Lady Ellaby is happy enough 
to appreciate the duty and fidelity she ow 
to an indulgent husband." And, rising as 
she spoke, Lady Ellaby moved to the other 
side of the room, and was soon after seen 
leaning on the arm of Lord Ellaby, all affec- 
tionate smiles and vivacity ; and as Waldo 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 213 

gazed on that proud, grand-looking man, a 
doubt entered his mind, as to whether his- 
tenderness and devotion might not at length 
have consoled her for the loss of an ungrate- 
ful lover. 

While he was thus musing, there was 
another arrival, and the crowd again parted. 
There entered a boy, who seemed to have 
numbered about fifteen years — perhaps 
might have been more or less. In mind, he 
had already reached the full growth of man ; 
his slight, elegant figure was perfectly erect ; 
and his beautiful head, covered with thick 
clustering curls, was thrown back with an 
air of haughty defiance, while his eye, so 
deeply blue, that in the light of the flashing 
lamps it looked quite black, passed boldly 
from one object to another, all round the 
room, as if he were expecting insult, and 
stood prepared to repel it. 

Lady Ellaby visibly changed colour at the 
appearance of Lord Lorrimer. For a moment 
she forgot her present self: it was a beloved 
object that stood before her — her old, pleasant 
companion. Claude's friend, too, — the beau- 



214 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

tiful link of gold that had first bound Claude 
and her together. She loved Sydney, with 
all his selfishness — all his wayward humours ; 
and she eagerly advanced to meet him ; but 
then stood still. Remembrance had come 
back; she recollected his proud spirit, and 
thought he might, perhaps, be capable of 
insulting a detested step-mother. She could 
bear any insult from another, but not from 
Sydney. 

But Annie miscalculated. The proud boy 
advanced to her, and, addressing her as 
" Mother," kissed her hand. Annie was for 
once quite overcome : she retained his hand 
in hers a moment, and her eyes filled with 
most unwonted tears. Lord Ellaby was 
greatly pleased to observe so warm a greet- 
ing pass between his wife and son. He had 
expected an immediate declaration of war 
between his proud heir and the step-mother. 
How agreeable was the disappointment. u Ah, 
Sydney, my dear boy !" he exclaimed, ,w how 
glad I am! how " 

" How well you look, my Lord !" said 
Sydney. " I must thank my dear mother 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 215 

for her care of you!" and he spoke, and 
looked round, as if he would have said — 
" Who shall mock my words?" — but no one 
did. 

A little time after, Sydney found an 
opportunity of a private conversation with 
Lady Ellaby. "Why is that man here?" 
he asked, shortly, and designating Waldo. 

" He is the celebrated sculptor, Waldo," 
said Annie, in a deprecatory tone : " every- 
body invites him." 

" I know, I know!" said Lord Lorrimer, 
impatiently; " but he is his friend, and 
cannot be ours. I know they were together 
in Rome, and together travelled into Greece. 
You are altered," he added, suddenly chang- 
ing his conversation. " You are greatly 
altered since the first day I saw you. You 
become your trappings well ; ay, better than 
she did. It was very sensible in my father 
to marry you; you have infused some of 
your spirit into him. Now, he is never 
ridiculous !" 

" Pray don't couple the word ridiculous 
with your father, Sydney." 



210 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

"Nay, it ill becomes any of us to moralize," 
said Sydney, abruptly. " We are all hypo- 
crites ; you the cleverest, of course. But it i- 
no use putting on a mask before me, — you 
know it is not. Don't you think I under- 
stand your position perfectly well? The 
daring, dangerous game you have so success- 
fully played. Indeed, I have watched all 
the moves, and have admired your skill, I 
assure you !" 

u You are as singular as ever, boy !" said 
Annie. 

" More so, probably," said Lorrimer, 
smiling. u However, we shall be £ood friends 
now, Lady Ellaby, whatever we may have 
been before. I don't doubt but that you 
thought I should bully my father for marry- 
ing you. Sol should have done, perhaps, some 
time ago ; — but we had fallen so low, so very 
low. You have built us up again ; and, as I 
said before, Lord Ellaby is no longer a zero 
in the world. I don't pretend to be senti- 
mental; but I am gratified; and, as I said 
before, we shall be friends. We have a 
common object in life." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 21 7 

" And what is that?'' asked Lady Ellaby. 

"Revenge!" said Lorrimer, growing 
suddenly pale. " You must have thought 
me dull, indeed, if you supposed that I did 
not see through all ! You loved him with 
one of those romantic passions that can only 
change to hate — and I, yes, I loved him too 
— admired him — made him my hero ! He 
has stung us both. But never mind, we shall 
have revenge; — we have it already!" 

" Let us talk of something pleasant/' said 
Lady Ellaby; " of your pursuits, Sydney." 

" They are not exactly what they were,' 7 
said Sydney. " I have read a good deal, — 
read in your way, Lady Ellaby, — picking up 
a good deal of odd, out-of-the-way things, 
instead of constantly pouring over classics ; 
though I shall expect to take a respectable 
degree at Cambridge some day." 

" What was your last book?" 

" Macchiavelli" 

" Surely it did not interest you ?" 

" Indeed, it did. By-the-bye, Lady Ellaby, 
if it would not excite unpleasant remi- 
niscences, I wish you would rub up my Italian . 



218 ANNK SHERWOOD. 

I cannot study with any one else as I can 
with you." 

" Of course, I will do any tiling to help 
you." 

" Do you know anything of Spanish?" he 
asked. 

" Very little," replied Annie. 

" Enough to put me in the w T ay of read- 
ing Calderon's plays? I hope," continued 
Sydney, abruptly changing the theme, " I 
hope I shall find a good shooting-gallery 
here." 

" I dare say you will, Sydney." 

" I am very anxious to be a good shot." 

" I should not have thought you would 
have cared about it !" 

" I do, though. I have practised ritle- 
shootino; for alon^ time." 

" Dear me, what for?" 

"Can you ask, Lady Ellaby? To give 
me a steady hand and aim. To rid the 
world — to rid me of him !" 

11 Oh, Sydney, leave him to Heaven!" 

"Did you leave Lady Adelaide toHeaven ?" 
asked Lorrimer, sharply. " Certainly not ; 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 219 

you wrung her very heart and soul, and you 
did well, yes, very well indeed. You took 
on you a yoke you loathed ; wore a title your 
pride, under other circumstances, would have 
made you spurn ; married a man you despised 
too much to hate, and go through a mas- 
querade scene every day, every hour of 
your life — and this, all this for revenge ! I 
am your apt pupil, Lady Ellaby ! I admire 
you — I own no other mother ! I will walk 
in your steps, and be worthy of my pre- 
ceptress ! Yet, but a few short years, and 
I will drag the coward from his lair, wher- 
ever it may be, and wash out the blot from 
our escutcheon in something redder than 
Burgundy. Dear me! is this you. Lady 
Ellaby? Can you be so weak! You are 
faint. Exert yourself; you must, you shall, 
before these people ! Here, come with me I" 
And as Lorrimer led Lady Ellaby from the 
drawing-room, he muttered, u We will never 
be ridiculous again ! You see," continued 
he, seating himself beside her, in her dress- 
ing-room, " I have talent, energy, the means 
of pursuing a great career in life; but all 



220 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

will be useless to me while he cumbers the 
earth. When once I have stamped upon his 
grave, I shall go forth like a young war- 
horse, in the arena of life. How you are 
shuddering ! Overcome this weakness, Lady 
Ellaby, or I shall fancy my father a second 
time dishonoured. By Heaven ! if I were 
sure he were, my vengeance should not w r ait 
for slowly coming manhood !" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 221 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

Lady Ellaby and her sister seldom met ; 
when they did — though the old affection 
lived in the heart of each — there was much 
of restraint in their intercourse; confidence 
was gone. Richard and Ellen refused to 
meet Lord Ellaby ; they considered Annie's 
marriage wrong, even criminal, and no ex- 
planation could suffice to make them more 
tolerant. Of course, Mr. and Mrs. Stancliff 
were too obscure for Lord Ellaby to desire 
their acquaintance, or to resent their un- 
willingness to make his. Annie and Ellen 
had apparently, in one respect, changed 
positions; for Annie, despite the thousand 
points on which they differed, looked up to 
Ellen now, as something immeasurably above 
herself, just as in former and happier days, 
Ellen had looked up to her; while Ellen's 
affection for her sister was fast merging 



222 ANNE SHKRWOOD. 

into the tenderest compassion. Still, the old 
throb of proud exultation would arise in her 
bosom, when the echo of her sister's literary 
fame came into her solitude ; but on those 
occasions, Richard would look very grave, 
and say, "But it is all vanity, Ellen — all 
vanity ! What is genius without principle ? 
Annie is always a painful subject of con- 
templation to me." 

" You don't know, you can't tell, what she 
has suffered, Richard!" was the reply. 
u Fire does not always purify, it sometimes 
hardens. There are so many traces of her 
own noble nature left ; she is still so gene- 
rous, so unselfish, and does so much good, 
though it is all in secret. I have never 
despaired of Annie, and I never will !" Not 
long after, Ellen was summoned to her sister, 
who was alarmingly ill. The artificial 
restraint so long imposed on her feelings ha<l 
proved too much for her physical strength, 
and she had been obliged to yield to 
weakness. 

It was Lord Ellaby himself who wrote to 
summon Ellen; forgetting his pride, he con- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 223 

descended to entreaty, and besought her to 
come and watch over a life so inestimably 
valuable to himself and his family. 

It wanted no persuasion to decide Ellen 
on immediately flying to her beloved sister 
at such a moment ; she reproached herself 
for the temporary estrangement, which had 
certainly not been her fault. 

When Ellen arrived, she was instantly led 
to Lady Ellaby, who lay powerless as an 
infant ; she had only a day or two previously 
broken a blood-vessel. What a contrast the 
pale, thin face, half- shrouded in its masses of 
ebon hair, offered to the splendid room in 
which she was lying. The foot fell noise- 
lessly on a rich carpet of purple and yellow, 
the transparent draperies looked as if they 
had been woven in fairy looms, and large 
silvery mirrors reflected highly gilded furni- 
ture, marbles, vases, statuettes of parian, 
besides the thousand and one ornaments 
which taste scatters with so seemingly neg- 
ligent a hand. There were books in profu- 
sion, and on an open secretary lay a folio of 
the work Annie was preparing for the press. 



224 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

when illness had surprised her in her labours. 
Beside the half- written sheet lay the pen 
which had fallen from a powerless hand, and 
close by it a packet of time-stained, perhaps 
tear-stained letters, and a bouquet of dried 
flowers, so dried that the once green leaves 
were crumbling to dust. They were lying 
on a sheet of paper, on which was written — 

"Le bois de la Cambre, 

Bruxelles, le 18 Juin, 1S5 — , 
Le plus beau jour de ma vie !" 

Only one eye had been wont to rest on those 
treasured mementoes, now the careless and 
the curious spied them out, but the one who 
prized them knew it not. 

Ellen stood beside her sister's bed un- 
announced. The languid eves were raised 
and flooded with sudden joy, as with a 
light. How plainly those eves spoke and 
said, " I knew that you would come ! I knew 
that nothing would keep you from me now!" 
Annie eagerly seized both Ellen's hands, and 
pressed them to her lips, while a gush of 
tears relieved her feelings. It was long 
before either could speak. "I believe I am 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 225 

in great danger," said Annie, in so low a 
voice, that it was almost a whisper. " I 
almost hope it is true ! Do you think it is, 
Ellen?" 

" God forbid !" exclaimed Ellen, half wild 
with fear. " To lose you thus would be 
horrible ! Surely, you will be spared to my 
prayers !" 

" To your prayers I may be !" said Annie, 
sadly; "but what have I to live for, Ellen? 
Did Richard willingly let you come ?" 

" Oh, yes, dearest Annie, and he would 
have come too, only he did not feel quite sure 
whether you would like to see him." 

" No, I should not like to see him ; he is 
too severe in his judgments to deal with such 
a wandering sheep as I am. But you, my 
precious Ellen, your love will plead for me ; 
you will pray for me ; alas, I cannot pray for 
myself!" So Ellen knelt down by that bed 
of suffering, as she had often knelt beside the 
miserable pallet of sin and misery, and 
opened her lips to pray. "Stay!" said 
Annie, " stay ! take this from me ; it weighs 
me down like a chain ; perhaps I can pray 

VOL. III. Q 



226 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

when it is gone." And she held out her 
feeble arm to Ellen, who detached from it a 
narrow velvet bracelet, binding on a locket 
holding one jetty curl. " I loved him — I 
loved him more than God! and God has 
punished the idolater!" said Annie, as her 
eyes followed the relic, which Ellen carried 
to deposit in the cabinet. Then Ellen re- 
turned, and offered up a holy prayer, to 
which Annie seemed to listen, though she 
did not appear to join. " And now," said 
she, hurriedly, when her sister had con- 
cluded, — " now, I must tell you all, or per- 
haps it will be too late !" 

" But you are expending all your strength, 
dear Annie. Spare yourself, for my sake, 
at least. No one loves vou as I do !" 

m 

"No, no one," said Annie. "Ah! if 1 
had been contented with that love! Put 
your arm beneath my head, Ellen ; the other 
round me, as you used to do, when we (no, 
not you, for you were always thankful), 
when I thought we were very poor and 
wretched; when we had but one room, one 
bed, one crust. Oh, Ellen. ! those were 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 227 

happy, blessed days! But they may not 
return again ! My heart is broken ! You 
will let me tell you all, Ellen — you will let 
me tell you all now, that you may think 
more gently of me when I am gone ! I have 
erred, grievously erred; but listen! The 
world judges me without mercy, and my 
heart is grown harder than a stone. I have 
scorned the world's judgments — hurled back 
defiance for contumely; but I am too weak 
for that now! Listen, Ellen! I will not 
tell you what I suffered for years, in the 
house of heartless strangers, more heartless, 
perhaps, in appearance sometimes than 
reality; for the fear of the world governs 
all — the dread of being beneath the fashion. 
The Maberlys were of the kind I mean. 
They were not bad-hearted ; but they were 
afraid — yes, positively afraid of showing 
kindness to their governess, lest they should 
be thought vulgar ! So they left me to that 
utter solitude, which preyed upon heart and 
mind, till I became bad-tempered and morose, 
and my pride rebelled against the haughti- 
ness of those I felt to be my inferiors, but 

Q2 



228 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

to whom, because I was their salaried de- 
pendant, I must for days and months bend 
obsequiously. Their children I loved : they 
had all hearts, and might have been trained 
to angels, but they were pampered, and 
taught a lesson of worldliness. But I must 
not dwell on them. They bring back the 
memory of dear Antonia — sweet, but faith- 
less Antonia — as I often call her. Still. 
it. is weakness; but I cannot help loving 
lier: and love and anger cannot dwell to- 
gether." 

"Dear Annie, this is too much for you!" 
interrupted Ellen. 

" No ; it relieves, it strengthens me. Let 
my full heart speak, or it will burst. But 
what is that?" she cried, suddenly, startled 
by the report of a gun, and growing, if 
possible, paler than before. "Ring, Ellen, 
quickly, I entreat!" Ellen rung as desired. 
"What is that report?" she asked, faintly, 
when the attendant entered. 

u Lord Lorrimcr, your Ladyship, tiring at 
a mark — practising, as he calls it. I have sup- 
plicated him to stop.but he wont, my Lady." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 229 

"I am so ill!" murmured Annie, over 
whose frame a fearful shudder had passed. 

" Shall we let my Lord know, your Lady- 
ship? Lord Lorrimer will mind no one 
else, but says just as he used in old times, 
" Do you know who I am?" 

u Ah!" sighed Annie, to whom those 
words brought back a world of memories- 
" No," she replied ; " but tell Lord Lorrimer 
my head will not bear the noise. Now, 
Ellen, listen once more. I have told you of 
the Maberlys ; you knew something of them 
before. My chains with them were silken 
fetters, compared with my bondage to that 
woman. Ah, there is my misery ! There 
is the load that presses my soul down to the 
burning pit, and shuts Heaven's mercy 
against me ! I cannot forgive her ! I have 
tried, but I can't ! Perhaps it would grow 
easier, if I were sure — quite, quite sure that 
she was no longer near him. They say 
they are no longer together; but I can't 
believe it — no, I can't believe it. Ah, Ellen, 
you shudder! So should I have shuddered 
once. But listen ! If it were only my iron 



230 ANN!; SHERWOOD. 

bondage, the years of misery, the daily, 

hourly tortures she made me suffer, I could 
freely forgive it all — yes, all! But when I 
remember that she took him from me, my 
brain is maddened ; for I loved him, oh, so 
madly, with that love that hurls down de- 
traction on the idolater ! Ellen, you know 
none of these things, absolutely nothing. 
Your pure, innocent love, God has blessed 
and approved. You can't enter into the 
miseries of consuming passion; still less 
can you understand the fierce pangs of 
jealousy. When she lured him from me, 
from honour, from every high thought and 
feeling, I became like a lioness robbed of 
her whelps. My highest hopes, my pride, 
were centred in him, as w r ell as 1113" idola- 
trous love. All — all, she swept away, and 
Heaven looked on! Had she stood before 
me in the first storm of my passion, I should 

have , I don't know what I should have 

done. As it was, I had time — yes, time to 
reflect — and I. gathered all the strength from 
the depth of my stubborn nature: made my 
angry passions crouch down like chained 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 231 

lions at my feet ; and walked through the 
world coldly, immovably as a statue: and 
all the while I lived only for revenge. Your 
lips quiver, Ellen; you would tell me to 
repent, and cry for mercy! But is there 
yet time ? I would undo it all now — all, if 
I could. But it is done — done to all 
eternity !" 

" Forgive the unhappy man, and banish 
him from your thoughts !" said Ellen. 

" Forgive him !" said Annie, starting. 
"You will scarcely believe it, but through 
all this tempest of passion I have never had 
one angry feeling towards him — never! 
And now," she continued, melting into tears, 
" now, if laying down my life for him would 
give him one minute's happiness, I would do 
it joyfully. But it is she that troubles me. 
Oh, Ellen, ask God to teach me to forgive 
her, as I have forgiven all others." Some 
one knocked at the door, but did not enter, 
when told to come in. Ellen went to the 
door to see who was there. Lord Ellaby 
stood before her. He pressed her hand, 
and anxiously inquired for the sufferer. 



232 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Thank Lord Ellaby, dear Ellen," said 
Annie, " and say I am better already, since 
he has had the kindness to send for you.'' 
Lord Ellaby received the message and re- 
tired. " I shall send for Lord Ellaby to ask 
his forgiveness, if I am to die," said Annie, 
when his Lordship was gone. " He is a very 
kind-hearted man; his pride was his only 
fault. That is softened now, and he is ex- 
tremely generous, letting me live and act 
exactly as I please, since the first few w r eeks 
w r e were together, when he used to persecute 
me with lover-like attentions. I am not 
really his wife. I have never considered 
myself as such !" 

" Then the sooner you part the better," 
said Ellen, quickly; " God wall spare you to 
us. You will go home with me, Annie 
dearest, — you will go home with me. 
Richard will be so glad, and we shall all be 
happy again." 

" No, dear Ellen," said Annie ; " if I am 
spared, I will not leave Lord Ellaby. I 
have w T ronged him grievously ; but for me 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 233 

he might have formed ties which would 
have made life pleasant; and though I 
cannot be all to him another would, I will 
remain in his house, watch over his family 
and interests, and do all I can to atone for 
the past. But I may not live, perhaps, to 
do this; I scarcely think I can." 

" But you have not told me who your 

doctor is, dear Annie." 

" Oh, a very great man, — Dr. F ." 

"Why not Dr. Sinclair?" 

* I did not like to send for him," said 
Annie ; "we have only met once since I 
entered this house. I sent for him one day 
when feeling very ill ; he took on himself 
to tell me I had behaved in a very unprin- 
cipled way. c That is a grave charge, 
Doctor !' said I, trying to laugh it off. l One 
richly merited,' he replied ; and, after hastily 
prescribing for me, he left, nor did he return 
again. How can I send for him, Ellen?" 

" I know he is rough in his ways, but he 
is a most faithful friend nevertheless," said 
Ellen. "Dear Annie, let him come." 



234 AXNE SHERWOOD. 

" Well then, as you ^vvill," said Annie ; 

" only don't leave me alone with him." 

• * » * * « 

The Doctor was summoned, and this 
time came more in sorrow than in anger. 
It was long since he had seen Lady Ellaby ; 
he was painfully struck by the alteration in 
her appearance, and sat silent some time 
after his few questions had been answered. 
He did not scold this time, his patient looked 
so wan, and meek, and humbled. 

u I see what you think !" said Annie, at- 
tempting to smile. 

" No, you don't," said the Doctor, quickly, 
" not a bit of it ; I was thinking of your 
sister's wedding-day ; I was thinking, too, 
of the foolish speech I made you that day, 
half in jest, half in earnest ; and wondering 
if it would not have been more for your 
happiness and safety to have taken it in 
earnest, sobered down your wild fancy, and 
contented yourself with the lot a silly, 
white-haired old man would have given 
you. It would have been better, Lady 
Ellaby, far better. My dingy walls wouldn't 



ANN1 SHERWOOD. 235 

have pressed such a dead weight on you as 
these gilded things." 

"Yes, yes, it would have been better," 
murmured Annie ; " but who can recall the 
past?" 

" You will get over this," said the Doctor. 
Annie did not speak, but her sister's face 
lighted up. 

" And then you will order her country 
air," said Ellen, eagerly. 

" Southern air," said the Doctor. " She 
must winter in the South of France." 

" No, no ; not there," said Annie, quickly ; 
" anywhere but there !" 

" Well, then, Pisa," said the Doctor; " but 
you will be careful of yourself, or have 
some one to guard you who will?" 

u I shall have Sydney," said Annie. 

" The young puppy will do you more 
harm than good !" said the Doctor. 

"I think not," said Annie; u he is very 
kind and attentive to me; and, besides, I 
like to have some one near me that I love ; 
and you know I cannot have Ellen." 

" So, you love him, indeed! — love! Do 



23G ANNE SHERWOOD. 

you remember who I am? I thought you 
had had enough of him," said the Doctor. 

" Yes, I love him dearly," said Annie ; 
" I can't bear him out of my sight. I have 
so many fearful presentiments of some 
coming evil." 

" Well, I suppose my Lord will take it 
into his head to go with you." 

" He cannot, he has duties at home. That 
is, of course, a great obstacle. He will miss 
me." 

" I don't the least doubt it. But Til tell 
you now, Lady Ellaby, what my prescrip- 
tion is. Go to Pisa directly you're in a state 
to move. Don't fag yourself with society ; 
keep quiet, and give yourself up to book- 
making, and forget all you leave behind 
you outside the w r alls of Wareham Rec- 
tory." 

" I will try," said Annie, humblv. 

" Then vou will succeed. You know vou 
always carry your points, great and small." 

" Not always, Doctor," said Annie, smiling 
faintly. 

M I shall go with you, Annie," said Ellen. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 237 

" Go with ine, my dear, kind Ellen, will 
you?" said Annie, with an irradiation of 
countenance that had long been absent from 
her face. 

" Of course she will," said the Doctor. 
" What did you do for her, when she was 
laid up? Toiled at complete drudgery!" 

" Oh, no," said Annie; " it was happiness. 
Those were blessed days." 

" Blessed nonsense ! — to be scratched, and 
pinched, and kicked by a pack of squalling 
children. I'll tell you what, Annie Sher- 
wood — (don't start and blush; my Lord 
wont be jealous of a white-haired old fellow 
like me) — with all your sense, you never 
had common sense in vour life !" 

" I believe not," said Annie ; " but Ellen 

dear Richard. What will Richard say 

to your plan?" 

" He will say I am quite right. You 
will only be two or three months absent; 
he will think the sacrifice richly recom- 
pensed, if it benefits you." 

" No, Ellen, dearest, you shall not leave 
your husband and children for me. The 



238 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

love that you send forth with me will be 
almost as sweet a solace as your company. 
Oh, Ellen, that you could always be with 
me ! Your pure spirit soothes and refines 
my sinful soul. If you had never left me — 
if we had never been separated — perchance 
I should have had less sorrow, certainly less 
self-reproach." 

" But, Annie," said Ellen, gently, " you 
must remember there is a higher, holier 
influence than any frail mortal could exer- 
cise, if we would only be guided by it. It 
is not wise, it is not safe, to lean so much 
on an erring creature." 

" But instinct always seems to lead you 
right," said Annie, mournfully. " You 
always clearly and instantly saw your 
way, while I ever had to grope like the 
blind." 

"We are all blind till God gives us light," 
said Ellen. " Indeed, if I had been situated 
like you — placed in the same position and 
circumstances — my weakness would have 
yielded, and I should have had more to 
accuse myself of than you have !" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 239 

M Ah, no ! — no one, perhaps, would have 
acted as I have done. I believe, I hope 
there is but one Anne Sherwood in the 
world ; and, alas ! I have been proud of the 
miserable distinction !" 

"Well, all this moralizing is, perhaps, 
very edifying," said the Doctor, helping him- 
self to a large pinch of snuff; " very edify- 
ing, indeed, and the speeches you have been 
pleased to utter have been very pathetic 
and touching; but I must trouble you to 
stop, and, if we are to have any acting at 
all, it must be comedy of the lightest descrip- 
tion. I shall see you again to-morrow, 

Lady Ellaby. If the great man, Dr. F , 

makes a breeze about my interfering, you 
can tell him I'm an old friend, understand 
your constitution, and all that sort of thing. 
Good-bye !" Then (to himself), " Ah, sick- 
ness has brought her down a little! — not 
quite so high and mighty as the last time I 
saw her ! Not a bit herself; — none of the 
old, quick, clever answers. Well, I haven't 
scolded her as she deserves ; but I'll wait a 
bit; yes, I'll wait a bit." 



210 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" You'll never scold me again, Doctor," 
said Annie, with a little flash of her old 
spirit. 

tc So you're mean enough to listen, are 
you?" said the old man, coming back to the 
bedside, with a little gleam of the old, merry 
light twinkling in his eyes. " By-the-bye, 
who do you think is on my list of patients 
now?" 

" I am sure I can't tell, Doctor." 

"Why, Madam Juno herself!" 

" Lady — Lady Adelaide !" said Annie, 
faintly, and sinking back on her pil- 
lows. 

" No other," said the Doctor. " Disease 
of the heart, — quite surprised, — didn't know 
she had one at all, — never trust to appear- 
ances again ! Her pride is fallen a little ; 
but she lias turned out a regular termagant, 
with a wrinkled forehead and cracked voice 
Her boy-husband is frightened out of his 
life of her." 

" She is, then, married — really, really 
married," said Annie, in a low but eager 
voice. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 241 

" Too surely, for the simpleton that's tied 
to her." 

" And what — what has become of the 

unhappy man who ? You know I once 

knew something of him," said Annie, while 
her white lips quivered with ill-suppressed 
emotion. 

" I suppose so," said the Doctor, with a 
little less good humour. " He is off, across 
the Atlantic, — a good riddance of bad rub- 
bish. There's no knowing whose wife he 
might take a fancy to run off with next. 
But I can stop no longer for this small talk. 
Now, if you'd talk sensibly, with spirit, as 

you used to talk five or six years ago " 

and muttering, as he left the room, the 
remainder of the sentence, the Doctor was 
gone. 

Annie said nothing, but held Ellen's hand 
in hers — sometimes kissing it, sometimes 
laying it under her hot face. A i'ew quiet 
tears now and then stole down her cheeks; 
but a calm seemed to have settled on her 
perturbed spirit; and presently she fell into 
a quiet sleep; only now and then her lips 

VOL. in. R 



2 1 2 AN N E S II ERWOOD . 

parted, and breathed a few inaudible words; 
at least inaudible to every ear but that of 
watchful affection. " An ocean — a wide 
ocean — between us ! But it rolls between 

him and her too! that is a mercy, at least l n 

***** 

Ellen remained watching over her sister, 
till Lady Ellaby had sufficiently recovered 
to travel. Then she would have accom- 
panied her, having already obtained kind 
Richard's full consent, and even his ap- 
proval; but Annie would not listen to a 
proposition which would separate her sister 
from her husband and children for several 
months. She wished for no companion 
but Lord Lorrimer. An absence for a winter 
would make a great break in his studies. 
Lord Ellaby passed over that objection di- 
rectly it was suggested to him. Sydney 
himself, though ambitious of early distinc- 
tion, eagerly caught at the idea of accom- 
panying his stepmother, and said lie >hould 
not fail of finding plenty to do; he should 
read Italian and practise shooting. 

After hearing this, Lady Ellaby became 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 243 

still more anxious to secure his company. 
" I wish I could go," said Lord Ellaby. 

" You are really very, very good, my 
Lord," said Annie. " I have little deserved 
all your kindness." 

Lord Ellaby looked at her in surprise ; it 
was so new to hear her speak so humbly — 
so very new. 

" You look surprised, my Lord," said 
Annie, '" and no doubt are so. In case we 
do not meet again — in case anything should 
happen to me — I must speak frankly, and 
tell you what is on my mind. First, I am 
very grateful to you for all your goodness 
and forbearance " 

" Say no more, pray, my dear Octavia," 
said his Lordship. " Indeed, you pain me; 
you make me think of past days of injustice, 
pride, and oppression." 

11 Ah, I have forgotten and forgiven all 
that, my Lord ! It did not arise from you. 
I have had too many proofs of your good 
heart and kindly nature to believe so ; no, 
all that sprang from the laics which govern 
the social institutions of aristocratic England ! 

r 2 



244 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Of late — I wish it had not been too late — I 
have repented, bitterly repented, of the 
injury — I may say injuries, that I have done 
you." 

" Injuries!" said LordEllaby. u I know 
of none — positively none, Octavia, but your 
withholding from me the affection I covet ; 

the But vou are beginning to love me 

now, Octavia — I feel, I see that you are !" 

" Oh ! no, no, my Lord !" cried Annie, 
starting back to avoid her husband's ca- 
resses; "I do not love you. I wish I did, 
but I do not; and I cannot again deceive or 
wrong you. My heart is crushed and 
broken, as much by its own pride as by 
others' cruelty; but it will keep one pure 
chamber still; it will not dishonour its only 
fragment of self-esteem." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 245 



CHAPTER XIX. 

"And this is Italy! Corinne's Italy!" was 
Annie's exclamation, when first the soft 
Italian breezes fanned her languid cheek. 

" Lord Claude Douglas and Lady Ade- 
laide's Italy," said Sydney, gloomily con- 
tracting his brows. 

Annie shuddered as he spoke, and closed 
her eyes. 

"You have not forgotten him, then?" 
added the boy, hastily; "I see you have 
not. I never thought to see you so weak ; 
but I hope you will put a good face on it. 
Hitherto you have behaved admirably." 

" Oh no, Sydney, — say wickedly." 

" No, I wont, Lady Ellaby ; I can't, nor 
could you, till lately. That sister of yours 
has been preaching to you. I'll tell you 
what, she is far too pretty for a Methodist." 

Annie was too feeble to argue with the 



240 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

youthful man of the world ; she leaned back 
in the carriage, and shut her eyes to the 
beautiful land. Each glance seemed to 
smite on her heart, — each song from the 
tuneful voices of the lively peasants brought 
with it the requiem of a promised happiness, 
that had perished before it began to exist 
for her. Despite all her resolution, a soft, 
persuasive, musical voice sounded in her 
ears, and it said, as she had once heard it 
say among the murmurings of greenwood 
leaves, " Annie dearest, have you never 
dreamt of seeing Italy, with me — with your 
own Claude?" 

Sydney sat opposite, watching the fluc- 
tuations of her face, and wondering why 
the proud woman had grown so meek and 
humble; and thinking with doubly-fierce 
hatred of the man he had once loved. 

Meanwhile Claude Douglas was wander- 
ing in the Far West — in the grand forests, on 
the banks of the mighty rivers, vainly seek- 
ing the peace of mind that fled from him 

the more closely he pursued the chase. 

****** 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 247 

Six melancholy months Lady Ellaby 
spent in Italy, reading the divine poetry of 
the land, as much in its stainless skies as 
in its imperishable bards and the glorious 
creations of its artists. She wandered from 
one place of interest to another, looking on 
and searching out all that other travellers 
regard with pleasure ; but the impressions 
on her mind — the images reflected in her soul 

CD 

— were very different from those of others, as 
her published thoughts proved, when she 
returned to the English w r orld ; but few were 
those thoughts of the many that had risen 
within her. There had come so many, that 
no eye less merciful than His who remem- 
bers we are ashes, might know. 

Lady Ellaby reached Rome the Eternal, 
and Corinne was her guide-book, as it had 
been that of Claude Douglas. It was in vain 
she strove to banish him from her thoughts 
in Rome. A deeper sadness settled on her 
spirits, and she hurried away to Naples, 
there to spend the remainder of the cold 
season. 

It was Dr. Sinclair who had escorted 



248 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Annie to Italy, Lord Ellaby having eagerly 
accepted his offer to take charge of the 
invalid ; it was the kind old man who came 
to lead her back again to her own land ; it 
was he who exerted his every faculty to 
rouse her from dejection, and to awaken her 
from the sad visions in which he well knew 
that she was plunged too often. On her 
return from Italy, Annie paid a brief visit 
to Ellen, and then once more took up her 
abode in the mansion of him whose name 
she bore. She still went into society occa- 
sionally ; still received guests at home ; but 
though she would sometimes sparkle with 
her old vivacity, hnr general demeanour 
was quiet and subdued. Her chief intimacy 
was with Mrs. Harrington; and it was well 
known that much of her time was spent in 
going about doing good, while her literary 
productions more and more evinced that her 

mind was assuming a healthier tone. 

* * * » • 

Time passed on, as it will pa—, in soitoav 
or in gladness. Lord Lorrimer had attained 
his sixteenth year, and with it a rare 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 249 

perfection of proud beauty. His slender, 
graceful form far passed the usual standard, 
and he stood amid youths of his own years, 
as superior to them in mind and attain- 
ments, as he rose above them in form. 
Lady Ellaby loved him devotedly, even as 
if he had not been Adelaide's child, — loved 
him so that her partial fondness no longer 
permitted her to discern his faults, except 
when now and then she received a sudden 
shock by a dark hint, or a more open de- 
claration, that he still nurtured the fiercest 
hatred towards the man who had brought 
shame and dishonour upon his family, and 
still caressed the idea of washing it out in 
his blood. 

" What are these for?" asked Annie, fear- 
fully, when Lord Lorrimer, kneeling on one 
knee before her, opened a case of duelling- 
pistols, and invited her to examine and ad- 
mire the beautiful workmanship. " What 
are they for?" she repeated, almost gasping 
for breath, as a cold, cruel smile passed over 
the fair boy's lips. 

" To shoot him !" he replied, in a low, 



250 AN\ BH1RWOOD. 

deep voice, adding, " I am a good shot, you 
know; I have consumed many hours in 
practice." 

In vain Annie wept, and prayed that 
stubborn spirit to forbear his vengeance. He 
roughly shook off her clinging hold, ex- 
claiming, in answer to something she had 
said, " I'll tell you, Lady Ellab}~, that if you 
betray me to my father, I will let him know 
your real feelings, your real motives, for 
opposing my just vengeance." 

" I will spare you the pains, Lord Lor- 
rimer," exclaimed Annie, something of her 
old spirit flashing in her eyes; "I will tell 
him all — more than you could tell — and he 
will lay his commands on you to spare 
yourself the guilt of murder !" 

" Then I shall simply tell him, that he 
should have had spirit enough to avenge 
his own honour; and I should not have 
been called upon to do it." 

" Surely he has suffered enough, Syd- 
ney !" said Annie. 

" And I, Lady Ellaby," said the boy, 
looking up with a livid face, — M do you think 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 251 

I have suffered nothing? Do you think I 
was insensible when the finger of scorn 
was pointed at me as her son! at my 
father as his dupe!" — and for the first 
time — the very first time — the proud boy 
burst into a passion of tears. 

"My Sydney! my own Sydney!" ex- 
claimed Annie, for a moment forgetting 
everything but his grief, as she pressed him 
to her bosom. " You know something of 
my love for you, but not all ; no, not half 
its extent. You do not know how neces- 
sary you are to me ! Can you wonder that 
I would guard so dear a life? Think of 
your father — your kind, good father's over- 
whelming grief. If you threw away your 
young existence, he would die — I know he 
would ! Think, too, of my sorrow ! What 
would become of me now without you ? And 
for what would you bring such misery on 
the two beings who love you best? — to 
throw fresh dishonour, fresh guilt on a name 
already " 

u Well, I will think over all you have 
said, and imagine the rest," said the boy, 



252 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

trying to smile and speak lightly; " but now 
I must be off. I am deep in a Greek play. 
You know the trilogy in jEschylus, don't 
you ? It is very grand ; but I fancy if you 
were in your old mood, you would prefer the 
Prometheus. I do — I like the grandeur of 
the Titan hurling defiance at the Thun- 
derer ! I like the fatalism, too. ''A riverirlaj 
he added, and, bending over Lady Ellaby, 
he kissed her. " I wonder vou errant me 

J o 

this privilege — I believe I am the only one 
so favoured !" 

" I regard none other as my child, Syd- 
ney !" 

" Mother," said Sydney, "you know r I have 
no sentiment; but, after all, 'mother' is a 
pleasant word. Thank you for all your 
love ; and whatever happens, remember I do 
love you — love you with all my heart. But 
I must go to my Greek." 

Annie looked after Sydney, and seeing him 
pick up two or three books as he left the 
room, and carry away with him, was rather 
reassured as to his present intentions, and 
turned to her occupations ; but soon a vague 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 253 

uneasiness returned. She sought for Lord 
Ellaby, to impart her fears to him, and with 
him to concert some means of averting the 
dreadful catastrophe she apprehended; but 
Lord Ellaby was out, and would not return 
till dinner-time. 

Annie spent several hours of intense 
anxiety. Sydney had gone out; she well 
knew Claude Douglas was in London, and 
there was every chance of their meeting. 
She went to Sydney's room, and was some- 
what comforted to find the pistols were 
there. Late in the evening, she heard him 
enter. She spoke to him as he ascended the 
staircase, but her voice did not reach him. 
His step was hurried and agitated. She 
followed him up-stairs ; she heard him lock 
his door ; a fear of something horrible seized 
on her; her knees smote together; she 
reached the door, tried to speak, but utter- 
ance failed ; a loud report of a pistol, a heavy 
fall, and a tale of horror was told. 

The servants crowded to the scene ; the 
door was burst open, and there lay the fair 
casket from which the young fiery spirit 



254 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

had just rushed forth, weltering in blood. 
Those who could more calmly survey the 
fearful scene, assured themselves and others 
that a dreadful accident had terminated the 
career of the proud heir of the Curzons. It 
was supposed that he had taken up one of 
his loaded pistols to examine it, that the 
trigger had become entangled in his watch- 
chain, and in seeking too hastily to disen- 
tangle it, the fearful result had followed; 
and the pale, cold lips that death had silenced 
could not open to tell how far the conjectures 
were true. Insensible from extreme horror, 
Lady Ellaby was carried from the room, 
while they went through the useless ceremony 
of sending for the doctor. He, of course, 
pronounced that death had been instan- 
taneous, the ball having entered the heart. 

The unhappy father arrived. In speech- 
less horror and despair he looked on all that 
remained to him of his idolized son, the 
proud heir of his fortunes, his titles, and 
honours, — the son whose career was to 
have stamped the unfading nobility of genius 
on the family escutcheon. There he lav. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 255 

cold and dead — and cold and dead with him 
a mighty host of proud, fond hopes ! How 
the once haughty man wept and groaned, 
and wrung his hands, and called upon the 
inexorable Heavens to give him back his 
son, his boy — his beautiful, proud boy ! But 
silence was the only answer to that voice of 
agony ; and the dim, cold midnight came, and 
spread its black pall over the dead boy and 
the wretched parent, as they lay side by 
side on the floor. 

In the cold, stiff hand a letter was grasped, 
here and there stained by the gushing blood, 
and this they read in it : — 

" I have wronged you enough, poor boy. 
I will not add to that wrong by bringing 
the guilt of your young blood on my head ! 
You are already avenged enough, believe 
me. I bear about with me an incurable 
remorse and regret, that time aggravates 
instead of softening. No ! I will not spill 
your blood — the blood of a child I once 
loved, and who loved me too ! 

" By the remembrance of old days, Syd- 



05G ANNE SHERWOOD. 

ney, when no barrier of guilt or anger rose 
between us, forgive and pity 

" Claude Douglas." 

From that clay forth Lord Ellaby sank 
into premature old age. He relinquished 
his public duties, society, everything the 
world could offer. 

Lady Ellaby devoted herself entirely to 
the bereaved father; and whilst suffering 
almost as severely as himself, from the fear- 
ful shock she had received, exerted her 
utmost efforts to soothe and comfort him. 
But her efforts were only partially success- 
ful. Lord Ellaby would sit for hours look- 
ing on vacancy — buried in dreams — from 
which he only awoke to ask for his son, his 
beautiful boy! And when the truth rushed 
back on his desolate heart, such a paroxysm 
of passionate grief followed, that reason and 
life seemed equally endangered. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 25 



re" 



CHAPTER XX. 

A dakk cloud settled on Lord Ellaby's 
latter days. It was not exactly madness — 
it was too quiet an oppression of the facul- 
ties. The fire of frenzy never gleamed in his 
dull eye ; his voice never rose in the storm of 
tempestuous passion ; it was low, mournful y 
except occasionally, when he fancied himself 
in years gone by, and reassumed the haughty 
tone which had then distinguished him. 
It was strange, very strange, to witness the 
utter oblivion of things that had lately oc- 
curred, even of the terrible blow which had 
struck down his proudest, fondest hopes, 
that was quite forgotten. 

He would write long letters to Sydney,, 
who he firmly believed to be at Harrow, 
and preparing for a future career of honour 
and distinction. It was a happy delusion; 
none could be so cruel as to undeceive him. 

VOL. III. s 



258 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 



There was another name, too, incessantly 
on his lips, — that of Adelaide, the wife of his 
youth, the mother of his children. He 
would call upon her even with tears, some- 
times expostulating with her in a tone of 
the tenderest reproach, on her absenting 
herself from him and from her family. 
Still he only thought that the pleasures of 
society drew her from home, — her guilt and 
dishonour were entirely effaced from his 
memory. He talked, too, of Claude Douglas, 
just as in other days, and always addressed 
Lady Ellaby as " Miss Sherwood," with the 
same air of condescending patronage he had 
often shown her in other days. 

Lord Ellaby travelled back several years 
of his life; he was in Brussels, in the midst 
of the old set. Lady Adelaide was the 
beauty of the day; Miss Sherwood was the 
governess; even little Dobson filled her 
obscure corner, and round him were gathered 
the fascinating Douglas, the old raui An- 
nesley, and the other familiar feces. The 
timid literary lady, with her little vanities 
and great pretensions, was there too. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 259 

All this did not seem strange to him ; it 
was just the world in which she lived her- 
self. She would fain have left it for higher, 
holier ground, and sometimes she did suc- 
ceed in rising a little on her clogged wing; 
but it soon drooped again, and she went 
back to the sad world of imagery, there to 
sit down, amid the sackcloth and ashes of 
the past. 

The direction of all Lord Ellaby's affairs 
necessarily fell into the hands of Annie ; and 
she proved a wise steward, as well as a 
faithful one, while, with the utmost scru- 
pulosity, she avoided the self-appropriation 
of anything that was his. Her husband's 
children she watched over, and trained to 
something higher and better than their 
original character and earlier education had 
promised. They were not likely to display 
either shining talents or brilliant virtues, 
but they might be respectable members of 
society. 

The Ellabys now constantly resided in 
the country, his Lordship's health requiring 
free air and retirement. Annie was his 

s 2 



200 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

assiduous and unwearying nurse. She had 

survived the proud feelings which would 
have made it painful to find herself seem- 
ingly placed in her old dependent position; 
and it was well she had; for she seldom 
entered Lord Ellaby's presence without being 
reminded of her supposed humble capacity. 
One day he said, " Miss Sherwood, be so 
good as to read some amusing book aloud 
to me ; I dare say you can leave your school- 
room duties for an hour or two. l>y-the-bye, 
I hope you are pushing Walter on in his 
arithmetic ; he was sadly deficient the last 
time I examined him. Lady Adelaide talks 
of making a change ; I hope we may be able 
to avoid parting with you. You can begin 
to read ; take a chair. Stay ! — first write a 
note to Colonel Anneslev, and tell him I 
shall be with him soon !" Annie shuddered 
when she heard those last words; and well 
she might shudder in listening to the words 
of the dying maniac, whose wild fancies had 
brought back the buried dead; and as she 
looked at him, she thought his words pro- 
phetic; he would probably soon be with 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 261 

Colonel Annesley. Lord Ellaby's disease 
was supposed to be a softening of the brain ; 
it was progressing with unusual rapidity. 
Daily it seemed that his faculties were 
diminishing in force ; daily, too, his physical 
strength declined. 

One of the dying visions of the unfortu- 
nate man was, that a dukedom had lately 
been conferred on him ; he insisted on being 
styled " Your Grace." Not long after, he 
conceived the idea that he was Premier, 
having just received the seals of office, and 
was forming a strong Tory administration. 
Many a preferment did he bestow on his 
imaginary creatures and dependents. The 
Duchess, as he now termed Lady Adelaide, 
w r as in constant attendance on the Sovereign, 
he said, so she could not be much at home. 
Annie's reading, — her gentle voice, her kind 
assiduities, — soothed and pleased him. He 
told her one day he had asked the Duchess 
to raise her salary; he had no doubt she 
would do it ! 

But the end, the fearful end, of these 
earthly visions drew near. Lord Ellaby 



262 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

was not confined to his bed, but weakness 
obliged him to lie on a couch. His fine 
person was thin and attenuated; his hand- 
some, aristocratic features were drawn and 
altered ; but there was unmistakeably printed 
there the family pride which had been the 
ruling passion of his life, — mingled, how- 
ever, with such traces of suffering, that it 
could only excite pity. He awoke one day 
from a troubled sleep, calling for Adelaide ! 
" What ! can no one watch beside me when 
I am ill but Miss Sherwood ?" he exclaimed, 
in a voice of irritation. " Be so good as to 
tell the Duchess I w r ish to see her." Annie 
left the room, and in a few minutes re- 
turned, saying, " She is not in the house, 
my Lord; I cannot find her." 

" Remember, Miss Sherwood, you are 
speaking of her Grace," said Lord Ellahy. 
haughtily. " Is Sydney at home?" 

" No, your Grace ; if you remember your- 
self, he has not been home this vacation." 

" To be sure, I forgot ; he is travelling 
with Lord Claude in the Highlands. I will 
write to him. Give me my desk." Writing 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 263 

materials were placed before his Lordship, 
but the pen fell from his hand ; death was 
already busy w'ith the enfeebled frame. 
"I cannot write," said he; "I have the 
cramp in my hand. You can write, and 

tell him Stay ! the letter had better be to 

Lord Claude. I want to let him know " 

and before the sentence could be completed, 
he fainted. 

"It is death," said the doctor, solemnly; 
"it is death. We may prolong a painful life 
a few hours; more cannot be done." 

" Shall I not see my wife? Did you say 
I should not see my wife?" murmured Lord 
Ellaby, recovering a little. 

" His Lordship is calling for you, Lady 
Ellaby," said the physician ; but Annie shook 
her head. " Not for me," she said, in a low 
voice. " He has not recognised me for a 
long time ; it is for her, his first wife, Lady 
Adelaide, that he is calling. His mind 
naturally reverts to her now, he was so de- 
votedly fond of her." And Annie drew 
further out of sight. 

" Is she not come?" he exclaimed, staring 



2 04 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

wildly round. " Has not my wife come?" 
and his convulsed lips grew purple. " Why 
do you leave me alone? I have such fearful 
dreams when you leave me ! Just now I 
dreamt they told me she had — my wife had 
eloped with Claude Douglas ! How dared 
they say so ! She does not love me, I know 
she does not; but her name is stainless as 
snow. And he, my friend Claude, was 
always sans reproche. No; I w T ill never, 
never listen to a tale like that ! What ! 
Miss Sherwood here again ! I do wish she 
would confine herself to the school-room. 
Perhaps she's lonely; well, let her stay!" 
Then fatigue overcame him; the wild eyes 
closed, and he remained some time silent. 

Towards midnight, Lord Ellaby woke 
again, and a fearful joy overspread his pallid 
face. " You are come, you are come at 
last, my boy ! — my boy ! my beautiful boy ! 
Ah, you have shot up strangely ! You are 
above me; I look up to you. You have 
done great things, my dear boy ! I am 
proud of you. You will be a great man 
some day, Sydney. I know it; I see it all 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 265 

before me. My son ! How proud I shall be 
to say, c he is my son !' when his name is on 
every lip, — the Canning of the day, or 
greater still. How the House will ring with 
him ! But 'tis a thorny path, Sydney," he 
added, sighing ; " a thorny path, indeed ! — 
one hour's home affection is worth it all. 
Mind how you marry, Sydney ! Marry no 
one that does not love you ! But what am 
I talking of? You must be loved ; you have 
treasures to buy any heart — beauty, genius, 
all great gifts. Look at him," he conti- 
nued, pointing to the imaginary shadow of 
his lost son. " Look at him, — how grand and 
beautiful he stands there ! But he is going ! 
— he is going!" he added, in a voice of 
alarm. " Stay, stay, Sydney ! I will go 
with you. Ah, you have put out the lights ! 
Bring a lamp, some one — quick ! quick ! I 
see him again! We are going together. 
His eyes gleam like fire — his cheeks are pale 
as ashes. More light, I say — more light; 
our way is dark !" And " The rich man also 
died, and was buried." 



206 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTER XXL 

The Rectory at Wareham was a little Eden ; 
and well it might be, for the pure spirits 
that dwelt there w r ould have made an Eden 
of a wilderness. 

Richard and Ellen are walking in an 
avenue of shady trees, with three fair chil- 
dren clinging round them, who look like 
bright reflections of their own calm happi- 
ness. The husband and wife are little altered, 
only that botli look more thoughtful. 

" Is not this blessed news?" said Ellen, 
dropping a few joyful tears. " Only to think 
that, after all, dear Annie is coming ! I knew 
she would ; I was sure she would, some day." 

" Is Lady Ellaby coming, mamma?'' asked 
the little girl, who held by Ellen's skirt. 

" Don't call your aunt so, darling," said 
the mother, " she will not like it. She is 
Aunt Annie. A dear, lovinir aunt, — another 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 267 

mamma. But who told you to call her Lady 
Ellaby?" 

" Oh, nurse, mamma ; she said I must call 
her so, and I fancy she thinks it a very pretty 
name, for she says it over as often as ever 
she can ; I can't tell you how many times a 
day ! 4 What will Lady Ellaby say ?' and 
other things like that. But she says, mamma, 
there are two rude, wicked boys coming with 
her, and that they'll be very cross, and take 
away all our playthings ; but I wont let them 
— that I wont." 

" Nurse has told you wrong, Annie. They 
are two poor boys, whose papa is dead, and 
they have no one to love and be kind to 
them but Aunt Annie." 

" But hav'n't they a mamma of their own ? 
all little boys and girls have. Why doesn't 
their own mamma take care of them?" 

" They have no own mamma, dear." 

u No ! Oh, then she is dead. I shall ask 
them where she is buried, and if they cried 
a great deal, and if they go to put flowers 
on her grave." 

" No, you must ask them none of these 



268 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

things ; but you must be very kind to them, 
and let them have your playthings if they 
like ; but they are both great, big boys, and 
will not join your games much, I should 
think. Run, darlings, and gather all the 
cowslips you can to make a ball. Now, 
Richard," continued Ellen, as the children 
bounded away over the lawn, " let us read 
Annie's letter again." 

" My dear Richard and Ellen, — 

" I shall soon be with you, if all is well ; 
and I hope you will now find me, like the 
man in the gospel, £ clothed, and in my right 
mind.' 

" You will have seen by the papers that 
poor Lord Ellaby is gone ! — a melancholy 
end of a sad life. But for the unknown 
world, wherein talents are redemanded with 
interest, I should say, it was a blessed thing 
that the last days of his existence were so 
clouded as to let him live and die in delu- 
sion. His natural tendency being to worldly 
aggrandizement, lie imagined himself raised 
to higher honours than he had ever eontem- 



ANNE SHKRWOOD. 200 

plated, and sometimes he appeared so happy 
in the persuasion that lie was a Duke, that 
I made every one humour his fancy. Oh, 
Ellen! it was so sad to hear him calling 
upon his guilty wife, so tenderly, in such 
entreating tones, it would have melted even 
her heart — even hers. He died fancying 
that Sydney stood by his bedside. I say 
fancying, but who can surely say that it was 
fancy? Who can say that he did not stand 
there, — that it was not his spirit that sum- 
moned his unhappy father away ? At times, 
I think it was all reality. The impression 
on Lord Ellaby's mind was so vivid. He 
exclaimed, 4 He is going ! he is going ! Stay, 
I will go with you V Then called for more 
light — and died ! Oh, Ellen, it was a fearful 
end ! I am glad he forgot the misery and 
disgrace Lady Adelaide had brought on him. 
Poor Lord Ellabv was a sad instance of the 
perverting influence of an artificial world : 
he had many, many generous, noble quali- 
ties, but the world's pride marred his better 
nature. His children do not feel his loss as 
they should : he was indulgent in the ex- 



270 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

treme, and tenderly attached to them. Their 
insensibility is very painful ; but I suppose 
they inherit their mother's cold nature — 
certainly they have no portion of their 
father's heart ! 

" It was neither a matter of surprise nor 
regret to me to find, that from the day his 
mind first began to wander, he lost all sense 
of my position, and always fancied me 4 the 
governess,' situated just as I had been under 
Lady Adelaide's harsh sway. I am glad it 
did not mortify me — very glad. The equa- 
nimity with which I took it, showed me I 
was coming to a right mind. 

" You know, dear Ellen, that from the 
time of my illness, I had many doubts as to 
how far I was justified in continuing to bear 
his name, and to hold a position in the house 
of Lord Ellaby which unworthy motives 
first led me to assume; but I now feel that 
I did right and well to remain to the end, 
and to soften the sadness of his last days. 
But for me, he would have died alone : 
alone, except as far as hirelings were con- 
cerned; there was not even an old, attached 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 271 

servant in the house. Yes, I am very glad 
I was with him ! But it has been a great 
trial to me. Sydney's face, beautiful even 
in its defiant haughtiness, has for ever 
haunted me, and his last words have rung 
in my ears without ceasing. Dear boy, he 
was imperfect; but there was something so 
noble and daring in his very look — so much 
in him that seemed the embodiment of 
young genius ! I loved him so much, even 
though he was her child ! I can never tell 
you all I have lost in him. 

" Ellen, you will rejoice with exceeding 
joy, even as the angels in Heaven rejoice 
over the sinner that repenteth, when I tell 
you, that the last spark of anger and resent- 
ment against that wretched woman is at 
last extinguished in my heart. I can even 
think of Claude now, with the calm regret 
that settles on a long-closed grave. I think 
— I even think I could meet him without 
one feeble palpitation of the heart that once 
only lived for him. But I must not boast. 
I will not think of him, except when I pray 
to be forgiven ; and then his name, too, may 



272 ANNE SHERWOOD* 

come upon my lips, for Loth have grievously 
erred. With him, too, it was the world ! — 
the fear of the world's censure and de- 
rision kept him from the pure love that 
would have shielded him from the snares 
of the guilty and designing. But let his 
memory for ever rest in the ashes of my 
poor heart; he was its idol, — it is fitting 
that his name should he buried beneath its 
ruins. 

u But I must not talk thus. I have made 
a sacred promise that I will not waste the 
remaining portion of my life in useless 
regrets. Perhaps years of real utility are 
before me. Heaven will point the path in 
which I am to walk. I feel something of 
my old energies springing up within me, 

and often repeat to myself Longfellow's 
Morions verse — 

" ■ Lives of great men all remind us 
We can make our lives sublime, 
And, departing, leave behind us 
Footprints in the sands of time.' 

" Forgive my incoherence, dear brother 
and sister. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 273 

" I hope I shall be with you in one month 
from the date of this, to ask your forgive- 
ness for the mam hours' uneasiness I have 
caused you, and to tell you something (all 
I cannot tell you) of my gratitude for your 
gentle patience and untiring love. I don't 
think I shall ever be quite wretched again, 
though my days of jesting and laughter are 
over. The sad remembrance of the past 
will check my follies ; and if the course I 
propose to myself does not atone for my sins, 
at least it shall testify of my repentance. 

" I feel that I am on the eve of some great 
change in life. I must consecrate it by 
solitude and devotion. I propose indulging 
myself with a solitary tour of one month in 
the Highlands. Heaven bless you both, in 
proportion to the love I bear you. 
" Your grateful and affectionate 

"Annie. 

" Tell the dear old Doctor he must meet 
me at Wareham: I long; to see him. 

" I have made my will. Poor Lord 
Ellaby's fortune, which he left at my dis- 
cretion, I have, of course, considered sacred 

VOL. III. T 



274 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

to his children ; and as they have no near 
relations, I have made their guardianship to 
devolve on Richard, after me. I believe 
and hope he will accept the charge for my 
sake, as I cannot feel other than interested 
in Lord Ellaby's children, and dear Sydney's 
brothers. 

' '" All that is really my own is to be di- 
vided between your children at my death, 
except a few legacies to old governess 
friends. 75 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 275 



CHAPTER XXII. 

A low travelling carriage was slowly wend- 
ing its way along a Highland road which 
passes through the beautiful Druhini. The 
road hangs over the river, which constantly 
rushes " foaming desperate, or else becomes 
dark like oblivion. " Sometimes the water 
is almost black from its depth, and the sha- 
dow cast by the mountains clothed with 
pine woods. Here and there rise green, 
fantastic rocks, broken into every variety 
of shape, through whose fissures the river 
foams in showers of silver spray. Nothing 
can describe the surrounding scenery, ex- 
cept Shelley's line — 

" Beautiful as a wreck of Paradise." 

Perhaps none ever passed through the 
Druhim, without at least a transient eleva- 
tion of mind, and feeling a momentary poet- 
izing of their worldliness. 

t 2 



276 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Lady Ellaby bent forward, and looked 
around her with such intense delight, that 
every speaking feature of her face became 
irradiated. She could not speak, so power- 
ful was the emotion which filled her heart. 
She motioned to her servants to stop and 
open the carriage door; then stepping out, 
with all her old eagerness, she sat down near 
the edge of the precipice which overhung 
the river, and desired her attendants to drive 
on, and only return for her in an hour. The 
road was so extremely lonely, it was little 
probable that any one would obtrude on her 
solitary visions. 

Annie was quite unconscious that she had 
chosen a position of extreme danger, — that 
one false step in rising, and she would sleep 
under the foaming waters that careered so 
wildly beneath. One of her servants ob- 
served her situation, and returned to entreat 
her to change it. She thanked him gently. 
moved a little, and then she was left alone 
with that sublime nature — alone with God ! 

At that moment a light silvery mist lay 
on the river and the green mountains facing 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 277 

her ; a cloud too was on the sun ; but as it 
passed off, the light mist slowly began to 
curl up from the waters, thin, like a trans- 
parent curtain, and gradually curled up the 
sides of the hills, and finally rested, a crown 
of silver, on their summits, linking them to 
the sky. 

It was like the unveiling of a sublime vision 
— a faint gleam of the ecstatic sight the rapt 
Apostle saw, when the veil of solemn mystery 
was withdrawn from the glories of the 
highest, and his privileged eye gazed on the 
beatitudes of Heaven. They were sublime 
thoughts that passed through the sorrow-. 
worn mind of Lady Ellaby — so beautiful, so 
absorbing, that she forgot the scenes of trial 
she had lately passed through ; utterly forgot 
the months and years of suffering that had 
marred her originally noble nature ; the 
wrong, the revenge, the sin, the punishment 
it had entailed, all faded away like a past 
dream, and left her heart full of love and 
holy peace. And in that heart three images 
sat enshrined — the images of those she had 
loved the best — her sweet, unchanging sister ; 



278 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

her friend, not the Antonia of late years, 
but the loving, confiding, tender-hearted 
Antonia of long ago; and, deeper shrined 
than all, the image of her first, last, only- 
love — not Lord Claude Douglas, a renegade 
from honour and high feeling, the guilty 
participator in an abhorred crime, but 
Claude, her own Claude, loving, faithful, 
tender, as on that blessed day in the 
greenwood, when it had seemed as if 
heaven's portals were opening to her, and 
that the heart must burst with over-joy, if 
one more grain of added happiness came to 
fill it. And the river flowed on with its 
eternal music, and the green trees bent down 
to meet it — the wind stirred their branches, 
and they made sweet music too, like the 
music that had sounded through the green- 
wood, far, far away, and long ago. And 
there was deep, silent music in the heavens 
above, and music, too, in that worn heart, 
as it brooded over its three precious trea- 
sures, and forgot, quite forgot, that two 
were gone from her for ever — one snatched 
away by foul sin, both by the world. And 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 279 

she fancied she was reckoning up her safely 
shrined jewels, and smiled to think how 
undimmed thev were. Oh, it was a blessed 
dream! a very blessed one! and it lasted 
longer than most pleasant dreams. And 
happy tears coursed down the pale cheeks 
so often washed by bitter ones. It is such 
joy to be at peace with all on earth — at peace 
with ourselves, at peace with Heaven — to 
have outlived resentment and forgotten 
wrong ! 



On the estate of Lord L is a wild, 

picturesque island, rocky, and covered with 
verdure. On every side the graceful weep- 
ing birch mingles with the shade of the dusky 
pines, and the oak which is interspersed 
gives name to the little isle. 

Two men were wandering about Eilean 

A , exploring its picturesque scenery, 

and talking over the fallen Stuarts, whose 
memories had been conjured up by some 
relics of Charles Edward which they had 
just been examining in the cottage on the 
island. 



280 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

The one of the men who appeared the 
younger, wore the common Sassenach dress; 
the other the kilted tartan of a noble clan, 
whose device is the bleeding heart. J loth 
the explorers had poetical minds and vivid 
imaginations, but in the one, fancy was tem- 
pered by a deep and abiding melancholv. 
His was a beautiful face, most beautiful, but 
it bore something of the trace of a lost anirel, 
something that told of a heaven forfeited — 
the rest a shadow ! 

" If Charles Edward had died on the held 
of Culloden !■■ said the younger. 

" Ah !" responded his companion, u of how 
many may the sad 'if be said — of obscure 
men as well as distinguished ones, perhaps ! 
There are bright moments in the life of every 
man, when it had been well for him if he 
had died — moments which if he outlives, 
life becomes a desert, and he sinks into 
misery or nothingness! Waldo, this 18th 
of June is the happiest day — I mean the 
anniversary of the happiest day in mv life! 
If I had died this day five years; if — but 
this is idle talk. Did you notice the two- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 281 

handed sword that hung over the mantel- 
shelf at the cottage? What a sinewy arm 
must have wielded it !" 

" Mind your footing, Claude ! you are 
walking like a blind man," said Waldo, 
linking his arm in that of his friend; and 
the tw^o men passed on in silence. And 
they came slowly walking up the road by 
the precipice, stopping now and then to 
note the glorious scenery, or to give utter- 
ance to an impulsive expression of delight 
and surprise at the objects that met their 
gaze. 

Lady Ellaby was still lost in dreams ; she 
was not roused by the wayfarers' tread, till 
they came up to her, quite, quite close. 

One word from a familiar voice struck on 
her ear, sounded through her heart, but it 
did not waken her from her visions ; no, it 
was only the continuation of her happy 
dream, and mingled with its music. 

" Claude ! my own dear, dear Claude I" 
cried Annie, wildly, turning to him her face, 
radiant with love and joy. Claude heard 
the voice, the words; he rushed forward. 



282 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

She stretched out her arms, and would have 
sprung to meet him; but the treacherous 
turf gave way, her foot slipped, and a 
moment later, the heart that had beat so 
high was sleeping beneath the wild, rushing 
waters of the Highland river. 



Mortal heart never was assailed by a fiercer 
pang of anguish than Claude Douglas expe- 
rienced in that moment. Uttering a wild 
cry, like that of a man struck with sudden 
frenzy, he would have blindly rushed over 
the precipice into the waters that had en- 
gulphed Annie, but a strong arm was thrown 
around him, forcibly withholding him from 
destruction. 

" Leave me ! leave me ! What have I to 
live for?" cried Claude, ineffectually strug- 
gling to free himself from the clinging hold 
of his friend. 

" To await your Maker's time ! To redeem 
the past !" said Waldo, solemnly. 

" She is not srone ! she is not dead ! M ex- 
claimed Claude, more wildly than before. 
" Let me go, Waldo! Unhand me, I say! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 283 

I see her! I see her! There — there! her 
white veil gleams yonder!' 7 

" Impossible, Claude !" 

" No, no ! it is true ! I am not raving — 
free me — I will be free ! I see her yet ! My 
God ! my God ! Let me save her !" 

Still grasping Claude's arm, the American 
approached the edge of the precipice; a 
sudden gleam of something like hope lit his 
face, but it faded away again, as he contem- 
plated the depth beneath. There, indeed, 
fluttered a white object, a handkerchief or a 
veil, but so far below the spot from which 
Lady Ellaby had fallen, that if her remains 
rested there on some shelf of the rock, or 
on the thickly tangled shrubs, life had pro- 
bably been extinguished in the rapid fall. 



She is found ! she is found ! — snatched back 
as by a miracle to the sunlight ! and in the 
wild joy of the rescue his own hand has 
wrought, Claude forgets that it is a lifeless 
burden he holds in his arms — a lifeless being 
on whom he calls with such passionate 
eagerness, to look up and answ r er him. 



284 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Years of sin and sorrow are effaced — 
Claude has gone back to his one, only sinlesi 
love, and she fills his arms and heart once 
more as in the happy past. Breathless, 
panting as much with joy as with exertion, 
he has regained a place of safety. Then 
slowly, surely, comes the sad conviction that 
Annie's ears are closed — closed for ever — to 
the passionate appeals of earthly love. 
Still holding the cold, inanimate form to his 
heart, vainly striving to infuse his own 
warm breath into the livid lips, Claude sinks 
with his burden on the earth. It was in 
that moment that Waldo discovered, what 
had escaped the agonized search of love, 
a faint pulse of life in Annie — so faint 
it scarcely could be discerned, yet it was 
there. 

"Claude ! Claude I" he whispered, eagerly, 
as if fearful to disturb the air with a sound, 
" rouse yourself! I think — I hope Lady 
Ellaby lives I" 

"Who? what are you talking of ?" asked 
Claude, distractedly. 

" Of Annie ! your Annie !" and a faint 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 285 

struggling sigh came to confirm Waldo's 
words. 

In an instant Claude passed from despair 
to delirious joy, and, but for Waldo's pre- 
sence of mind, he might have been the 
means of extinguishing the little flame of 
life still lingering in Annie's bosom. 

Happily, at that juncture, Lady Ellaby's 
servants returned with the carriage. The 
inanimate form of Annie was lifted into the 
conveyance, still supported in the arms of 
Claude, who would not relinquish his charge. 
By degrees some heat was communicated to 
the passive frame; but Lady Ellaby con- 
tinued insensible, only now and then utter- 
ing a low sigh. Strange to say, no immer- 
sion had taken place, the fall having sud- 
denly been arrested by some thick bushes 
of genista. 



Long did Claude Douglas watch over 
Annie, more loved, more fondly loved than 
ever, only with the despairing passion that 
sees no hope, admits of no future, but gazes 
at its object across an impassable gulf. 



286 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

The invalid was lying at a little inn in 
the inconsiderable town of Dingwall. Her 
dreams were sweet and pleasant ; they were 
all of Claude, dear Claude ! He was for ever 
in her sight; the young romance of her 
existence had come back to her, with all its 
stainless glory. Annie was too happy for 
mortality, only sometimes she dropped a few 
quiet tears on the hand in which hers rested, 
and asked forgiveness for having fancied 
Claude unfaithful! Now she knew how 
true he had been to her all the time she had 
doubted him ! Only w r ould he take her forth 
from that dark, close room to the greenwood, 
where they had spent a June day together, 
listening to the music of the leaves and 
the music of their own hearts ! 

But the fever dreams passed away, and 
Annie awoke to reality ; awoke and found 
Claude really by her side, humble, penitent, 
almost purified from the past even, by 
suffering and remorse ; and w T hen the hour 
of parting came, they w r ent their several 
ways reconciled to each other, reconciled to 
life, and forgiven of Heaven. " You shall 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 287 

hear of me again, Annie," said Claude ; " you 
shall hear of me again, but without dis- 
honour ! I will live to win back the name 
I have forfeited." 



Annie turned again into the battle of life, 
serenely strong — hopeful as those can only 
be who walk on earth with eyes fixed on 
heaven, gathering love and strength there 
to strive below; who better than she had 
learnt to 

" Know how sublime a thing it is 
To suffer and be strong ?" 



Claude Douglas died with honour on that 
fatal but glorious day, when — 

" Into the valley of death 



Rode the six hundred." 



THE END. 



L 



LOITDOK : 

SAVILL AMD EDWABDS, PRINTERS, CHA>"DOS STRXET, 

COYENT GAKDEX. 







L I E) R.A R.Y 

OF THE 

UN IVER5ITY 

Of ILLINOIS 



823 
K84a 



ANNE SHERWOOD: 



SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS OF ENGLAND. 



" II faut 6ter les masques des choses, aussi bien que des personnes !" 

MoNTAtONB. 

" Per me si va nella citti dolente : 
Per me si va nell' etemo dolore : 
Per me si va tra la perduta gente." — Dante. 

" Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at 
ease, and with the contempt of the proud."-T-Ps. cxxiii., BibU Version. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. II. 



LONDON: 
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1857. 



LONUOK : 

BAVtLl ANn EJ)WARDS, PRINTKKS. CUANDOS STREET, 

COVKNT GAHDKN. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE I. 



The fortune of Mr. Maberly being mode- 
rate, it precluded liis taking that position in 
London, wliich his ambition would otherwise 
have led him to assume. With sundry re- 
gretful sighs, he saw himself obhged to forego 
a lordly mansion, and to turn liis longing 

looks from B or E Square, lest the 

contemplation of the impossible should cost 
him too severe a pang. 

A handsome, famished house in" 

Place, one of the dependencies of the happy 
regions, was selected and hired for Mr. 
Maberly' s family; and therein they were 
speedily established. Friends and acquain- 
tance called ; two or three titled cards were 
carefully put in the little fancy plateau on 

VOL. II. B 



2 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the clrawing-room table — of course on tlie 
top — and they looked remarkably well. 

Annie Sherwood found that several of 
Greraldine's predictions were verified ; not 
that she was admitted to the drawing-room, 
but Mrs. Maberly really did show herself 
good-natured. She gave Annie free permis- 
sion to go and see her friends (she had so 
many to see!) when her day's work was over, 
and frequently desired her to take the six 
children to see various sights, including the 
wonders of Madame Tussaud's artistic gal- 
leries, and the axe (the very identical axe) 
in the Tower, which had slain the fair Anne 
Boleyn, the Spanish collar of torture, and 
other pleasant things. Now a governess is 
seldom privileged to see all these nice things ; 
and if so favoured, she ought to feel espe- 
cially grateful, and behave like the good 
little girl in Er. Mavor's spelling-book, whose 
aunt took her to see Miss Cox's baby-house. 
But our heroine, being, alas ! very imperfect, 
did not feel as happy and thankful as she 
ought. 

One great pleasure she had which she 
really did appreciate ; she was located in a 
dehghtful httle study, wdiich happened to 
contain a select library of works of fiction. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 3 

And Annie, who knew as familiar friends 
Homer and Yirgil, Demosthenes and Cicero, 
had scarcely made the acquaintance of Walter 
Scott; but no sooner had she obtained a 
glimpse of the glorious world of his creation, 
than she threw aside her attempts at author- 
ship in disgust, and gave up nearly all her 
leisure hours to the study of the Wizard. 
In the evening Annie often had to resign 
her pleasant sitting-room, for there is no 
ceremony in ejecting a governess from her 
accustomed precincts when they are wanted 
for other purposes, that is, for more impor- 
tant persons. She never thought of mur- 
muring at this, for she could carry with her 
such delightful company — the Master of 
Eavenswood, or the Knight of Snowdon, 
perhaps. Besides, by a strange accident, her 
own room was a pleasant one ; it had been, 
and would be again, that of a young girl, 
who had left many a token of her graceful 
presence behind her. It seemed to Annie, 
as she looked round on the drawings with 

which Miss B 's taste had adorned the 

chamber, and the everlasting wreaths which 
encircled some of them, as though she had 
something in common with the young girl, 
and should love her if they met. 
B 2 



4 ATs^NE SHERWOOD. 

But tliougli Mrs. Maberly allowed lier 
governess to go and see Madame Tussaud's 
wax figures and tlie instruments of torture, 
&c., and although she communed w^ith Scott's 
creations, and Milton and Shakspeare came 
to sing to her, in her solitude, of Paradise 
and the realms of Oberon, it must not be 
supposed that her life was all couleur de rose. 
No ; several circumstances conspired against 
her, poor girl. The comparatively small size 
of the house occasioned an almost utter an- 
nihilation, of even the degree of discipline 
she had been enabled to establish among her 
pupils in the old country mansion. The 
reader mil ask why ? AVliat had the size of 
the house to do with it ? Everything, kind 
reader ! You have never been a governess ! 

In the large, old country house, in the 
remote regions of the school-room, a child 
with even tolerably strong lungs might (when 
required to do two sums instead of one, to 
learn fifteen words of spelling instead of 
fourteen) go through the fatiguing process 
of screaming for an hour, without any result 
but weariness to herself; taking this into 
consideration (and little men and women have 
very reflective powers), ten to one but the 
ill-used child would abstain from a storm 



^ ANNE SHERWOOD. 5 

which could not reach mamma's ears, whereas, 
in the smaller space of a London house, one 
piercing scream, requiring but a momentary 
effort, would be quite sufficient to attract the 
indulgent parent. On these occasions Mrs. 
Maberly was not in the habit of scolding 
the governess. 'No ; she only took the in- 
jured child out of the room, forgave her 
lessons, and granted her some special treat, 
to make up for the supposed injustice inflicted 
on her. 

At last things came to such a pass that 
the beauty would walk nonchalantly into the 
school-room in the morning, miwashed and 
uncombed (having dared a new nurse to 
touch her), and exclaim, " I am only to do 
two lessons to-day. Miss Sherwood, and I am 
to choose which they shall be." 

The Maberly hopes had likewise a very 
particular talent for quarrels and for tor- 
menting each other. Unfortunately, they 
usually tested then- pugnacious powers in the 
most public place they could find. The Park 
or the street was often selected as the theatre 
of a biting or scratching match. In vain, 
on these occasions, did the poor, disheartened 
governess endeavour to allay the fierce, 
though puny strife ! Deprived of all autho- 



6 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

rity by the folly of a weak-minded mother, 
who mistook pampering for tenderness, cer- 
tain that no correction wonld be sanctioned 
or permitted, Annie's efforts for the improve- 
ment of her charges were all destined to meet 
disappointment. 

The end (alas ! a common result in such 
cases, and there are thonsands, tens of thou- 
sands of them), the end was, that the gover- 
ness, instead of correcting her pupils' way- 
wardness, ruined her own temper and became 
irritable, if not morose. Geraldine grew a 
great, strong girl with a warm, impulsive 
heart, and as warm, as impulsive a temper. 
She kicked her sister in a sudden fit of pas- 
sion ; the governess ventured to interfere, 
and Geraldine, resenting tliat interference, 
knocked her down with a blow on the chest 
which would have done honour to a profes- 
sional pugihst. In an evil hour the gover- 
ness returned the blow, by giving her dutiful 
pupil a slap on the shoulder. Poor gover- 
ness ! poor child ! The governess lost her 
self-respect, and the child saw one whom she 
should have been taught to reverence, brought 
down to her own level. Yet in the heart of 
that poor governess, there was a deep well of 
love ready to gush up and overflow, for any 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 7 

one who would call it forth by one word, one 
look of sympathy ! Perhaps not less love 
dwelt in the soul of the wayward girl, whose 
better instincts had been choked and whose 
evil inclinations had been too surely fostered 
by a mother's blindness. There was not one 
bad heart in the Maberly family, positively 
not one ; but they very rarely seemed happy 
themselves, and certainly never allowed those 
about them to be so for an hour at a time. 

Soon after her arrival in town, Annie 
had taken an opportunity of seeing Bertha 
Somerton, whom she found scarcely recog- 
nisable, so much had a life of comfort and 
happiness done to renovate her youth and 
spirits. 

Mrs. Harrington had proved indeed a 
friend, and while suffering herself from one 
of the deepest sorrows the human heart can 
experience, found in the midst of grief 
some alleviation in caring for others. Her 
husband was unchanged, and patient endu- 
rance was settling down into the calm melan- 
choly of hope resigned. She had never 
yielded to angry feelings, there were none 
such in her nature, and she loved her hus- 
band still. 

Bertha spoke enthusiastically of Mrs. 



8 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Harrington, wlio, not contented with giving 
her a bare stipend, had, though with the 
utmost delicacy, pressed on her so many 
useful gifts, that she had been enabled to 
devote nearly all her salary to her mother's 
use. Bertha had also had the happiness of 
paying her mother a visit — spending six 
weeks at Merton ; the first hoHday she had 
had granted to her, since the commencement 
of her governess life. Of course Annie and 
Bertha had a thousand things to ask and 
tell each other, of their mutual experience 
since they had parted, yet more of the little 
doings of Merton, dear old Merton ! Annie 
anxiously asked. She would hear of every- 
body, from her dear father's right-hand man, 
the round-faced, fat churchwarden, down to 
the poor blind, old w^oman, to whom she and 
Ellen had been wont to read the Bible. 

All the Merton news was satisfactory. 
The poor had declared that they " Hked the 
new minister well, though he could never be 
to them what their own Mr. Sherwood had 
been." Still they Hked him, all but one 
poor old woman, who had " heard that Mr. 
Backhouse was a pious minister, but did not 
see how that could be, for she'd been up to 
the ^dcarage to get a letter writ to her son 



ANNE SHERWOOD. \) 

in Ingy, and slie'd seen with her own eyes 
that he'd got graven images in his house, 
and the Bible was clear against that !" The 
graven images in question, were the first 
busts ever imported to Merton ! " Mr. 
Sherwood never had graven images to bow 
down to, that he hadn't." The good inha- 
bitants of Merton had asked with eager 
soHcitude after the welfare of their beloved 
pastor's daughters. 

Mr. Turner had made his inquiries with a 
kind of nervous trepidation, which either 
showed that he could not name Annie Sher- 
wood without emotion, or else that he was 
intimidated by the presence of Bertha, she 
being the only person in Merton who had 
seen Greneral Tom Thumb or heard Jenny 
Lind ! 

" Have you seen Miss Maynard lately ?" 
inquired Annie, when the Merton visit had 
been fully discussed. 

" Oh yes, she often comes to see me," re- 
pHed Bertha ; " Mrs. Harrington has taken 
quite a fancy to her, and presses her to come 
frequently, I told you every one liked 
Hortensia, and thought her clever !" 

"Is she stni at Sir William S 's?" 

" Still ; do go and see her ; she will be 



10 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

delighted with your visit. But do you 
know, Annie, I begin to fear that she will 

not stay at the S 's. I only gather this 

from hints, however. If she leaves, it will 
be extremely awkward for her, as it is gene- 
rally understood that she is more the friend 
of the family than the governess. I scarcely 
know what she can do to account for the 
separation." 

Annie Sherwood found with surprise that 
the happy year which Bertha had spent at 
Mrs. Harrington's, in teaching sweet children 
things useful for time and for eternity — in 
daily communion too with the kindest heart 
and the most refined mind, had so effectually 
effaced all painful impressions of her bond- 
age at Mrs. Cheshyre's, that Bertha was 
ready to smile at her past troubles. She 
would even aver that things had not been 
as bad as she had imagined them. " The life 
of a governess may be made an easy one," 
said Bertha, " if she is only contented with 
the allotment of Providence." She even 
went so far as to smile incredulously when 
Annie recalled to her several little things 
she had herself related, exclaiming, "Dear 
Annie, you must have dreamt that ! I 
never told you so." And certainly Bertha 



ANNE SHERWOOD* 11 

was lionest in her declaration, only present 
peace had obliterated past suffering. 

Mrs. Harrington received Annie with the 
greatest kindness, and asked her to spend 
the evening. Mr. Harrington was fortu- 
nately absent. Mrs. Harrington inquired 
after Ellen with great interest, but carefully 
avoided making any allusion to her late 
connexion with the Elmgrove family. She 
well understood the exact state of the case, 
though it had been very differently repre- 
sented to her. 

Late in the evening a carriage stopped at 
the door. Mrs. Harrington started; she 
feared that her husband had arrived; and 
for some reasons, scarcely self-explained, the 
unfortunate wife had an instinctive feeling 
that she would not like him to become better 
acquainted with Annie Sherwood, who some 
way could be, and was, more charming, when 
once engaged in conversation, than a regular 
beauty. But it was a lady's voice in the 
hall ; and with a mingled feeling of curiosity 
and pain, Annie heard Miss Sophia Ferrers 
announced. 

" Has anything happened to my sister !" 
exclaimed Mrs. Harrington, who was quite 
unprepared for so sudden an arrival. 



12 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Nothing. Indeed she's very well, — as 
well as you or I, if she'd only throw her 
novels in the fire and give up the sofa," 
replied Sophia. " I have run up to town, 
under the protection of mamma's maid, to 
do a little shopping — in fact, to buy my 
trousseau." 

" Your trousseau ! I did not know that 
you were engaged, Sophia !" 

" Oh yes, I have been engaged two years 
to my cousin, Francis Vincent (you know 
Francis Vincent). He has been wonderfully 
constant, considering the pains that my kind 
sister Caroline has taken to lure him from 
me. Of course mamma told you all about 
that odious Miss Sherwood's affair. After 
using every vile art to draw Francis to her, 
at last she got one of her low associates to 
way-lay and nearly murder him. We knew 
nothing of it till the fellow had gone to 
America, or Australia, or somewhere, they 
say, to shake her off — for Francis most nobly 
kept it all to himself, and pretended that he 
had been thrown from his horse. I don't 
know the least what has become of the 
wretched, intriguing creature !" 

" But I do, Sophia," said Mrs. Harrington, 
who had made several vain efforts to stop 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 13 

the torrent of vindictive misrepresentation ; 
" Ellen Sherwood is living with an estimable 
and religions family, where her virtuous 
integrity and conscientiousness are appre- 
ciated, as I did hoj)e they would have been 
in my sister's house. This lady is Miss 
Sherwood's sister; when I tell you so, I 
trust you will regret your hasty judgment 
and its most uncharitable expression." 

" My dear Mrs. Harrington, you always 
were eccentric, and always will be. Pray is 
it true that you have set up as an assistant 
to the City Mission ? TJiat you go into all 
the vile holes in London ? I hear that, a la 
Shaftesbury, you frequent regular dens ! 
What can you find there ?" 

" Much sin and misery," answered Mrs. 
Harrington, slightly colouring. 

*' And you think you're right to go into 
it?" 

" I only follow humbly in the footsteps 
of our Great Exemplar, Sophia," said Mrs. 
Harrington, gravely. 

"Who is that?" asked Sophia. "Do 
you mean Lord Shaftesbury? Of course 
his high rank covers all his oddities, 
but " 

" Unfortunate girl !" exclaimed Mrs. Har- 



14 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

rington, "in what scliool have yon been 
taught ?" 

" In one of my own inventing, I believe. 
Oh, how glad I am that Prancis has no 
Methodist notions ! I declare we have had 
no peace of onr lives ever since Ellen turned 
religions ! There's a precious instance for 
you ! She grows worse and worse ; has been 
everything by turns, and nothing long. 
Once she was as gay as I, then was suddenly 
converted, grew strictly evangelical, turned 
Puseyite, then moderate, and has now gone 
over to the Wesleyan Methodists." 

" But that is no argument against religion, 
merely a proof that poor Ellen had not 
enough of what you call Methodism." 

Sophia had particular reasons for keeping 
on good terms with Mrs. Harrington. She 
found her hospitable house particularly con- 
venient on occasions ; besides, she liked 
flirting with Mr. Harrington. She did not 
again refer to Ellen Sherwood. 

Annie had risen to depart, not only from 
a natural repugnance to remaining in the 
company of one wdio spoke so insultingly of 
her sister, but also because (though on ac- 
count of her hostess she endeavoured to 
restrain her indignation) she feared that 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 15 

she conld not continue silent, slionld Ellen 
be again mentioned so disparagingly. 

" But you are not going yet !" said Mrs. 
Harrington, in her kindest tone; adding, 
with marked emphasis, ''it is not often that 
I am enabled to enjoy such company as 
yours; you must not so soon deprive me 
of it." 

Sophia raised her eyebrows, so that 
Annie might observe her action, though she 
hoped Mrs. Harrington would not. She 
raised them still more when Mrs. Harrington 
ordered the carriage to convey Annie home ! 
" No, not home 1" thought Annie, but with 
more of melancholy than bitterness. 

When our heroine withdrew, Mrs, Har- 
rington's farewell was so cordial, that it 
might be called affectionate, and her coun- 
tenance evinced her sincerity. 

" Is she not the most loveable creature in 
the world?" said Annie to Bertha, who had 
left the room with her. 

" She is an angel !" replied Bertha, 
warmly. " Grod bless and reward you for 
sending me to live with her 1" 



16 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE II. 

It happened that Annie Sherwood had, ac- 
cording to the custom of Belgravians, 
" which altereth not " in such matters, to 
conduct her pupils to the gardens of the 

Square every morning. There the 

cliildren were w^ont to play together ; and 
provided they were not very quarrelsome, it 
was a sort of holiday hour for the tired 
governesses, who might sit down on the 
benches, and watch their young charges 
while they themselves conversed. 

The younger children of the Maberly 
family, who had not gone so thoroughly 
through the process of spoiling as then' 
sisters, were particularly attached to their 
governess. The brightest moments in Annie's 
life were those in which the youngest child, 
a lovely cherub with bright golden ringlets 
and blue eyes that danced in hght, would 
stop in the midst of her play, and, rusliing 
towards her, tlirow her arms fondly round 
her neck, while her infantine lips wliispered, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 17 

" Don't cry, you beauty !" and the tiny hand 
wiped away a stray tear. "Beauty" was 
that child's fondest term of endearment to 
her, — all she loved was beautiful. Her little 
heart was a world of love ! Annie Sher- 
wood doted on the sweet child, and in after 
years never recalled the artless tenderness 
that had soothed so many a sorrowful hour 
without tears. 

Yes, those little wayward, spoilt children 
had all warm, generous hearts, and Annie could 
not choose but love them, even the girl that 
had lifted her hand against her. " It is not 
their fault," she would say, when reviewing 
what they had done in her calmer moods. 
Then she VvTould think of their mother, and 
of v/hat was amiable and excellent in her ; 
her open-hearted charity, her deep though 
mistaken love for her children, her com- 
parative indulgence to herself, giving her 
liberty to see her friends, not overtasking 
her strength, &c. ; and the result of these 
cogitations usually was, '^ Mrs. Maberly has 
a kind heart, but she is enslaved by the 
world. I will try to be thankfal for the 
instances in which she is kind, and will re- 
solutely tm-n my eyes away from the pride 
that so constantly hurts my feelings. I 

VOL. II. c 



18 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

will try to be more patient with Greraldine. 
I have not been as endTi];^ng as I ought 
to be. Tor dear Antonia's sake I will 
strive to please her sister." All this looked 
well in theory; but when the practice of the 
theory came to be tried — when the violent 
scenes of strife recurred — when the poor 
children, unrestrained by any just authority, 
fought with and injured each other, the 
strong oppressing and ill-treating the weak ! 
— agam and again Annie lost patience. 
Again and again the foohsh mother assured 
her that all w^ould come right "with time. 

Annie Sherwood found plenty of food for 
amusement and speculation, among the 
numerous governesses she met in the 
gardens. She found that they usually be- 
came acquainted and confidential without the 
ceremony of an introduction. So would 
Eobinson Crusoe have become with any set 
of men, had he been favoured with an acci- 
dental rencontre now and then in his desert 
world, with those situated like himself. 

A few of the governesses, however, held 
themselves aloof from the rest, and prevented 
their pupils joining in the merry games of 
the general tln^ong of cltildren. The ex- 
clusives were principally ladies residing in 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 19 

noble families, who, from clinging for a 
year or two to the skirts of nobility, almost 
dreamt that they might say " people of our 
rank !" Silly pretenders, you are but upper 
servants after all ! Drop those haughty airs, 
which become you as little as the lion's 
skin became the ass — drop them, I say ; if 
your noble masters came by, you know you 
must ! 

It w^as very easy to distinguish the few 
wdio were on confidential terms with their 
employers. Thek countenance, their very 
walk showed it. Proud consciousness of 
their position shone forth in their eyes. No 
royal favourite ever more plainly bore the 
stamp of the dignity he enjoyed. 

Among the governesses was one young 
girl — yes, literally a young girl, for she 
could not have known more than nineteen 
years of joy and sorrow; no doubt both had 
fallen to her share. She was a Swiss ; not a 
beauty, but a fair, gentle creature, whose 
very look of innocence and trust seemed to 
claim sympathy and protection. 

Annie Sherwood was sitting on the same 

bench with the young stranger, who was 

reading w^hile her Sieves were at play. It 

is a capital offence in a governess to read 

c 2 



20 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

under such circumstances, even if she 
should look up from every second line 
to note the safety of her pupils. But the 
stranger was ignorant of the extent of her 
dehnquency — she did not yet know her craft ; 
it was not many months since she had left 
her native valley and her fond mother. 

The young governess looked up at her 
pupils, and her eye caught Annie's, fixed 
on her with kindly interest. Juhe did not 
hesitate to speak. 

" Have you read this ?" said she, extending 
her hand to show the hook she held. She 
spoke in French; but Annie replied in 
English that her knowledge of French was 
too limited to enjoy the beauties oi V Histoire 
des Girondins. 

"You don't know well the French?" said 
Juhe. " I am sorry ; but I shall teach you." 

" You are very kind," said Annie, " very 
kind indeed ; but what opportunity shall I 
have of receiving, or you of giving lessons ?" 

" Oh, very good occasion ! You come 
here every morning, don't you ?" 

" Yes, unless it rains." 

" And I come whether it rain or not," said 
Julie, sighing a little. " Well, then, v^^hen 
it is fine, I shall bring with me a grammar 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 21 

and a reading-book, and so you sliall learn. 

I live in Street, with Lady T ; and 

you, where do you live ?" 

" In Place," said Annie. 

" That's not very far. You will come and 
see me ; I will go and see you." 

" But will Lady T approve ?" 

" She will not think about it. I am always 
alone in the evening. But the lesson shall 
be here ; morning is the best time to study." 

" I am very grateful for your offer," said 
Annie, " but I am afraid you must not do 
what you propose." 

'^ Why not?" 

" Because Lady T will think you are 

neglecting the children while thus engaged." 

"But I am not at all absent, and we 
should be all near my Beves. I should not 
cease looking." 

" It wont do," said Annie ; " it will only 
get you into trouble ; we must not think of 
it. But perhaps we can arrange for some 
other plan. I can go to see you some 
evening. But you have not told me your 
name." 

"JuHe." 

" But the other, the surname ?" 

" Angelet ; and yours ?" 



22 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Sherwood," said Annie, who thought, 
of course, that she and her new acquaintance 
would be Miss Sherwood and Mademoiselle 
Angelet to each other. Not so thought 
Julie; she must know her new friend's 
Christian name, and call her by it. More- 
over, she was ready in aU sincerity to vow a 
life-long friendship to one unknown to her 
an hour previously. JuHe's simplicity and 
evident innocence amused and interested 
Annie. There was something in her — only 
a look, a very slight look — which reminded 
her of her dear Ellen ; that alone would have 
formed a bond of union between Annie and 
the stranger. But after a short acquaintance 
(which, in leading our heroine to think of 
her friend's troubles, diverted her mind from 
her own cares) she learnt to love Julie for 
her own sake. She soon found that the 
poor foreigner's life was one of hourly 
torture. Eeader ! the detail of a day spent 

by the governess in Lady T 's family 

would only produce an incredulous smile on 
your countenance. You v/ould indignantly 
exclaim, " This is a vile slander ; such people 
do not exist ! such scenes never take place !" 
The vmter of these pages therefore abstains 
from placing before you a vivid picture of 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 23 

tlie miseries wliich that poor young foreigner 
bore — bore meekly, far from lier native land, 
from liome, affections, and from sympathies, 
— bore, because she had a mother, a widow 
and in poverty. 

" AVhy don't you leave ?" exclaimed 
Annie, one day. The answer was tears from 
those sweet, innocent eyes, and the words 
" Ma mere r 

Annie Sherwood fulfilled her promise of 
calling on Julie. She was admitted by a 
page, w^ho, jerking his finger over his 
shoulder, pointed to the staircase, curtly 
answering her inquiries by " Up there 1" 

" But where ? which room ?" 

" Top of the house ; sure to find it," said 
the boy, with a grin ; and he let himself out 
by the hall door, which he closed after him, 
leaving Annie standing alone, and embar- 
rassed as to what she should do. 

A ponderous dinner-bell sounded. Annie, 
fearing to meet some of the party from the 
drawing-room, made a rush up the staircase, 
and flew, rather than ran, to what she sup- 
posed to be the top of the house. 

A light glimmered from under a door ; it 
must be the school-room. " Julie," said 
Annie, softly; more she could not say, for 



24 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

her breath was gone. 'No answer; she 
lifted her hand to knock, but ere she could 
do so the door suddenly opened, displaying 
a lady's dressing-room; and a voice of peculiar 
harshness and asperity exclaimed, " Who are 
you, and what is your business ?" 

" I have mistaken this room for the school- 
room. I came to see Mademoiselle Angelet," 
replied Annie, with an unmoved countenance 
and in a firm tone. 

" Then you can't see her ; she asked leave 
to go out for the afternoon, so I suppose she 
is gone. But what is your business ?" 

" I thought I had told you, madam ; to 
see Mademoiselle Angelet." 

" Well, if you wanted to see her, you must 
have had something to say to her, and you'll 
just tell me what it was !" 

" It was what one friend might say to 
another, but would not be coerced into de- 
tailing to a stranger. I am sorry I have 
disturbed you. Good evening." And Annie 
tmmed away. 

" Stop, stop !" cried Lady T ; then 

called up another flight of stairs, which 
had before escaped Annie's observation, 
"Here's a j)erson wandering about the 
house who sa^s she came to see Mademoi- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 25 

selle :" but Annie liacl succeeded in making: 
lier escape. 

She was in a very gloomy mood the whole 
of the following day, and, alas ! tried her 
new-born powers in French, by thus writing 
to Julie : — 

" C'est en enfer que vous vivez, chere 
Julie. Y aller pour vous voir ! impossible !" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE III. 

Though ruffled by the scene she had just 

passed through at Lady T 's, Annie 

soon recovered her equanhnity. A few days 
afterwards she called on a governess acquain- 
tance, whose usually smiling face led her to 
expect that her life was differently spent to 
that of the unfortmiate Julie. 

Mademoiselle Clairvault was giving her 
pupils their lessons, in the usual kind of 
half-furnished den at the top of the house, 
commanding an extensive view of a whole 
street of mews. 

The governess did not at first perceive 
Annie's entrance. The children were nomi- 
nally engaged in ciphering ; that is to say, 
they had slates before them with imposing 
rows of sums on their surface, but one girl 
was looking over a picture-book^ another 
scratching the table with a pin, a third 
behind her preceptress's chair mischievously 
busy in cutting a hole in her lace collar, w^ith 
a pair of sharp scissors. Mademoiselle her- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 27 

self, entirely unconscious of their proceed- 
ings, was absorbed in a volume of Matldlde^ 
ou les Memoires cVune Jeuiie Femme. 

Annie advanced, and laid lier hand on the 
shoulder of the reader, who looked up at her 
with a vivacious smile, and taking in at once 
the meaning of the grave face bending over 
her, exclaimed, " I know well at what you 
think ! mais que voulez-vous 1 on me trompe, 
et je trompe a mon tour !" Then drawing 
her visitor towards the window, she continued, 
in a lower tone, " Dey tell me dey treat me 
like de famille. Bon ! I believe dem. But 
dey treat me like de chien, et je me venge; I 
am de renard ! Why not Madame la Comtesse 
sometime speak me herself? Why send de 
impertinent femme de chambre give orders ? 
I obey de femme-de-chambre ! Non, non, 
jamais; mes eleves s'amusent, je m'amuse 
aussi !" 

Annie Sherwood, with all her faults, had 
a grave sense of duty, and of fal filling duty 
for conscience' sake ; even without that prin- 
ciple she would have gone through her tasks 
with exactitude, for she was too proud to 
deceive. The philosophy of Mademoiselle 
Clairvault shocked our heroine; she attempted 
to remonstrate with her, but she found her 



28 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

convictions too stubbornly seated to be 
moved. Clarisse Clairvanlt was naturally 
good-tempered, and even amiable ; but, hav- 
ing no fixed principles, would be bent by 
circumstances. Had she been placed with 
Mrs. Harrington, all that was kindly in her 
nature would have been brought forth, and a 
disgraceful neglect of duty would never have 
been practised. As it was, the serfdom of the 

Countess of 's family had made her — 

lohat the slave usually is — cunning anddeceiiful. 

In return for the good advice Annie had 
given Mademoiselle Clairvanlt, she was 
laughed at, and told that she would soon 
learn to return " measure for measure !" And 
that unprincipled woman spoke truly. As 
the system of " governessing" now exists in 
English families (with some honourable ex- 
ceptions), the fate of the dependent is to 
become hardened by oppression or broken- 
hearted — unless, indeed, high and holy faith 
has been her guide, preserving her alike from 
temptation or despair. 

Mothers should beware of the evils they 
create for themselves and for their children 
by their false estimate of the really impor- 
tant position and office of the governess. 
Mothers of England ! would you ensure a 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 29 

faithful discharge of duty from her to whom 
the training of your children is confided, 
while you are following the idol fashion or 
the pageant of amusement, degrade her not 
beneath the level of your menials ; show her 
at least courtesy, if you have no heart for kind- 
lier feelings, that your children may profit 
by the instructions of one, whom you do 
not teach them by your example to despise. 
When Annie returned to Mrs. Maberly's, 
she found a letter from Ellen awaiting her. 
Her pupils were absent ; their mamma had 
taken them out to see something. An hour or 
two of freedom remained to her, during which 
she might read and reread the lines traced by 
her dearly-loved sister. But, as Annie read, 
the blood rushed into her face, and her tem- 
ples throbbed as though they would burst. 

" Dearest Annie, — I am not very well, 
and fear that my strength is not sufiicient for 
this situation, and yet my duties are light. 
I should not (even feeling as I do) resign 

my office, but Mr. told me last night 

that his wife had requested him to speak to 
me, and say that they did not consider my 
health and spirits sufficiently good for my 
position, and therefore wished me to leave. 



30 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

You must not think from this that they have 
been unkind to me, for indeed, indeed they 
have not. 

" Mr. is a most self-denying Chris- 
tian, who spends his life and nearly all his 
fortune in doing good ; he is as near perfec- 
tion as humanity can be. My dear children 
(for inexpressibly dear they are to me) are 
all that I could wish, and it will indeed cost 
me much to leave them. 

" You must not, my dear, kind sister, be 
uneasy about me ; I think I know exactly 
what is the matter with me : I am very 
weak, have a pain in my side and a little 
cough — remember, not a bad one — and I have 
become rather nervous. I am afraid I have 
not prayed as much as I ought for resigna- 
tion to Heaven's will ; I mean with regard to 
poor Eichard's loss, for dead I am sure he 
is. Perhaps he has been too much in my 
thoughts ; and the solitude of this house, 
which no one ever enters, the constant silence 
that prevails in it (you might hear a pin 
drop), has preyed on my spirits, I must own. 

" Poor Mrs. is a great invalid. There 

is nothing liaughty or disagreeable about 
her, but she has fallen into invalidish habits. 
No doubt she was very different before her 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 31 

illness. She is querulous and peevish; one 
would almost say selfish, if she did not 
suffer so much. She cannot bear the least 
sound, and if a Look falls accidentally, she 
sends up-stairs to inquire what the noise is, 
and to request more care. Sometimes on 
these occasions she comes up herself, and 
looks so red and vexed. On this account 
I hve in constant trepidation lest the chil- 
dren should forget to tread softly; and though 
they are good, dear children, they sometimes 
forget themselves, and, being carried away 
with their spirits, skip across the room. The 
result always is, that I have to listen to a 
long expostulation, though I am very careful 
to keep them as quiet as I can. Don't think 

ill of Mrs. for this. I am sure she means 

to be kind, though circumstances have made 
her temper trying. 

" But, to return to myself. I shall be in 
London in three weeks. What a kind Pro- 
vidence has led you there before me ! I wish 
very much, till I find another engagement, 

to be at our old lodgings in IST Street. 

I love that house from association. I look 
so much older than I did, that my living 
alone wiU. not seem strange. Besides, you 
will be near me ; and before you leave Lon- 



6Z ANNE SHERWOOD. 

don again, I dare say I shall be in another 
family. How strange that you should meet 
Sophia Ferrers at Mrs. Harrington's ! 

"I often think about the Ferrers, and 
wonder whether my fancy did not exaggerate 
their faults. Perhaps appearances sometimes 
deceived them about me ; they may now be 
really sorry for their unkindness. It is so 
much pleasanter and happier for one's self 
to think as well of people as we can. I am 
glad I left them, though ; for I fear that if I 
had remained at Elmgrove, I should have 
become quite wicked ! 

" How pleasant to hear of dear old Mer- 
ton ! and how thankful I am for Bertha's 
happiness ! Oh, dear Annie, it seems an age 
since we met ! I feel better already at the 
mere thought of going to you ; to-night I 
shall not lie awake coughing. Grod give you 
the best blessings, my own dear sister ! 

" Your affectionate Ellen." 

Interpreting Ellen's letter as her fears 
suggested, Annie trembled with apprehension, 
and almost expected to find her poor sister 
in the last stage of consumption on her 
arrival. The three weeks which Ellen had 
mentioned seemed interminable. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 33 

And yet at the last moment, when they 
were about to meet, Annie's courage failed 
her ; and as she stood on the platform at the 
railway- station to receive her sister, after the 
first eager look at the train as it entered, she 
covered her face with her hands, fearing to 
see the change she anticipated. But she had 
not stood there long, when some one eagerly 
caught her arm ; she uttered one hurried ex- 
clamation, and despite the proprieties of 
public life, clasped Ellen in her arms, pale, 
faded as a crushed lily, but with eyes of un- 
natural brightness, which showed consuming 
fever. " My Ellen ! my poor, poor Ellen !" 
sobbed Annie. 

" Don't pity me," said Ellen, faintly smil- 
ing ; " I am so much better than I have been. 
But I must go, and claim my luggage." As 
she spoke, Ellen w^alked quickly along the 
platform, drawing Annie wdth her. Presently 
she dropped her handkerchief ; Annie stooped 
to pick it up, and, in so doing, observed that 
it was discoloured with spots of blood. She 
looked at Ellen with inexpressible anguish. 
" I am not so ill as you fancy," said Ellen ; 
" you will see, dear, what a few weeks will do 
for me I" 

'* A few weeks !" Annie shuddered. *' A 

VOL. II. D 



34 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

few weeks !" she repeated, clasping her hands, 
and weeping. And no w^onder the poor 
governess wept at the prospect of travelling 
on life's weary journey alone — quite alone ! 

Annie led her sister with tender care to 
the humble dwelling in which they had to- 
gether passed so many trying months ; there, 
divesting her of her heavy outer garments, 
she made Ellen lie down on the sofa, while 
she prepared tea for her. " How strangely 
this is like the scene of long ago !" said 
Ellen. "Just so, Annie, the first day we 
spent in this house you made me lie down, 
while you took all the fatigue. How you 
used to spoil me — how you spoil me still ! 
just as if I were a child, though I am sure 
I do not seem at all younger than you." 

Ellen was indeed altered, and looked 
several years beyond her real age. Her 
figure was attenuated, and her sweet face, no 
longer shaded by a shower of golden curls, 
looked thin and drawn. 

" Why don't you c\irl your hair, darling ?" 
asked Annie. 

"I left off wearing curls, you know, dear, 
to please Mrs. Ferrers, and I supposed they 
would be equally objected to elsewhere. Be- 
sides, I have not cared to curl my hair since 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 35 

" And poor Ellen's voice was here broken 

with sobs, which she vainly struggled to sup- 
press, and in the shelter of her fond sister's 
arms she gave free course to her tears. 

Then Annie drew from her the truth, that 
the poor girl's health and spirits had been 
shattered at least as much, by the wearing 

ill-temper of Mrs. , as by grief for her 

lover's loss. 

" And this is religion [" said Annie, 
bitterly. 

" Eeligion ! Oh, no, dear Annie !" said 
EUen, in a voice of deep sorrow ; " this is 
corrupt human nature — religion is all gentle- 
ness and peace ! I wish, you could have 
known poor Eichard : he would have taught 
you true Christianity. How you would have 
loved him, if you had met ! But you will 
meet some day, for life is short, and we shall 
spend an eternity of happiness together. 
Eternity, ' that day of never-ending peace I' 
as Thomas a Kempis calls it." 

Annie made no reply. She could not enter 
into her sister's beautiful and inspiring hopes. 
She was weary of earth and earth's trials ; 
but a veil was spread between her and 
heaven — the veil that unsubdued passions 
hang before the high and holy. 
D 2 



36 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Annie busied herself in preparing for her 
sister's comfort, till she had induced her to 
take the refreshment she so much needed. 

She then soothed her to sleep, and, slip- 
ping out, went in quest of a physician. Dr. 
Sinclair, who, though in extensive practice, 
never affected to be busy when he was not, 
and never kept even a poor patient waiting 
in order to enhance his own importance. The 
Doctor was considered very clever, but odd 
and eccentric. 

A¥lien Annie returned, accompanied by 
the Doctor, Ellen was still sleeping, but her 
dreams were bright and happy, as her coun- 
tenance showed. 

"A sweet young creature !" said the Doctor. 
He was only speaking for his own informa- 
tion; but he had said enough to convince 
Annie that he was a very clever man, though 
what proof he gave of cleverness, in admir- 
ing our heroine's sister, w^e must leave the 
reader to discover. 

The old Doctor sat down patiently to await 
his patient's waking, and in the meanwhile 
examined her state as well as he could, and 
questioned her sister of her occupations and 
habits. Annie eagerly told him all she 
knew. There was something in the clever old 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 37 

Scotchman which, immediately won her con- 
fidence, so she spoke without any reserve, 
and the Doctor listened with evident interest, 
not only to the detail of Ellen's late painful 
position and trials, but also to the praises of 
her excellence. It never occurred to Annie 
to suppose that anything she could say of 
her sister, would sound ridiculous or exagge- 
rated, so simple was her faith in the fact of 
Ellen's being the sweetest and most faultless 
being in creation. 

The Doctor listened till quite the end of 
a very long story, and then fell into a 
reverie. He was an absent man, and had a 
habit of expressing his sentiments and 
opinions pretty freely to himself; but it 
generally happened that his remarks were 
made so loudly as to benefit every other 
person present. 

Dr. Sinclair was old, his locks were thin 
and grey, his face deeply lined with thought, 
perhaps with cares past, though he was now 
prosperous in the world. 

He sat beside the sick girl's couch, hold- 
ing her delicate wrist in his hand. " Bad 
case," he muttered, " very bad ;" and Annie 
stood by, clasping her hands in silent misery, 

" Governess again ! fourth this week 1 



SS ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Better call me in to an omnibus horse at 
once, or a needle- woman ! Ah ! Mr. Hood, 
your * Song of the Shirt ' was a fine thing — 
a very fine thing ! Pity you hadn't made 
the song of the grammar and geography ! 
Sweet creature ! But she must go, though ! 
she must gol" 

" Oh, sir ! is there no hope ?" gasped 
Annie. 

" Who told you there wasn't ?" said the 
Doctor, roughly. " I didn't ! No, no ; she 
shan't die !" Then relapsing into absence, 
he muttered in the old style, " Ha ! that's 
what Uncle Toby said of the Lieutenant ! 
but he did die, for all that !" 

" Oh, sir ! what do you say ?" exclaimed 
the half-frantic Annie. 

" What did I say ? I said you must be 
careful, and she must do no more governess- 
ing ; better send her into a coal-pit at once 
to work. She must go and board in some 
cheerful family — say a medical man's, who 
can watch her state, as it varies. It wont 
cost you much — not above a hundred a 
year." 

" A hundred a year !" repeated Annie, in 
despair. 

" What am I talking about ?" cried the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 39 

Doctor, witli a start of recollection ; " you'll 
get it for far less than that. What conld. 
you afford to give ?'' 

'' Thirty-five pounds a year," said Annie^ 
dejectedly, naming the whole of her salary, 
as she boasted no accomplishments ; and for 
far less than that many a superior woman 
barters acquirements solid and ornamental. 

" Humph 1" said the Doctor ; " you say 
you're in place. In — in a situation, I 
mean r' 

''Yes." 

" And I dare say you don't earn much 
more than the sum you name ?" 

" No more than that ; I cannot teach the 
things others can. But do you think, 
sir 

" Do I think ? No ; I'm sure I can find 
some one vv^ho'll take you — take her, I mean 
— for less. I'll see about it to-morrow. 
But see, she is waking 1" 

Ellen opened her innocent eyes with so 
bright a smile, that she did not look half so 
ill as before. " Oh, Annie !" she exclaimed, 
not seeing the Doctor, " I have had such a 
blessed dream of poor Eichard 1" 

"Humph!" ejaculated the old Doctor j 
" Coeur de Lion, I suppose ! Well, perhaps 



40 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

it's not all grammars and geographies, after 

aur 

" Ellen, darling," said Annie, very gently, 
" I have brought some one to see you." 

" To see me ?" 

"Yes, dearest ; a kind Doctor, who will 
prescribe something to make yon stronger." 

" But I don't want anything, now I am 
with you, Annie ! I am already well." 

''Still, to make me happy, you will let 
the Doctor see what is the matter with 
you! 

The Doctor then commenced his exami- 
nation — asked the patient a number of ques- 
tions, and, as he pursued his inquiries, his 
countenance brightened up. 'Not less 
brightened Annie's ; for she had been read- 
ing his face, as though to find her sen- 
tence of life or death therein. At length 
he took leave, promising to return on the 
morrow. Annie tendered him his fee. He 
pushed it back, saying, "No, no; I like 
money like rhubarb — in the mass. Send 
you in a bill some day. Good-night ! Gret 
her to bed, and prepare to move to-morrow." 

" To-morrow ! — to move to-morrow 1" said 
Ellen, in no little astonishment. 

" Yes. I've been teUing your sister where 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 41 

you can get much cheaper lodgings/' said 
the Doctor. 

" Oh, I am glad 1" said EUen ; " my ill- 
ness will be such an expense !" 

" Your illness ! I don't mean you to have 
one !" said the Doctor, with a merry laugh, 
that almost reassured Annie. " Grood-night 1" 
repeated he ; adding audibly, " Very nice 
girls, and one of them very pretty ! Gover- 
nessing, indeed 1 Better take in washing 
and ironing ! Poor things ! poor things ! 
Four governesses this week ! Yery strange ! 
What nonsense I'm talking ! not strange at 
all ! not the least strange ! Grammars and 
geographies and arithmetic books, and non- 
sensical ologies ! I wish Colenso and a few 
of those fellows were hanged, that I do ! 
Drugs ! what's the use of drugs to a drudge ? 
* Throw physic to the dogs 1' The physic 
she wants is rest and quiet." By this time 
the Doctor had reached the door, and the 
rest of his observations were no doubt de- 
livered to the cushions of his brougham. 



42 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE lY. 

The following day Annie asked for and 
obtained a half-holiday (on such points Mrs. 
Maberly was particularly indulgent), and 
so grateful did she feel for the readiness 
with which her request was granted, that 
she was ready to forget everything disagree- 
able that had occurred in the family. 

" How kind in Mrs. Maberly to let you 
come to me !" said Ellen. 

" Oh, yes," responded Annie, warmly, 
" she has such a kind heart !" The back 
stairs and other similar matters were en- 
tirely forgotten. At three in the afternoon 
Dr. Sinclair's carriage stopped before the 
little door of Ellen's lodging, and the Doctor 
hurried in, very busily talking to himself. 

"Well, I've bargained for you wdtli a 
young practitioner and his wife, Miss 
Helena," said he, in his rough but kind 
voice, after finishing the conversation he had 
been holding with himself. " Not much 
luggage, eh ? Those two trunks and a band- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 48 

box? Women must have their head gear. 
Well, easily managed — very. Big box — Par- 
cels Dehv. ; little one go on coach-box ; 
bonnet affair under seat, eh? Nice plan 
altogether. Miss Sherwood. Only 25/. a year; 
moderate, isn't it? Hammersmith — nice airy 
place. Ever been at Hammersmith ?" 

'' 'No, sir, we have never been there," said 
Annie, who somehovv found herself im- 
pHcitly following the directions of a stranger, 
without inquiry, and with blind confidence. 

" Put on your bonnet. Miss Helena ; and 
you'll come too, of course. Miss Sherwood, 
to see she's safely lodged, and that I don't 
burke her. But you don't know anything 
about burking ; it was before your time. 
Here, Thomas," continued the Doctor, bust- 
ling to the door ; " got a piece of twine in 
your pocket ?" 

'' Yes, sir." 

" Well, give it to me. There, take that 
bonnet trap, band-box, or whatever it's 
called, and the little black trunk, and put 
them up." 

" Where, sir ?" 

" Where, sir ! Use your sense ! Wherever 
they'll fit in. Ofi" with you !" 

" They'd be rum 'uns that didn't do mas^ 



44 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

ter's bidding/' muttered the man. " What 
a way lie has got with him !" 

The Doctor then hurried to the table, 
snatched up a pen, and wrote something on 
a card, which he tied on the remaining 
trunk. He handed the sisters into his car- 
riage, and turning back, pointed to the large 
trunk, saying, " Parcels Deliv." Then he 
appeared to shake hands with the landlady ; 
she dropt the lowest of all possible low 
curtsies, and hoped that the Doctor would 
recommend her lodgings. 

" I will, I will," he replied; adding, " when 
your parlour grows big enough for a pair of 
lungs to breathe in !" 

Neither Annie nor Ellen asked a single 
question. They felt instinctively that none 
was needed ; and how pleasant it was to have 
some one to guide and direct them — they were 
so accustomed to stand alone and uncared- 
for ! And Annie sat quite contentedly, hold- 
ing her sister's hand ; and if there was a little 
anxiety in her heart, it was more than coun- 
terbalanced by hope. When the Doctor 
asked her bluntly if the people she was with 
" treated her decently," her answer taking 
its tone from the favour recently granted to 
her, she answered, freely— 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 45 

" Yery well ; Mrs. Maberly is very kind." 

"And liberal?" 

" Oh, yes, extremely liberal." 

" Not at all haughty or purse-proud, I 
suppose ?" 

Here poor Annie's countenance fell, and 
she made no reply in words. Dr. Sinclair 
put his head out of the window — 

" Slower, Thomas, slower ; give us time 
to see the scenery, and to hear the rich 
sounds of nature !" 

" What ! wont you buy twelve iron sJdvers 
for a penny ?" was the first sound that met 
the ears of the party in the good Doctor's 
carriage; and the novelty of the strongly- 
marked and expostulatory tone in which the 
vendor of skewers cried his wares, so particu- 
larly struck the Doctor's fancy, that he called 
the ragged itinerant to the carriage window. 

" There, you clever rogue ; a shilling's 
worth !" cried Dr. Sinclair, " Don't cheat 
me ; twelve twelves are a hundred and forty- 
four ; d'ye hear ? There, tell them out 
quickly; hand them up to the coachman. 
Pray who taught you that cry ?" 

" My own invention, sir," said the lad, 
proudly ; " and I make bold to say it's the 
newest cry about town." 



46 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" You like this vagabond sort of life ?" 

" Well, sir, I've seen many of life's 
wicissitoodinons changes ; but taking it all to- 
gether, I calls all parts pleasant, just as they 
comes." 

"I dare say you do. Hark ye, fellow: call at 

No. — , Street, to-morrow, if you'd like 

another of life's ' wicissitoodinons' changes, 
but don't steal any forks or spoons ; d'ye 
hear ? Drive on, Tliomas !" And Thomas 
drove on, wdiile the skewer- vendor grinned, 
and repeated yet louder, and more argumen- 
tatively than ever, " Wliat ! wont you buy 
twelve iron sJcivers for a penny ?" 

" I've made a bargain," said the Doctor, 
turning to Annie. " My housekeeper boasts 
of her bargains ; but I often carry her home 
something that astonishes her. I w^onder 
what she'll say to 144 skewers for a shilling ! 
enough to last her ten years ! London's the 
place for bargains ! Clever rogue, that — very 
clever. I like his eyes — fuU of fun and 
spirit !" and while the Doctor spoke, his ow^n 
eyes rolled with a merry twinkle. '' Some 
runaway jail-bird, no doubt ; but I dare say 
I shall make something of him, unless he 
robs me and cuts my throat 1" 

" Sm-ely, sir, you are not thinking of 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 47 

taking him into jour family !" exclaimed 
Annie. 

" Thinking abont it !" said the Doctor. 
" Dear me, no ! I quite made np my mind 
while I w^as paying the fellow. I shall get 
him cheap, and besides, shall have a rich 
bargain of drollery in him. What a capital 
Lancelot Gobbo he'd make ! Who knows 
but that in the course of life's luicissitoodinoiis 
changes he may one day tread the boards. 
How do you feel now, Miss Helena?" added 
the Doctor (and when he spoke to Ellen he 
always softened his voice). " Wliat nonsense 
to ask ! how should she feel but blithe and 
well, now the grammars and geographies are 
shut up !" 

The drive w^as long — for Dr. Sinclair had 
made his man move slowly, that the motion 
of the carriage might not affect his patient — 
still it was pleasant. He had an inexhaust- 
ible fund of drollery, but so tempered that 
it kept up his listeners' spirits and attention, 
without producing violent mirth. At length 
they arrived at a neat house, standing in 
small but beautiful grounds, near Hammer- 
smith. "Humph!" said the Doctor; "this 
is the sort of thing they call villa. I wonder 
what the word means ? One sees all sorts of 



48 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

whirligig houses that they call villas. I shall 
expect to find one of them stuck in the middle 
of Fleet Street some day. Mr. Ellington at 
home ? Out, is he ! Nonsense, don't I 
know better ! Tell him Dr. Sinclair and his 
friend Miss Sherwood." And without a 
moment's pause he led the sisters to the 
drawing-room, and introduced Ellen as the 
young friend for whom he had been com- 
missioned to negotiate. He then proceeded 
to give several directions which he wished 
followed, winding up with " Eemember, 
Ellington's not to drug her ; she's my patient, 
and if she's to be poisoned, I shall keep all 
the dosing to myself I think I told you 
Miss Sherwood would like to spend the rest 
of the day with her sister. Perhaps you'll 
be so good as to let my fellow put up what 
The Beaiis Stratagem calls my ' leathern con- 
veniency ;' it is to wait to bring Miss Sher- 
wood back to town." 

" But how can I keep it when you have to 
return yourself, sir?" asked Annie, anxiously. 

" Oh, I shall travel by omnibus ; often do ; 
like it best. One hears and sees such droll 
things in the omnibus. There's always the 
fat man that takes up the room of three ; 
always the woman with the big bundle 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 49 

liugged up to her like a baby, and the bigger 
basket that she sets on her neighbour's toes. 
There's always the mother with a baby that 
you are assured is as good as goold, but 
that will squall all the way. Then tliere's 
the dandy clerk coming home from his office, 
or bank, who wears mosaic gold rings and 
paste, and runs his fingers through his 
macassared hair to show the said mosaic and 
paste. Then there's the young lady opposite 
to him, with seven flounces that will get 
rumpled, and the bonnet that wont keep on. 
There's the impatient gentleman, that swears 
at the conductor, because he stops to take up 
anybody but himself. There's the child 
that's thrust in like a foundling, and stands 
up right in the middle (till the fat woman 
that's nursing the bundle, makes room for 
him on the other knee), and stares round 
bewildered, and wonders if he is really a boy, 
or a parcel, or a hamper, that he's shipped 
off that way, by an undutiful aunt ! There's 
no end to the fun in an omnibus ; and in my 
opinion, there's not a word in the English 
language to be compared to fun. It's the 
prince of words — should be written in capitals ! 
printed in gold 1 I know your husband's at' 
home, though your lying fellow pretended 

VOL. II. E 



50 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

he wasn't ; but no matter, for I can t stop. 
Good-bye, Miss Helena, good-bye. Mrs. 
Ellington, how many iron skewers do you 
think I bought for a shilling to-day ?" 
" I really don't know, Doctor." 
" 144 ! Don't I know how to make a bar- 
gain ? And the fellow I bought them from, 
had the drollest cry in the world. Good- 
bye, Miss Sherwood." And giving his last 
word and look to Annie, he hurried away. 

" The most excellent man in the world !" 
said Mrs. Ellington. 

" He seems so, indeed," said Annie. 

" Have you known him long ?" asked 

Mrs. E . 

" Long !" repeated Annie ; " I saw Dr. 
Sinclair for the first time yesterday !" 

"Is it possible ? But what an extraordi- 
nary interest he takes in you ! Yet I need 
not be surprised, for this is his way. But 
come, Miss Sherwood, I will show^ you your 
room. The Doctor says that you are to lie on 
the sofa, read entertaining books, and be 
regularly suppHed with Fundi ! " Mr. Elling- 
ton is in his consulting room ; he will come 
and see you presently when you are rested. 
He is not to prescribe for you at all, you 
know, but to forward a frequent statement 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 51 

of your case to tlie Doctor, who says lie 
shall come over often. He tells me we are 
to expect the pleasure of your company for a 
year/' 

" A year !" repeated Ellen, as she looked 
round with startled wonder at the elegant 
dressing-room into which Mrs. Ellington led 
her, and marvelled what the Doctor's pro- 
mise of cheapness meant. " I am afraid this 

home will be beyond our means," she 

would have said, but that her voice was 
choked by nervous tears. Annie, too, looked 
grave and disquieted; and Mrs. Ellington, 
who was an amiable woman, hastened to 
relieve her uneasiness, the nature of wliich 
she well understood. " I hope your sister 
will be happy and comfortable with us," 
she said. "Dr. Sinclair spoke of you as 
very particular friends (I ought to have 
remembered that, though his friendships are 
enduring, they often spring up in a day), and 
as such, begged us to name the lowest terms 
we could receive. I hope what we have asked 
is not beyond what you intended giving." 

" I think — I fear," said Ellen, hesitatingly, 
'' that we misunderstood Dr. Sinclair . The 
sum he mentioned seems quite out of the 
question." 

E 2 



52 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" If it frightens you/' said Mrs. Ellington, 
" we can, I dare say, make a trifling abate- 
ment/' 

" Abatement !" said Annie ; "we slionld 
be mad to expect it. I was going to say I 
would willingly add 1 5/. more, only tbat would 
still be too little !" she added, dejectedly. 
" I am afraid v/hat the Doctor said was quite 
a mistake !" 

" What sum did he name ?" asked Mrs. 
Ellington. 

"Eeally, I feel ashamed to tell you, it 
seems so ridiculously small. I thought Dr. 
Sinclair was leading us to some humble 
dwelling, where the most we could expect 
would be pure air and cleanliness ! He said 
Ellen could be boarded for 25/. a-year." 

" That was the sum we agreed to receive 
from you." 

" Impossible !" 

"Yet it is quite tme," replied Mrs. 
Ellington. " We could not take one inmate 
on such terms ; but we have several, so that 
we can manage better. We shall be per- 
fectly satisfied." Mrs. Ellington did not add 
that Dr. Sinclair had promised to make uj) 
the deficiency ; that they were to receive 
125/. from the benevolent old man, in addi- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 53 

tion to Annie's 25/. ! And for once in lier 
life Annie was taken in — as thoroughly 
taken in as simple-minded, innocent Ellen — 
and though all still seemed a wonder to her, 
as she looked round the room, with its 
luxurious couches, its soft carpets, its air of 
cheerful comfort, she suspected nothing of 
the charitable deception practised on her. 
Still, she was as full of gratitude to the kind 
Doctor as if she had known the extent of her 
obligation. 

After a number of minute cares for her 
dear Ellen — such as putting away the loose 
articles she had brought with her, unpack- 
ing her boxes, arranging her few books, her 
desk and work-box, &c. — Annie returned to 
town with a lighter heart than she had felt 
for a long time, and much more faith in 
human nature. 

She arrived late, but there w^as no one to 
question her ; so passing hastily up the stairs, 
she threw off her bonnet and shawl, and 
went to look at the sleeping children. She 
seemed to love all so much better to-night, 
and she stooped and kissed them fondly, 
even the rebel Greraldine. "Her day had 
been so happy 1" she mentally repeated ; " so 
very happy ! and, but for Mrs. Maberly's 



54 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

kindness in sparing her, she might have lost 
half its pleasure T Yes, Annie's heart was 
full of love and thankfulness. That night a 
little thing called forth her gratitude; and 
to crown her contentment, on her table lay 
a letter from Antonia — the angel that ap- 
peared to Abou Ben Adhem was not more 
welcome. 



55 



CHAPTEE y. 

Antonia's letter was a pleasant one — 
pleasant her letters always were ; she was so 
affectionate, so unworldly. She informed 
Annie that she hoped to see her in a very 
short time, as her sister Mrs. Maberly had 
given her a very kind invitation to spend 
some weeks in town. "Ahl" thought 
Annie, " can sisters wait for the ceremony of 
kind invitations to see each other ? Is this 
what people of the world call affection? 
But Antonia is not of the world ; oh, no ! 
she is not, or I should never love her as I 
do, next best to my darling Ellen. Nor 
Mrs. Maberly is not worldly — surely not ; 
after all her kindness in letting me see Ellen, 
I must not think harslily of her. I will try 
hard to be more patient with those dear, 
spoiled children ; I will try very hard indeed. 
Wliile I can keep this situation, Ellen can 
live in that delightful home, and slave no 
more ; that is such a happy thought ! Keep 
it 1 yes, if it were like poor Julie's, I would 



56 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

try to keep it for dear Ellen's sake. I onglit 
to be thankful, instead of murmuring, and 
I will strive to be more and more so. True, 
Greraldine did knock me do^vn, but it was in 
a moment of excited passion. I dare say 
she was sorry for it afterwards. I shall 
certainly try to stay ! And Antonia too, 
dear Antonia ; she would not like me to 
leave her sister; our correspondence might 
be interrupted if I left ! No, no ; I am 
wrong ! Antonia is too true-hearted to give 
me up, whatever happened !" Thus mentally 
soliloquizing, Annie spent two or three 
hours, during which she was too much 
excited, and too happy to sleep. Ah, it is 
seldom a governess is too happy to sleep ! 
very seldom! Certainly there appeared a 
bright day dawning on Annie Sherwood's Hfe; 
whether its sun would go down in darkness she 
knew not, but she resigned herself to sleep 
and pleasant dreams. Yes, her dreams were 
pleasant ! There came back to her the sweet 
vision she had had long ago. She saw her 
sister the happy wife of a man who was 
leading her gently onward through a peace- 
ful, pleasant path, to the high and holy 
in eternity. And, as Annie Sherwood 
slumbered and dreamt in the calm moon- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 57 

light, lier face became beautiful with the 
radiance of hope and happiness. She arose 
in the morning with renovated life, full of 
faith and trust in heaven and man. She 
thought that she had passed a turning point 
in her life ; that henceforth her way was to 
be plain and straight. There might be 
thorns in her path ; but she would tread so 
as to avoid them, or she would blunt their 
sting. All would be peace and contentment. 
In the course of the day several little 
things occurred to ruffle Annie; she reso- 
lutely refused to see them. Time went by — 
some days, then some wrecks — her grievances 
increased ; she tried to turn her head away, 
but they crept on — surrounded her as an 
atmosphere — stared her in the facie. Her 
patience failed ; the worn, wearied body and 
mind feebly strove to bear up against the 
irritation of the spirit. It was in vain. Old 
scenes recurred. Poor Annie almost ceased 
to struggle. Her proud spirit was trampled 
on. She was insulted ; she saw herself fast 
merging into the menial. Often she com- 
pressed her white lips to keep in the ex- 
pression of indignation tumultuously rising 
from within; for she remembered Ellen — 
remembered that the money she earned was 



58 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

necessary to Ellen's very life. Had she 
stood alone in the world, she would have 
rushed forth, and have braved the pitiless 
storm in the streets, rather than have re- 
mained beneath the shelter of the proud rich 
man's roof. 

Annie thought of Ellen, and paused ; she 
thought of something else too, — that to 
supply Ellen's wants she had humiliated 
herself to ask and receive some of her money 
in advance. She had moreover added to 
that necessary evil by too generously obtain- 
ing a second advance, to lend a mere 
acquaintance, who had no claim on her but 
real or pretended distress. 

Mrs. Maberly did not feel the incon- 
venience of advancing a (to her) small sum 
of money, and she was naturally hberal ; but 
she could, and did let the poor governess 
who had incurred the obhgation feel its 
pressure most heavily. 

When matters were about at their worst — 
at that particular point which is usually con- 
sidered a turning one, and the precursor of 
improvement — Annie heard that Antonia 
would arrive in a few, a very few days. Her 
letters had been fewer between, shorter, and 
colder lately. Annie had been hurt thereby, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 59 

but it now seemed all accounted for. Antonia 
had been busy making preparations for town; 
but when she came — when their old, delight- 
ful intimacy was renew^ed, they could talk 
freely in their walks, and in the evenings, 
many of which Antonia would certainly 
spend with her, as she had done in the 
country. 

Annie was very much like a sentimental 
girl expecting her lover's visit after a long 
absence ; she not only counted the days, but 
even the hours, till the arrival of Antonia. 
How she listened for wheels ! — then sighed 
with disappointment, remembering how 
foolish it was to expect, among the number 
of carriages that rolled through the street in 
a day, to be able to recognise that which 
would bring her beloved friend. Truly, Annie 
Sherwood's friendship had all the warmth 
of love, unalloyed by love's selfishness. 

Annie was standing just within the door 
of her room, her eyes glistening, and her 
whole countenance irradiated with pleasure. 
She heard Antonia's voice in the hall ; she 
would have known it among a thousand — it 
seemed so long though since she had heard 
it before ! What a pleasant voice it was too ! 
so frank ! so fall of heart ! A little too loud. 



60 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

perhaps, for the fashionable world — still not 
nnmnsical. 

Annie wanted to rush out and throw her 
arms round Antonia, but she well knew 
that there would be some sneering at a senti- 
mental scene with the governess ; so she put 
a great restraint on herself, and waited— she 
knew so well that Antonia's warm heart 
would lead her to her friend the moment she 
had seen her relatives, who might justly 
claim the first greeting. 

Annie stood waiting near the door half 
an hour ; she heard Antonia walk up-stairs, 
accompanied by her sister. Of course, 
Antonia could not immediately break ofi" her 
conversation with Mrs. Maberly, but she 
Avould come soon. Annie felt a little sad to 
think that she might not without incurring 
ridicule, perhaps even reproof, go forth and 
greet her friend as her heart dictated ; but 
then she was sure that the affectionate girl 
felt just as she did. She w^aited still ; the 
children did not come for their lessons at all 
that afternoon ; lately they had acquired the 
habit of taking a holiday whenever they 
chose. At tea-time they began to straggle 
in ; it was an unknown tiling for the 
Maberly family to sit down at one time to a 



ANXE SHERWOOD. 61 

meal. Tlie cliildren said, "Aunt Antonia 
is dressing for dinner." 

"I have no wish to hear what Aunt 
Antonia is doing/' said Annie, crossly. The 
children looked at each other and laughed ; 
it was " fun" to see the governess lose her 
temper sometimes — " real fun," when she was 
always telling them not to he cross. Greral- 
dine (a quick, clever girl was Geraldine) 
made a knowing speech about " precept and 
example." The governess replied sharply, 
and the consequence was, what the sailors 
call a " breeze." " It is such prime fun to put 
the governess in a rage ;" and " Miss Sher- 
wood looked so delightfully ugly when she 
cried." " If TJncle Hal would but come in !" 
But tea passed over despite the little scene ; 
rather a common occurrence was such an 
episode. No Antonia appeared. The children 
rushed off like so many hounds after scent. 
The first dinner-bell rang. Greraldine put her 
head round the door of the school-room, 
looking very merry. " I dare say she'll come 
and see you by-and-by. Miss Sherwood !" 

Geraldine meant to be kind ; she forgot 
the late misunderstanding — forgot that 
not long before she had knocked her 
governess down, for venturing to interfere 



62 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

when she kicked her sister; and now Qeral- 
dine thought Annie was disappointed, and 
that she would say something to comfort 
her, for she w^as beginning to get a ghmmer- 
ing notion of what "people's feelings" meant. 

But Annie being so much more accus- 
tomed to rude remarks than pleasant ones, 
thought she was mocked, and as Geraldine 
still lingered, instead of thanking her she 
made some hasty answer. " How do you 
do, Miss Sherwood?" said Antonia, entering, 
and offering her hand. " I must hasten, for 
the second dinner-bell is ringing." 

Annie held the hand extended to her, and 
looked up at her friend hastily ; but her 
trembling lips could not frame a word, and 
Antonia's hand dropped from hers. Miss 
Oakley turned and left the room. 

" And it is thus Antonia greets me !" 
repeated Annie. " It is almost as if Ellen 
herself had forsaken me ! Is this Antonia — 
Antonia that I have loved so much? Eomantic 
fool ! what right had I to expect stabihty 
from an unequal friendship ? Why did I 
not remember that Antonia was an indepen- 
dent lady, and I the poor dependent gover- 
ness, cut off from the sympathies of all, 
unless I choose to accept those of the vulgar 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 63 

herd ?" A drop of gall was infused in Annie's 
heart that day, which nothing ever expelled 
again. Yet her judgment of her friend 
might have been severe — probably it w^as so. 
Very hkely Antonia still loved her, but she 
was ashamed to show her affection. She 
had learnt that the companion of the country 
could not always, and with equal propriety, 
be the companion of town life. She had 
learnt that she would be laughed at, if sup- 
posed to be on familiar terms wdth her sister's 
governess ; and few people are so nobly 
independent as to bear derision. So, though 
it was perhaps rather painful at first, it was 
best to begin as her position, not her incli- 
nation, would obhge her to continue. No 
doubt she was sorry, for Antonia was too 
tender-hearted to inflict a pang on a human 
being without sharing m it herself. But 
one must yield to the world's opinions, and 
she w^ould try "to make it up to Minnie 
some other way."^ 

The evening of Antonia' s arrival was a 
gloomy one to Annie. She wanted courage 
even to think, and as she could do nothing 
else worth doing, she began to scribble, and 
produced the best sketch of a tale she had 
ever before attempted. She was pleased and 



64 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

surprised at her own performance. Perhaps 
it was the secret consciousness of her o\mi 
talents which kept Annie from utter des- 
pondency ; pride too came to her assistance. 

" I will weep no more," she murmured ; 
" henceforth I will only live for my dear, 
unselfish sister. If Heaven takes her from 
me, we shall die together. I have no other 
tie in life — none other wdll I seek.'' 

Late that night, as Annie lay on her 
sleepless bed, some one gently opened her 
door, entered the room, and stood beside her. 

" Minnie ! dear Minnie ! are you awake ?" 
said the old loving voice. 

" Aw^ake ?" repeated Annie. 

" Yes, I want to say something to you. 
You must have thought me strange to-day!" 

" Not at aU, Miss Oakley." 

" Oh, pray, don't speak to me in that dis- 
tant way !" 

" Wliat shaU I call you, then ?" 

" Antonia, as you used to do in the old 
pleasant times ; then I shall believe you un- 
changed." 

" You wish me to call you Antonia ! w^ell, 
I wm." 

" But I mean," began Antonia in a hesi- 
tating voice ; "I mean when " 



ANXE SHERVN'OOD. G5 

'' When in private ?" suggested Annie. 

" Yes, yes, exactly so, Minnie ; but how 
strangely you talk to me !" 

'' Do I ?" 

" Yes," replied Antonia, melting into 
tears, and stealing her arms round Annie's 
neck. " You make me very unhappy, Min- 
nie, and this is a foolish world." 

Annie returned Antonia's caress, and 
gently kissed her cheek. She understood 
her now. Her friend had not forgotten 
their past happy intercourse ; her friendship 
was neither dead nor cold ; she only wished 
it to seem so to the world, because she had 
not courage to meet the world's opinion. 

Annie was no longer angry ; she pitied the 
weakness of Antonia's mind, and forgave 
her ; but she could never again share with 
her her inmost thoughts. 

It was a cold night, intensely cold, but 
Antonia seemed quite insensible of it ; she 
threw herself down beside Annie, and 
clasping her in her arms, renewed all her old 
professions of affection and friendship. But 
the old story did not sound now as once it 
had sounded, and Antonia did not feel sure 
in her heart that she would be believed, 
though every word was sincerely meant. 

VOL. II. F 



(j6 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Certainly she then fully intended to be the 
affectionate friend of the poor solitary go- 
verness, whom she still pitied, stillj loved ; 
only her friendsliip mnst be shown in pri- 
vate — indeed, be kept as secret as a clandes- 
tine love affair. For a long time the friends 
conversed, but not as in other days. How 
could they talk as they had done ? Confi- 
dence no longer existed between them; it 
was destroyed by the mean cowardice of 
one. 

" You must not stay in the cold, Antonia," 
said Annie, trying to warm her friend's hands 
between her own. 

" But I have so much to say, dear 
Minnie !" 

"Never mind; say it to-morrow. We 
shall have, plenty of time. You will go out 
with us ?" 

" Well, dear, I'm afraid I can't. I shall 
be obliged to go with my sister." 

" Of course she has the first claim on you," 
said Annie. " I ought to have thought of 
that. But you'll come into the school-room 
some time in the evening, I dare say ?" 

" If I can manage it any way," said An- 
tonia, hesitatingly. 

" You can bring your work with you, you 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 67 

know," said Annie, " if you have any pet 
crocliet, or other " 

" Not exactly that," said Antonia. " But, 
Minnie " 

" I suppose we are to have stolen inter- 
views, like clandestine lovers !" said Annie, 
rather sharply. 

"Dear me, what odd things you say!" 
said Antonia, not liking to make any direct 
answer. 

Annie said nothing in reply. She listened 
patiently to Antonia's sayings, and offered no 
comment on them. At length Antonia retired 
to her own room, after again affectionately 
embracing her friend. Annie loved Antonia 
too much to feel any resentment towards 
her, but she felt as if a star (and a very 
bright one) had been put out in her sky, 
and as if she could never trust nor love 



E 2 



68 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE VI. 

Her dream of romantic friendship tlins 
rudely dispersed, Annie Sherwood clung 
more than ever to her sister. In Ellen she 
could meet w^ith no disappointment ; from 
Ellen the world could never separate her. 

Under the care of the Ellingtons, and the 
constant supervision of the benevolent Dr. 
Sinclair, Ellen w^as rapidly improving ; and 
if a little shade of sadness now and then 
clouded her fair face, it arose from the re- 
membrance of her lover's uncertain fate, and 
the contemplation of Annie's toils and lonely 
existence. As soon as she found her strength 
returning, she was anxious to seek employ- 
ment ; but the bare possibility of her sister's 
going back to governess life, made Annie so 
wretched, that Ellen was obliged to put off 
the evil day. It might have been observed, 
that whenever Annie had been to spend a 
few hours with Ellen, she returned more 
patient and more humble. Not only did 
she meekly bear her every-day school-room 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 69 

trials after those visits, but slie met with 
silent endurance the increasing slights and 
annoyances received from the family in 
general; and that which was a thousand 
times more painful, the growing estrange- 
ment of Antonia. Yes, Annie bore much, 
from the dread of losing the means of sup- 
porting her sister in ease and comfort ; but, 
unfortunately, she did not see Ellen very 
often, to renew the impression in her mind 
of how much depended on her self-denial ; 
and when that strong incentive to for- 
bearance was momentarily dormant, she 
jdelded to the feelings of indignation and 
resentment which her unfortunate position 
inspired. 

And daily the situation of the hapless 
governess became more unbearable, nor had 
she any one to whom she could confide her 
sorrows. To Ellen it was impossible to un- 
burden her overcharged mind ; she loved 
her too much to relieve herself by imparting 
to her the load she was called upon to bear. 
Should she talk to Antonia ? Antonia, whom 
she had loved so much, next best to EUen I 
Antonia was now almost a stranger to her. 

There are some things supposed to be 
immortal, or at least, expected to be such. 



70 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Foremost among these things stands the 
patience of the tutor and the governess. 
Not only must they barter for a small sti- 
pend — sometimes a mere nominal remune- 
ration — " the small accomplishments of a 
Crichton," the wisdom of a Socrates, and the 
elegance of a Sevigne ; but they must super- 
add thereto the patience of an Isaac Newton. 
And, alas ! poor Annie Sherw^ood had not 
lately been in a school for the cultivation of 
patience ; and one day, being irritated rather 
beyond even a governess's powers of en- 
durance, she actually Avrote a note to give 
warning to Mrs. Maberly ! 

But the governess was, after all, but a 
poor, weak woman, and had overmuch of 
woman's heart ; and while she was sealing 
her note, her eye accidentally fell on some 
toys scattered about the floor; and some 
way those little bits of wood and tin spoke 
to her of a golden-headed child, that was 
wont to twine her soft arms round her neck, 
and with words of endearment strive to 
soothe her in sadness. And the thought of 
relinquishing the world of love in that child's 
heart made Annie pause, and finally made 
her throw the letter in the fire. It would 
be re-written when the first kick, or what 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 71 

she felt much more, the first sneer, should 
inspire her with fresh determination for the 
task. 

Yes, the letter was burnt, and the gover- 
ness crept softly into the nursery to kiss 
the little sleeper, whose love more effectually 
bound on her galling chains, than her own 
poverty. Not many days later, however, 
the warning was again written, and given 
into Mrs. Maberly's own aristocratic hands, 
with fearful temerity. Her governess want 
to leave her! Iter governess give her warning ! 
The thing was incredible ! Her governess, 
who had been allowed so many privileges ! 
who had even, on two or tln-ee occasions, had 
her salary most liberally advanced to her ! It 
could not be! Mrs. Maberly's surprise was 
only equalled by her indignation ; for if she 
did not express this opinion in as many 
words, she certainly thought that to " servo 
her" in any capacity was such an honour 
and happiness, that no person in their senses 
could renounce a post in her family, without 
the utmost ingratitude and folly. 

Mrs. Maberly had but six weeks before 
her in which to express her anger and in- 
dignation; she made an excellent use of the 
time, and the contumacious governess re- 



72 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

ceived sucli daily punishment for all offences, 
past, present, and to come, that her existence 
became so miserable as to create a doubt 
whether purgatorial purgation were really so 
fabulous as Luther, Calvin, Zwingle, Me- 
lancthon, Knox, and a host of other worthies 
opined it to be. 

Mrs. Maberly, despite the habitual hauteur 
engendered by her aristocratic pretensions, 
had usually shown an easy temj)er ; and 
Annie's surprise, wdien she heard and saw 
the aristocratic lady fume and rage, equalled 
the aristocratic lady's surprise at finding 
that her governess was not afraid of her. 

Poor Annie ! how she wished the last day 
had come ; the last day of her sojourn under 
that inhospitable roof ! How pleasant would 
be the round, red face of the cabman who 
would come to take her away from the 
Maberlys ! To take her away ! but to 
where ? to what ? To penury — want — star- 
vation, perchance 1 "Where was the home 
open to receive her? Where were the 
friends who would supply her necessities ? 
Who would not blame her for giving up a 
comfortable home, shelter, and provision? 
And giving up all this from a mere fantastic 
delicacy; a morbid sensibility wdiich would 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 73 

not allow lier to become reconciled to an 
occasional slight, or even an occasional kick ! 

Indeed, when Annie came to tliink it over, 
she began to donbt whether she had not 
been very foolish. Many governesses were 
so mnch worse situated than she had been, 
yet they bore it ; why cordd not she ? She 
might find an exchange of employers any- 
thing but an improvement ; perhaps she 
would not get another engagement at all ! 
And then, poor, dear Ellen ! What was to 
become of Ellen ? Annie taxed herself with 
selfishness, and felt almost persuaded, fot 
Ellen's sake, to humiliate herself for ever in 
her own eyes, by seeking to conciliate Mrs. 
Maberly, and revoking her warning. Day 
after day she pondered the possibility of un- 
doing what she had done ; but day after day 
it became a more difiicult task. Meanwhile, 
the apparent insensibility of Antonia cut her 
to the heart ; but probably Annie misjudged 
her former friend, who was afraid of her 
sister, and only weak, not heartless. 

The day approached for Annie's departure. 
She wrote to Ellen, "I have ruined you 
and myself!" Ellen replied, "Your letter, 
dear Annie, has taken a load off my heart ! 
I thank God for the determination you have 



74 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

taken, again and again. You have always 
been wretclied with those proud, unkind 
people, who could neither enter into your 
feelings, nor appreciate your talents ; but 
how have you kept your miseries to yourself 
till now ? 

" Never mind, my own dear Annie, what 
they say or do to you, you will soon be out 
of their power. Torget that heartless An- 
tonia, and see if your sister's love cannot 
make amends to you for the loss of such a 
hoUow friendship. Be comforted, my sister, 
there are bright days in store for us yet. 

" Oh, Annie, I have such good news to 
teU you — such blessed news ! To-mon'ow, 
then, you will leave your hard bondage. 
Come straight here ; you are expected. The 
dear old Doctor will be with us in the 
evening, or perhaps, as early as you ; and 
we shall talk merrily over 'life's wicissi- 
toodinous changes.' You have no idea how 
well ' AYliat ! - wont - you - buy - twelve - iron- 
^X^'y^r^-for-a-penny ?' looks in livery ! 

" Your loving Ellen." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 75 



CHAPTEE YII. 

Annie left the Maberlys' door without one 
word of farewell, or even an expression or 
look of sympathy or kindness from Antonia; 
and the remembrance of her friend's insensi- 
bility haunted her through life. 

To be deceived in friendship is worse than 
to be deceived in love. Love wears wings, 
and they indicate the possibility of flight ; 
but sober friendship has no such attributes, 
and we naturally expect from it a more en- 
during existence. 

To leave even the wayward among her 
flock was a sore trial to Annie Sherw^ood; 
but as she went forth from the inhospitable 
mansion, she resolutely turned away her 
face, lest her tears should be seen and de- 
rided. Wlien once the coach-door was shut 
on her, and the window drawn up, she gave 
way to her feehngs, and drawing forth a 
little golden curl, severed from the head of 
her little comforter (while she had watched 



76 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

over lier in the weary hours of a painful 
illness), she kissed it again and again. 

But on, on must those go, who toil for 
their daily existence. They have no time for 
tears and regrets; no room for sentimental 
sorrows. On ! on ! what have they to do 
with the heart and the heart's affections? 
Annie well knew all this, so she dried her 
tears, resolutely dismissed the images of 
those she had left behind her, the memory 
of the love she had lost, the insults she had 
escaped, and set to work to plan the ensuing 
campaign in search of a fresh engagement. 
The thought of wdiat lay before her was heart- 
sickening, but it must be looked resolutely 
in the face, and so would she look at it. 

When Annie arrived at the Ellingtons', 
she was shown into a small drawing-room 
in wdiich Ellen w^as seated, but in such a 
position that she could not see her sister 
enter. A gentleman was sitting beside her ; 
and Annie saw, or fancied she saw, that 
Ellen's hand rested in his, and that very 
lovingly. 

Annie advanced, silent from astonishment ; 
she had seen him so casually, that she could 
not immediately recognise Eichard Stancliff 
—but he it was. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 77 

" Annie ! dear Annie !" exclaimed Ellen, 
starting up, and hugging rather than em- 
bracing Annie, in the exuberance of her 
joy. " Bichard, this is Annie !" on which 
Mr. StanclifF advanced eagerly, and taking 
both Annie's hands in his, kissed her pale 
cheek just as if he had been her brother 
all her life. 

And Annie laughed and cried alternately, 
and asked a great many foolish, incoherent 
questions, w^hich nobody thought of answer- 
ing ; or if they did answer, she did not listen; 
and for some hours she remained without 
the slightest conception of how the happy 
meeting of the lovers had been brought 
about, or wdiy she had broken Mrs. Elhng- 
ton's beautiful china vase, and had laughed 
at the mischief she had done. 

In the midst of a very confused, unedifying, 
but, to the parties concerned, happy conver- 
sation (if conversation it could be called, in 
which all engaged talked at the same time), 
in came the Doctor, rubbing his hands, and 
with a bright light playing over his face 
that would settle down nowhere, but was 
now lurking round his mouth, now glancing 
into one eye, then into the other, like a real 
Jack-o'-lantern. 



78 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Well, Miss Sherwood, what do yon say 
to my patient ? mine, qnotha ! I snppose 
this yonng man means to tell me a different 
story, as he has stepped into my shoes. 
But I shall always consider the cnre ' mine, 
and mine only,' as the song says. Glad to 
hear you've got rid of that cantankerous old 
woman !" 

" Who do you mean. Doctor?" asked 
Annie, wishing to divert the old man's 
attention from the blushing Ellen, and the 
scarcely less discountenanced )ver. 

" Why, the old w^oman who has been 
leading you a life which has made you look 
as thin as a certain apothecary, wdio they 
say lived in Mantua in olden times. You 
needn't deny it, for I know the life you 
governesses all lead in Belgravia. Back 
attic, no ventilation, or wind enough to set 
a mill going; three miles of stairs a-day; 
seven of walking out in all weathers ; thir- 
teen hours of teaching and talking ; hurried, 
nasty meals; eternal legs of mutton and 
rice pudding; impudent servants; damp, 
unaired clothes ; kicking, scratcliing, scream- 
ing children ; and a shrew of a mother ! Oh, 
don't I know all about it !" 

" But Mrs. Maberly is not an old w^oman, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 79 

Doctor, and never sent ns out in the rain at 
all, unless tlie children particularly wished it." 

" And then you had to drag them through 
the mud to that filthy abomination, the 
Serpentine ! Seventy-nine distinct bad smells 
in it. Coleridge only found seventy-two in 
Cologne. Never talk to me about it ! If 
I'd a daughter, your Belgr avians might get 
her as an upper housemaid, perhaps ; but as 
a governess, never, never, if they'd give me 
a king's ransom for her 1" 

Here the good Doctor lapsed into his ab- 
sent habit, and the remainder of his speech 
consisted of a soliloquy, only parts of which 
reached his companions. " Broken vase, eh ! 
must be paid for, I suppose. Madame 
Ellington makes a fuss about her knick- 
knacks. Now, if it were only a child, with 
a broken arm, might be repaired, and no 
costs ! "Why wiU women have such kick- 
shaws about ? Fine young man that Stan- 
chif ! Pity he's not in my trade ; make a 
good lop-lolly -boy, and afterwards slip into 
my practice. What an old fool I am ! No 
business of mine, certainly. Ahvays worry- 
ing my brain about other people's concerns. 
Poor thing ! she looks as if she'd been ill- 
used ! Should hke to strengthen her and 



80 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

help her to beat that termagant 1 Jealous 
of her, no doubt !" 

" Not the least jealous of me, I assure 
you, Doctor,'' said Annie, touching the old 
man's sleeve ; "I hope I am not flattering 
myself though, in supposing that I am the 
object of your thoughts." 

" The object of my thoughts, you impu- 
dent baggage ! I was thinking of a plan 
for cleaning the pestilential Thames, as the 

C of S can't do it, with the help 

of all his mud-larks." 

" But why can't he do it ?" 

" For the best of all reasons, his hands are 
tied behind his back, and he can't use them." 

" And what do you propose ?" 

" A plan beyond the reach of any compre- 
hension less enlarged than my ow^n." 

" Then there can be no use in propounding 
it. Doctor, as no one will be equal to its 
execution." 

" True ; so, like most theorists, I must 
live on the sublimity of my own conceptions. 
Kemember, I take you in hand to-morrow." 

" There is nothing the matter with me, 
Doctor." 

" Nothing ! Dear me ! Of course not, 
or a mere trifle. Only you're just a fit ob- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 81 

ject for an anatomical museum, showing a 
gentle descent to the Avernus of phthisis ! 
Didn't I see you in the Park the other 
day?" 

"Perhaps so," said Annie, colouring a 
little, for she greatly disliked saying that 
it was indeed she who had been seen strug- 
gling with a refractory child, who was 
scratching her own wrist, that on her return 
home she might show the mark, trium- 
phantly exclaiming to her credulous mother, 
" See w^hat she has done to me !" 

" Perhaps so 1" repeated the Doctor. 
"Nonsense! don't I know it was you! I 
suppose you wouldn't speak for fear those 
angelic children should carry a tale home, 
and say I was your beau, eh? Ah, you 
needn't laugh, — you might have a much 
worse one." 

" Certainly I might," said Annie. 

" Suppose now, Annie Sherwood, I were 
to make you an offer, what should you say?" 

" That you were not consulting your own 
dignity, sir, or " 

" Or your taste ! Well, I believe you 
are right, girl. May and December don't 
go well together. December 'd get rheu- 
matic, tricking himself out in May flowers, 

VOL. II. G 



82 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

and May would shiver in the atmosphere of 
ungenial snows." 

" Ah, there is nothing like May in me," 
sighed Annie, as she turned away. 

" Little enough, Grod knows, poor thing !" 
muttered the Doctor; "when once a girl 
has settled down to the drudgery of gram- 
mars and geographies, she has bid a long 
farewell to youth !'* 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 83 



CHAPTEE VIII. 

When Annie at lengtli found lierself quite 
alone with EUen, the eager questioning, 
with its incoherent repHes, was renewed. 
The same things had been asked again and 
again, and so badly answered, because so 
badly understood, that Annie seemed almost 
as far as ever from comprehending all she 
most desired to know, and would doubtless 
have long remained in ignorance, had not 
Ellen hit on the bright expedient of " be- 
ginning at the beginning," and recounting 
the few simple facts to her, little short of 
miraculous, which had brought back her 
lover from the shadowy regions to which 
her imagination had consigned him. 

" It was yesterday, only yesterday, dear 
Annie — no, the day before, that I met him — 
and, strange to say, I had been dreaming of 
him the night before !" 

" Not at all strange," said Annie, laugh- 
ing ; "I dare say you had dreamt of him 
the night before that, and the night before 
G 2 



84 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

that also, and had lam down on purpose to 
repeat the dream, just like Goldsmith's 
miller Whang, when he had had one vision 
of the hidden treasure. However, there was 
a difference between his dream and yours, as 
his realisation was a ruined fortune, and 
yours will, I hope, be a brightened one. Yes, 
you have the advantage over Whang !" 
" But, Annie, dear, do listen !" 
" I will try to listen, darling !" 
" Well, as I said before, I had been 
dreaming of Eichard ; I fancied that I was 
at Elm grove again, and Ellen Ferrers was 

doing all she could to separate him from 

But, Annie, you have five or six hairs as 
silvery as our father's !" 

" True," said Annie, laughing ; " I shall 
soon learn to sa}', 

" ' My hair is grey, but not witli years, 
Nor grew it white in a single night, 
As some have done through sudden fears.' 

If the Doctor were here, he w^ould mutter 
' grammars and geographies !' " 

" Annie, was the Doctor jesting when he 
said, ' Suppose I were to make you an 
offer ?' " 

'' I dare say he was." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 85 

" But if lie were in earnest, would you 
accept Mm?" 

" The world would call me mad if I did 
not. It would be a good money -matcli ; 
and, considering the difference in our years, 
it would possess the advantage Bevil de- 
scribes in Sir Eichard Steele's play, ' One 
would soon l3e delivered from what they did 
not marry, the person, and enjoy what they 
did marry, the money.' But I see you look 
horrified, Ellen : allay your fears ; the Doctor 
thinks not of me ; no man in his senses 
would. I am poor, plain, and have not even 
the merit of good humour to make up for 
my deficiencies." 

" I am sure you always had a sweet 
temper !" exclaimed Ellen, warmly. 

" But you forget that Mrs. Maberly has 
been filing me with rather a sharp tool, and 
instead of smoothing me down, has managed 
to make sharp gaps in my temper. No, I 
can't pretend now to good humour ; but I 
suppose that, like other splenetics, I shall 
some day soften down, in my own estimation, 
into a nervous invalid. Nervousness is such 
a pretty little diminuendo for ill-humour !" 

'' Nonsense, Annie, but you must tell me 
whether you would accept the Doctor." 



8G ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" JSTot if ' each particular hair' of his head 
were a huge diamond, and he showered them 
all on me, like the v/indfall that Danae re- 
ceived from the father of the gods. No, I 
would rather hve by selling lucifer-matches 
than sell myself; and if I would, Ellen, no 
one would buy me ! But to retrace our 
steps, ¥/here did you find your Eomeo ? for 
' that's the theme.' You had better go 
back to your dream, or you will be like the 
preacher who lost the thi-ead of his discourse. 
' We dream — we do but dream !' " 

" But I did something more than dream," 
said Ellen. '' When I got up, I found Mrs." 
Ellington preparing to take her children to 
see some experiments at the Polytechnic, 
and " 

" There you found your Strephon ! JSTot 
at all romantic ! I dare say he was going 
down in the diving-bell. In novels, lovers 
sometimes meet at balls, theatres, and con- 
certs, but never at the Polytechnic !" 

" Annie, you are incorrigible ! I never 
told you I met him there." 

" Well, go on your ow^n way, EUen." 

" We spent three hours very pleasantly 
at the Polytechnic, and saw among other 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 87 

things some very curious experiments in the 

atmospheric " 

" Ellen, I can't listen ; you are like Pope's 
woman — I forget her name — who could 

" ' Mark the figures on an Indian chest/ 

while her adoring swain was making love T 

" When we came out/' continued Ellen, 
" the first thing I saw was an old woman 
with a basket of oranges " 

" You tantalising girl ! Was Richard 
hidden under them ?" 

" No, but they were -" 

" Well, do pass over them. There's no- 
thing interesting in oranges. Ah ! I forgot 
that lovely song of Mignon's, * Kenst du,' it 
begins." 

" Having arrived at the persuasion that 
there is something poetical in oranges, will 
you venture on one now?" said Ellen, who 
had a basketful beside her. 

'' No, thank you, ' I should fall ofi*,' as 
Leigh Hunt said to a lady who made liim 
the same propositici." 

" Well, just as the old woman was cross- 
ing Regent Street, with her ponderous 
basket " 

" Ellen, your story and my interruptions 



88 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

remind me of ' the farmer who was fond of 
ducks and green peas,' in the Citizen of the 

World r 

" Annie, you are provoking ! I never 
called you so before ! Just as the old woman 
was in the act of crossing, a dashing 
cabriolet drove up at such speed that she 
and her oranges were in the most imminent 
danger." 

" And Celadon rushed to her assistance !" 
" Not at all. A gentleman in the cab 
called out to a pedestrian, in a voice whose 
disagreeable tone seemed very familiar to 
me, — ' Huntly, old fellow, how are you ? 
Isn't my turnout stunning ? Don't I hold 
the ribbons well, that's all ! Altogether first 
rate, ain't it ?' ' Like its master, irresistible !' 
was the reply, as Mr. Vincent raised his 
whip to send on the horses in style. Un- 
fortunately, the lash was very long, and 
struck the poor old woman in the eye ; she 
had ignorantly approached too near, sup- 
posing that the fine gentleman would buy 
her oranges. With a scream of pain, she let 
her basket drop, and its contents rolled in 
every direction ; some of the oranges were 
smashed by carriage-wheels as they rolled 
along. A number were eagerly snatched by 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 89 

the loitering boys, wlio seemed to think they 
had made a good harvest. I dare say I 
looked very absurd doing it, but I could not 
help stooping to pick up some of the oranges 
and replace them in the basket, more espe- 
cially as I had heard the poor old woman 
exclaim, as soon as her anguish would allow 
her to perceive her loss — ' Sure, an all I had 
in the world's gone now ! Sure, an' it was 
in the basket, an' nothin' but ruin's before 
me ! Bad luck to him, anyhow ! Sure, an' 
it's himself that's no jontleman. Niver once 
to say he was sorry afore he driv'd away 
with his fine box !' 

" A crowd soon gathered round, and I 
began to feel uncomfortable ; still I would 
not let false shame stop my doing a right 
thing. Mrs. Ellington stood on the pave- 
ment waiting for me. I am sure she would 
have helped me, if her courage had not failed 
her. Just as I had put the last orange 
which I could find, in the basket, and the 
poor woman was bemoaning at once her in- 
jury and her losses, a gentleman came up, 
inquired what was the matter, and examined 
the injured eye. He said that the poor 
creature would lose her sight, if it were not 
immediately attended to. Without adding 



90 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

more lie called a coacli, put tlie poor old 
woman and lier basket in, and desired the 
coachman to drive immediately to St. 
George's Hospital. Oh, Annie, it was 
Bichardj'^and he had not seen me ; or if he 
had, he had not recognised me. Joy and 
surprise ahke chained me to the spot, and 
sealed my lips. Mrs. Ellington led me 
away; she saiv somethmg had happened, 
though she could not tell what. She knew 
little of my past history. I could not talk 
freely to her. Despite her kindness and 
sympathy, she has too much of the world's 
conventionalities about her, to render con- 
fidence easy. 

"I spent the rest of the day in a be- 
wildered but pleasant dream. True, I had 
to account to myself for Eichard's seemingly 
strange conduct ; but I was sure he could ex- 
plain it most satisfactorily, and it never 
occurred to me to doubt him in the least 
degree. 

" In the evening the Doctor came. I was 
in my own Httle sitting-room. He talked for 
a short time with the Ellingtons, and then 
came up to me. I think Mrs. Ellington 
must have told him of our morning's adven- 
ture, for as soon as he had seated himself, and 



ANNE SHERV/OOD. 91 

muttered a few words for his own edification, 
lie "began with, 'Tell me all about the old 
woman and her oranges.' When I had 
complied with his request, he exclaimed, 
abruptly, ' That's not all ! Who was that 
good-looking jackanapes driving tandem? — 
tandem in Eegent Street, eh ? Did you say 
he was called Eichard?' 

'' ' Oh no, sir !' said I, ' his name is 
Francis Vincent.' 

" ' Some old flame of yours. Miss Helena?' 

" ' No, sir,' I answered, hastily ; ' if I did 
not think it wrong, I should say Mr. Yincent 
was the most hateful of men. An old ac- 
quaintance, truly, but recognised with more 
aversion than pleasm^e.' 

" ' Well, don't look angry ! I never saw 
you with such a vixenish look before. The 
truth is, it's in all women, and only wants 
an occasion to come forth ! You didn't see 
any other old acquaintance, I suppose ?' added 
he, looking very scrutinizingly at me. ' You 
didn't grow red, then white, then red and 
vvdiite again, just as you do now ! You 
didn't tremble and shake just as you do at 
this minute !' 

" I believe the Doctor was right ; I was 
really trembling and colouring, and I am 



92 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

afraid feeling rather vexed too; but it's 
impossible to be really angry with the Doctor, 
he is so good and kind. He looked at me 
with an odd smile, and added, ' You needn't 
look just as if you'd picked a pocket, but 
may just as well tell the story in a straight- 
forward way. By a singular coincidence, 
you happened to know the name of the 
gentleman who took possession of the old 
v/oman and her traps !' 

" ' Yes,' said I, hesitatingly. 

"'WhoisV?^ 

" ' A clerg3^man ; one of tlie clergymen of 
a parish in which I used to live.' 

" ' Ah, good ! ver^^ good, indeed ! And he 
w^as a curate, a young, interesting curate, 
eh? Good-looking, student-like, Kirke- 
Whitish ? Wrote verses, and lent you sen- 
timental books !' 

" I tried to laugh, but failing, cried ; and 
then the Doctor got it all out of me in five 
minutes. He subsided with 'Humph!' a 
few minutes' silence, and then began his 
usual soliloquy. 

" ' Silly girl, thought she'd more sense ! 
But all of us make fools of ourselves at some 
period of our lives. Business must be 
looked into ! Some young scapegrace, I'll 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 93 

answer for it. Jilted lier, no doubt. Fool 
of a girl ! Women all alike — ready to die 
for a good-for-notliing dog ! an lionest man 
may go liang for them. Glad I never 

married — yet Well, I must be off. 

Good-bye, Miss Helena, going to a very in- 
teresting operation indeed; wouldn't miss 
seeing that leg off for something ! I've still 
a hankering after surgery. Don't know the 
old orange- woman's name, eh ? or the hos- 
pital she w^ent to ?' ^ 

" ' I don't know her name,' said I, ' but 
she went to St. George's Hospital.' 

'' ' A^ery good ; I shall peep at her ; I 
should like to see that case myself 

" So saying, the Doctor left, but on the 
staircase I heard, 'Funny business, very; 
young people will be young ! Black-coated 
fellows often not good for much; talk of 
red coats ! a thousand times more mischief 
in a cassock ! Funny business ; thought it 
w^asn't all grammars and geographies 1 
Should like to cudgel the fellow !' 

"When the Doctor was gone, I had a very 
good cry at having been led to say so many 
silly things ; more especially as I felt sure 
that he would talk of me in his soliloquies 
all day long, and that before all sorts of 



94 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

people. I was going to wTite it all to you, 
but that I knew I could tell you better. 
And then, dear Annie, yesterday, Eicliard 
walked in, and I felt as if I should die with 
joy. Some time passed before I was col- 
lected enough to understand what he tried 
to tell me; but at last he succeeded in 
making me comprehend, that he had been 
vainly seeking me almost ever since we 
parted at Elmgrove. The letter which I 
had written to him before leaving he had 
never received ; consequently, he had no 
clue to my address, and all his efforts to 
trace me had proved useless. He has been 
some weeks staying in London, and was 
preparing to leave and take possession of a 
new curacy in Somerset, wiien he called at 
the hospital to inquire for his j»?'0ifey6%, the 
old Irishwoman. The nurse of the ward 
asked his name, and then put a card in his 
hand — our dear old Doctor's — on which he 
read, ' Dr. Sinclair's compliments, and would 
be gratified by a few moments' conversation 
with Mr. Stancliff, if he could make it con- 
venient to call in L Street.' 

" Eichard sav/ and comforted the poor old 
woman, and proceeded immediately after to 
L Street. The Doctor was engaged, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 95 

but begged Mr. Stancliff would amuse him- 
self with a book for a feAV minutes. He ac- 
cordingly took one from the table of the 
room into which he had been shown, and 
found, to his inexpressible surprise, my 
name written in the boldest and most 
striking characters on the cover. Of course 
the circumstance seemed very singular, and 
the more so as the book happened to be 
purely medical. Still, Eichard did not 
suppose that the strange coincidence of 
names was other than accidental. But he 
took up another and another volume, and 
found the same thing repeated. Of course 
the Doctor had taken the trouble to write 
them in all for Eichard's edification, and had 
left him alone, recommending a book, in 
order to bring about the denouement he 
wished. 

" When Dr. Sinclair came in, he was very 
cordial, shook Eichard warmly by the hand, 
and said he was delighted to make his 
acquaintance. He praised his humanity to 
the oranges — to the orange-woman, I mean 
— and after a half-hour's conversation, during 
which the Doctor kept so wide awake that 
he did not once soliloquize, (though he had 
seemed all the time as if he wanted to intro- 



96 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

duce some subject foreign to tlie conver- 
sation,) he exclaimed abruptly — ' I am just 
going to see a pet patient of mine !' Here 
Eicliard started up, expressing a fear that 
he was detaining the good Doctor. 

" ' Not at all,' he replied ; ' pray sit dow^n. 
The fact is, my patient is convalescent. A 
very interesting case, Mr. Stancliff, one of 
those poor, hard-w^orked, ill-used governesses. 
I dare say you know how they're treated. 
It's ' do, dog, while you may !' and then 
they're turned off to starve. I've often 
stood up for them to some high and mighty 
dame, wdth more tin than temper ; but I dare 
say they got worse snubbed afterwards, and 
had impudent insinuations thrown out 
about the old man that took their part. 
But this was a very interesting case — young 
creature • — clergyman's daughter — Miss Sher- 
wood — same name as the woman that made 
so many books, you know — wdiat business 
have women to make books ?' 

"Here Richard started up again, and 
begged so earnestly for further informa- 
tion, that the Doctor gave him a hard slap 
on his shoulder, and told him he ' knew 
all about it, and that if he wished to renew 
his acquaintance with Ellen Sherwood, he 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 97 

had better bestow himself in the corner of 
the brougham at the door ;' on that hint he 
acted. 

"And now, dear Annie, comes the most 
joyous part of all (after the joy of finding 
Eichard alive and well) — he has a nice 
curacy, 150/. a-year, and he says we can 
manage wxU with that. You are to give up 
' grammars and geographies,' and the Doctor 
is to give me away on May-day. He and 
Richard have settled it all between them, 
and they seemed so pleased with their plans, 
and so pleased Avitli each other, that I did 
not like to contradict them; and then, 
Annie darling, we are to set off straight for 
Banner Else (the new curacy), where Ave 
shall have the prettiest of all pretty cottages. 
We shall be so happy, shan't we ? Do say 
yes, Annie ! Shall we not be happy ?" 

" You will be, dear Ellen, with yoiu' sunny 
faith." 

" And you too, darling ! Say that you 
will be happy, too !" 

" Oh, yes !" replied Annie ; but she an- 
swered with a sigh, and, wishing to turn the 
conversation, said, " How came the Elling- 
tons to ask me here?" 

" I am not sure," said Ellen, " but I sus- 

VOL. II. H 



98 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

pect that the Doctor was the plotter and 
contriver of that event, as he seems to be of 
everything pleasant. To tell the truth, 
though she is amiable, I don't think Mrs. 
Ellington particularly Hberal, (of course that 
is accounted for by their not being rich,) 
and lately, I have strongly suspected that 
some invisible friend satisfies her for my ex- 
travagant style of boarding." 

"I do not suspect, but am sure of it l" 
said Annie. "Dear, generous, old man, 
what can have inspired him with such bene- 
volence ?" 

" ' He who feedeth the young ravens when 
they call upon him,' " answered Ellen, smil- 
ing through a mist of tears. " But, Annie 
dear, I hope the sense of our obligation to 
Dr. Sinclair does not oppress you." 

" Oh, no !" said Annie, " benevolence like 
the Doctor's, is too unostentatious to be op- 
pressive." 

" Eichard has given me a full description 
of our future home," continued Ellen ; "I 
understand the plan of the rooms so well ; 
there are casement windows, and a thatched 
roof. You are to have the west room 
(Eichard says it is the prettiest in the 
house), and we mean to make it so nice. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 99 

There is jasmin twining over your window, 
and throngli its silver stars you will see the 
lovely Mendip Hills. There is to be a nice 
bookcase in your sanctum, and perhaps 
Charles Turner will let you have papa's 
books, and his old writing-table; you will 
like it better than a new one. Oh, Annie! 
Annie ! I am so happy. Ought we not to 
be happy and grateful too, now that our 
storms and trials are all over — quite, quite 
over? Surely our blessed Father's spirit 
will be permitted to look down and smile on 
us in our Httle Paradise ! And then, Annie, 
to think of the good we may do if we are 
humbly dihgent in Grod's service. The dear, 
white-haired old men and women that we 
may visit and comfort ; the little ones that 
we may train to virtue and happiness. I 
have but one fear, only one, that the life 
dear Eichard has promised me may tempt 
me to make my Heaven below !" 



H 2 



100 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTER IX. 

We will not tire our readers with a disserta- 
tion on the wedding of an obscure curate, 
who had scarcely a relation or friend, and 
the yet more obscure governess, who had 
still fewer of either. Yet a right merry 
wedding it was, if chastened joy and holy 
love can properly be called merry. 

Lucan makes the magnificence of fallen 
Pompey's obsequies by describing what there 
was not, in the way of splendour, thus almost 
clothing meagreness in grand attire; so, if 
we were to attempt describing the above- 
mentioned wedding, we should say, it did 
not take place by licence, nor at St. Greorge's, 
Hanover Square. The ceremony was not 
performed by his Grace of Canterbury. The 
bride did not wear magnificent jewels ; she 
had not a Honiton lace dress, nor a Mechlin 
veil. There were not six bridesmaids in 
white dresses and pink satin jackets, each 
bearing a bouquet of choice exotics. There 
was not a brilliant train of equipages, nor a 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 101 

crowd of noMe relations and friends. Tliere 
was not a dejeuner from Grunter's. The 
happy bride and bridegroom did not set off 
immediately after the ceremony for a Con- 
tinental tour, or to the Lakes. In fact, they 
left undone a thousand indispensable things. 

And yet it was a happy wedding, and the 
sun shone out on that bright May-day, and 
smiled on the innocent young bride, just as 
if it had come to say, " Of such is the king- 
dom of Heaven !" 

The breakfast — for there really was one — 
was given at the good Doctor's, and the 
bride and bridegroom, instead of rushing off 
in a paroxysm of hunger, remained a brief 
space to partake of it, and to share, too, the 
pleasure of the few friends that had gathered 
round them. 

The friends in question were not rich nor 
fashionable, indeed, they were of the work- 
ing classes, i.e., poor, care-w^orn governesses, 
to whom Ellen wished to give a day's hap- 
piness on her own happy day. 

The only person of any importance pre- 
sent was Mrs. Harrington, who, as the 
hospitable host was a bachelor, had kindly 
promised to do the honours for him. 

Every one had some little offering to 



102 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

make the fair bride, some trifling token of 
good-will. Mrs. Harrington gave her a 
pnrse of her own knitting ; nothing in it, 
though, but two or three pieces of crumpled 
paper to show off the silk netting, but Ellen 
was not to take the paper out till she could 
fill the purse with coin. 

" That will never be, unless I get a 
living," said Eichard, laughing. " We shall 
soon sHp down the hill, into a Mr. and Mrs. 
Primrose." 

The Doctor sat at the table, eating very 
little, but busy helping everybody else, 
while the Jack-o'-lantern smile was playing 
over his merry face, and yet his eyes were 
moist. He had given the bride a handsome 
volume of launch, and a sealed envelope con- 
taining a prescription, which was not to be 
opened till the next day ; so Ellen did not 
dare to peep in, to see if there was anything 
else than the prescription. 

" Ah !" sighed the Doctor, after a little 
preliminary soliloquizing, " I ought to have 
got married thirty years ago. Wliat non- 
sense I'm talking. I hadn't a coat to my 
back thirty years ago, and little thought 
what life's ' wicissitoodinous' changes would 
do for me. The way I got on in life was by 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 103 

bnUjdng people. I took to bullying because 
it was tlie secret of Abernetliy's success. 
You do look so comfortable at tlie place 
where my wife ought to be, Mrs. Harring- 
ton. I declare you brighten the atmosphere ; 
it will be dingy enough to-morrow. Annie 
Sherwood, just sit there a minute ; let's see 
how you'd look in that seat. Mrs. Harring- 
ton wont mind giving it up for a minute ; 
I know she wont. There, very well. Hold 
up your head. A little more dignity. Let 
me have the pleasure of drinking wine with 
you, Mrs. Sinclair. Timothy, carry this 
wine to your mistress." 

The Doctor was so well known that no 
one looked surprised at his jest, and he 
seemed so thoroughly to enjoy it, that Annie 
never dreamt of m^arring his sport, till he 
exclaimed, half in jest, half in earnest — 

" Once for all, Annie Shervfood, and in 
the face of this good company, will you 
accept my sixty years, brown wig, brougham, 
and establishment ?" 

" Directly I have overtaken you in the 
journey of life, Doctor!" answered Annie, try- 
ing to laugh, though she was really very 
uncomfortable at the attention directed to 
her. Annie Sherwood httle thought that 



104 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

tlie day would come, in wliicli she would look 
back with regret, and wish the Doctor's offer 
had been sober earnest, and her reply grate- 
ful compliance. 

" I am sure any one might be glad to accept 
an offer so frankly made, and promising such 
happiness !" said Hortensia Maynard, with a 
sigh, and a very tender glance at the Doctor, 
but he neither saw nor heard her : his face 
was very red, his air " distrait," and he was 
furiously taking snuff; he took it like the 

veteran Sir Charles N , loose from his 

waistcoat pocket, and with a little silver spoon. 

There was a carriage at the door. Not a 
chariot, with a pair of blood horses, and gold- 
laced postilions ; but the same chocolate 
brougham which had taken some of the 
party to church. Then came a great deal of 
shaking of hands, and a great many civil 
speeches, which were all and each reaUy 
meant, and that civil speeches seldom are. 
But then there were no great and fashionable 
people present, and what was better still, 
none who fancied themselves great and 
fashionable, unless indeed it were poor Hor- 
tensia Maynard, who had studied the peer- 
age and baronetage so long, and knew so 
many titles, and had caught a glimpse of so 



ANNE SHERWOOD, 105 

many lionourables, tliat she really did fancy 
slie was somebody. Poor Hortensia ! it was 
such a harmless fancy, and it made her so 
happy ! 

Of course, the Doctor would kiss the bride, 
and the demand created neither blushes, nor 
exclamations, nor surprise ; but the young 
girl held her fair cheek affectionately to 
the old man, to whom she owed life and 
happiness. 

A minute later the curate (with his wife 
and sister) w^as gone, and the group of poor 
governesses returned to their labours, sigh- 
ing, and wondering whether such a day 
would ever come for them ! And the old 
Doctor stood in his lonely dining-room, ten 
times more lonely since he had seen it filled 
wdth cheerful faces, and he too sighed as he 
looked after the train of women, some very 
young, some old before their time, some really 
approaching a period of life when soul and 
body implore peace and rest ! " Poor things 1 
back to their dens, and bondage 1" muttered 
the Doctor. " Well, they've had one pleasant 
day. God knows when they'll get another ! 
Saucy girl, that Annie Sherw^ood ! ugly, too, 
the w^orld would say, but she's not, no, that 
she's not — she's handsomer than Ellen ! Ah, 



106 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

if I were thirty years younger, I would — 
yes, that I would ! What an old fool I am ! 
There's mischief in that girl, with all her 
high, noble spirit, and her pride ! A true- 
hearted friend, but hang me if I should like 
such a determined wrench for an enemy ! 
Well, it's none of my business. Wonder 
whether she'll live with the Stancliffs, or go 
out again ! Great fool if she does ! but it's 
no matter to me, not the least in the world ! 
How" she laughed at my sixty years and wig, 
and all that silly speech I made ! She's a 
clever girl, but as saucy a one as ever turned 
a man's brain ! I'm too old to have mine 
turned, and it's no business of mine. Here, 
Timothy, take avv'ay this rubbish from the 
table, and bring me The Lancet !' 

" The cutting article, sir, for blood-letting?" 

" No, you grinning monkey, the cutting 

article on blood-letting ;" and the Doctor sat 

down, w^ell pleased, and rubbed his hands, 

because he fancied he had made a joke ! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 107 



CHAPTEE X. 

Six weeks from tlie day of her sister's happy 
bridal found Annie Sherwood again in Lon- 
don, seeking an " appointment/' as Hortensia 
Maynard called it. Annie's was too proud a 
spirit to be easily reconciled to dependence 
on a scarcely know^n brother-in-law, but she 
had passed six very happy weeks with her 
dear Ellen, long enough to feel assured that 
her happiness was secure in her union with 
the most generous and noble-minded of men. 
So satisfied was Annie with the blessed lot 
of her heart's idol, that she returned to the 
struggle of life, almost reconciled to its diffi- 
culties, her character at once softened and 
elevated, and much of the painful past almost 
obliterated from her mind. 

Ellen was sheltered from the w^orld's cold 
atmosphere : she had courage to face a tem- 
pest. Ellen was placed beyond the reach 
of want ; she could alone, endure many pri- 
vations ! Ellen was to be no more assailed 
by the taunts and insults addressed by the 



108 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

vulgar-minded to their dependents ; they 
might assail her, but they would recoil, and 
leave her unscathed 1 In fact, the aim of her 
life seemed accomplished ; Ellen w^as happy, 
and surroinided by an atmosphere of hope 
and love. 

It was not solely the desire of indepen- 
dence which led Annie to return to her 
arduous profession ; it was at least as much 
the dread of diminishing the curate's small 
means, by increasing the expenses of the 
little household. Besides, Annie had a pretty 
little Utopian scheme of saving a small 
fortune from her salary for Ellen's future 
benefit. She forgot to calculate how many 
long years of anxious toil must pass, ere she 
could lay up even two or three hundred 
pounds from such a modest salary as she 
could command. 

Annie Sherwood had come to London, 

and taken up her old quarters in N • 

Street (there to exist on the three crumpled 
joapers found at the bottom of Mrs. Har- 
rington's wedding present to EUen), till she 
could find employment ; but she was in ex- 
cellent spirits, and opened her new campaign 
with vigour. Her name was entered at 
nearly all the agencies in London ; she duly 



ANNE SHERAVOOD. 109 

advertised in the Times and Record^ and then 
tried patiently to await tlie result. 

In the meanwhile she employed herself in 
writing a long story, very full of incidents, 
and clothed in beautiful language, but very 
deficient in many of the points which make 
a long story acceptable to a publisher or a 
reader. 

There was no answer to Annie's advertise- 
ments, and the agencies failed to supply her 
wants. Annie looked forward to protracted 
trials, but she felt no dismay. " Ellen is safe 
and happy !" 

With a steady hand, she transcribed her 
tale, and with unwearied patience carried it 
from publisher to publisher; they all declined. 

Annie returned home, serious, but not cast 
down. She thought over her work, and de- 
tected or fancied she detected, a thousand 
faults in her MS. which in another attempt 
might be avoided. That very day, she began 
another tale ; she wrote night and day, 
scarcely allowing herself time for sleep. 
There was no one to disturb her in her soli- 
tude : her few friends did not know she was in 
town, so they could not possibly interrupt 
her. In a fortnight her task was completed : 
it was a tale of love and jealousy, passions 



110 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

which Annie had never known; but she threw 
her whole soul into the composition, and it 
had grown into a life-like reaUty which 
pleased and surprised herself. She did not 
sit down to criticise the imperfect work, but 
she knew it was true to nature, by the emo- 
tions it had produced in her own mind while 
her hand had traced each varied scene. And 
the obscure girl in that little room, felt for 
awhile unspeakably happy — happy in the 
consciousness of her own powers — yet more 
so, in that of untiring perseverance, which 
discouragement could neither subdue nor 
undermine. 

But now came the question, how was the 
story to be disposed of? Could Annie 
present it to the very men who had just 
repulsed her ? 

"While debating the point, a ''vulgar 
reality" came to interrupt the author's 
thoughts ; her landlady entered, with no- 
thing more ethereal than a tray, containing 
something dignified with the name of dinner. 
A loaf of brown bread, a knife or two, a 
plate, a glass and a bottle of cold water 
(besides some mysterious-looking object 
wrapt in a piece of newspaper), were spread 
on the tray. ''It's eating money, that it is, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. Ill 

Miss, eating cheese/' said the fat landlady ; 
" if that bit didn't cost every farthing 
of fivepence-halfpenny, my name's not 
Mitchel, and yet Mr. Hogg pretended lie 
let me have it cheap ; but my 'pinion is, a 
rashern of bacon 'd come cheaper, and be 
more relishin' like !" 

" Thank yon, it will do very nicely," said 
Annie, abstractedly. " The very thing I 
most wanted !" she continued. 

" Is it, Miss ! Then I'm sure you're easy 
satisfied, if a bit of cheese can do it ; and 
you may thank 'eaven that's made you very 
humble-minded !" 

Annie smiled ; she was indeed seemingly 
intent on the cheese, for she was reading 
the soiled paper that enclosed it, and which 
proved to be a leaf from a penny journal of 
amusement and graver pretension, despised 
indeed by the aristocrats, but circulated 
among the million through the length and 
breadth of the land ; and not there alone, but 
in our distant colonies, till it has become the 
type of civilization and entertainment among 
the masses, while its enterprizing publisher 
is fast realizing a princely fortune among the 
great capitalists of this age of gold. 

" This wiU do !" exclaimed Annie, as she 



112 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

read the publisher's address. " A tiling like 
this is open to all competitors. I will try 
here, whether success or failure be the con- 
sequence. And if I do succeed," she added, 
with a radiant smile, "perhaps from this 
humble point I may struggle upwards ; if 
that is not reserved for me, I will be the ro- 
mancer of the people. Better, perchance, to 
make the warm hearts of the million beat 
with pleasure than to be coldly anatomized 
by the fastidious few !" 

No sooner had Annie dispatched her 
humble meal, than she made up her parcel, 

wrote a note to the editor of the F , and 

set off for tlie Strand. There arrived, she 
walked on in an absent fit, forgetting her 
intended patron's address, and only waking 
to remembrance, when she found herself just 
opposite Bolt Court, in Fleet Street. The 
busy tide of human life was flowing by, and 
she felt borne on in the wavy motion in a 
half- dreamy state, till an elbow, rudely 
tlirust into her side, drove her under the 
courtway to recover breath and memory. 
When Annie came forth again, she w^as 
conscious that she had travelled a long 
w^ay out of her road, and must retrace her 
steps ; but she had been repaid by conjuring 



ANNE SHERWOOD. US 

up the image of the great and good Johnson 
lumhermc/ up Fleet Street, his colossal mind 
fall of great thoughts — too full to permit of 
his observing social life's every-daj usages. 
When Annie Sherwood found herself at 

the publisher's of the F , she resolved, 

instead of giving her note, boldly to request 
anintervicAV with \h.^ (/re at man — for a great 

man Mr. is, though he does publish a 

penny paper. But little did our heroine 
know of the potentate she was attempting 
to approach. That was not one of his re- 
ception days ; and regular reception days he 
had, like any crowned head ! Eegular days, 
too, on which he was invisible as Pope's 
" Eastern Kings," and on which his satellites 
affected a dignified mystery that would have 
led any one to suppose the great man had at 
least been summoned to take a seat in the 
Privy Council. To the great mans credit 
be it spoken, however, that his followers, 
however dignified in one sense, however 
touched with the orgeiiil legitime of being 
connected with such an establishment, have 
little of the pride of place in other respects ; 
and aspirants for literary employment are 
never rudely repulsed in that office, however 
feeble, or even ridiculous, their efforts may be. 

VOL. II. I 



114 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Finding slie had as much chance of ad- 
mittance to Buckingham Palace as to the 

editor of the F , our heroine committed 

her MS. to the care of a particularly civil 
young man, who as yet was not elated to the 
seventh heaven by his position of confi- 
dential clerk to the establishment. Being 
told that in five or six weeks she w^ould 
know the result of her application, she de- 
parted, mth a confused idea that she had 
committed a very daring act ; that she had 
been very near seeing a very great man, and 
that if her contribution were accepted, she 
would certainly have at least %yq pounds 
as its purchase money. What a sum ! It 
seemed magnificent. Four or five pounds 
for literary labour ! A labour of love to the 
young author ; even such, in the warmth of 
composition, to the wearied scribbler, who 
has given the best years of his life, the 
brightest fancies of liis heart and mind, for a 
mere nominal remuneration; given them, 
too, w^ith the heart- sickening consciousness 
that they were to enjoy but an ephemeral ex- 
istence, and never to be called by his name. 
The contributions to small periodicals are 
usually anonymous. 

The stipulated number of weeks had 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 115 

passed, and Annie had spent the interval 
in renewed efforts to obtain an " appoint- 
ment" as governess ; stiU no success attended 
her. With breatliless eagerness she snatched 

the F to see if there were any answer 

for her. None ! she turned quite sick and 
faint. She must try to forget her disap- 
pointment ; the following w^eek might bring 
her better news. She would not despond, 
for all was well with Ellen. 

Annie went to see Mrs. Harrington. She 
found her kind, cordial, and unworldly as 
ever; and Bertha as happy, nay, happier 
than before. She renewed her acquaintance 
with the tribe of Belgravian governesses — a 
little w^orld in themselves. Some so patiently 
enduring, so angelic; others so cunning, 
so revengefal in their bondage : some so full 
of love and devotion, because a little kindness 
had been shown them ; others intriguing 
and vindictive, because their employers had 
showm them harshness, or, it might be, only 
that supercilious pride wdiich the enlarged 
mind w^ould despise too much to resent. 

Poor Julie was as meek and amiable as 

ever; as eager to renew Annie's French 

lessons as she had been to begin them ; but 

liard work, and a continued system of ili- 

I 2 



116 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

treatment, had told on the poor girl's health, 
and she looked pale and sickly. Annie 
hesitated to tax her strength by adding to 
her v/ork, hut Julie insisted that the lessons 
were rather a recreation than a fatigue, so 
they were resumed. 

Hortensia Maynard came to see Annie, 
with a profusion of high-sounding promises 
of an immediate appointment. She really 
herself believed all she promised (she had so 
many noble and influential friends), and it 
woidd have been very ungrateful in Annie 
not to believe it too, so our heroine did her 
best to look credulous. 

Annie had not l^een so fortunate as to 
meet Dr. Sinclair since her return to tow^n, 
though she longed to see his genial face 
again. At length, after long waiting and 
w^atching, came an offer from the publisher 

of the ¥ to purchase Annie's MS. 

at 20/. 

If the mines of Potosi had been thrown 
open to our heroine, she could scarcely have 
felt more elated than she did with this first- 
fruits of her mental labour ! 

" Misfortunes come in groups," said a 
learned prelate ; good fortune seems equally 
fond of society. The day that brought 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 117 

Annie Sherwood lier first literary gain, 
brousrlit also a letter, addressed X. Y. Z., a 
very late answer to one of lier numerous 
advertisements. Thus ran the epistle : — 

'' The person advertising (under the initials 
X. Y. Z.) for a situation as governess m a 
nobleman's family, &c., is requested to call 
at Lady Adelaide Curzon's, No. — , Grros- 
venor Square, to-morrow, at three o'clock 
precisely." 

"Wliat a blessing!" exclaimed Annie. 
" Not a civil word in it ! Nothing to take 
one in and ensure disappointment ! Beyond 
the precincts of this pretending, detestable 
Belgravia. How happy I shall make Ellen 
with my next letter ! To-night I will write, 
and tell her all!" 



118 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XI. 

It was a magnificent mansion. The high 
priest of rank and fashion could not have 
desired a more gorgeous shrine on which to 
offer ohlations to his divinity. The gover- 
ness candidate stood w^aiting in the marble 
hall. Several servants w^ere standing there 
in a group, discussing pohtics. Their master 
was one of the most active of the Commons' 
members — one of the most frequent and 
lengthy speakers, if not oneof the best; he had 
been a member of a lately-dissolved Cabinet ; 
of course his servants were politicians. 

They were not actually rude to the "decayed 
gentlewoman" who had " come after the go- 
verness's place ;" they only eyed her rather 
superciliously, and, deciding that she was not 
at all a " splendid v/oman," hoped Lady 
Adelaide would know better than to engage 
her. Annie heeded them not ; she was al)- 
sorbed in the contemplation of a statue from 
the divine hand of Canova, and so remained, 
till summoned to wait on Lady Adelaide 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 119 

Curzon. Slie followed the page up tlie broad 
marble stairs, and into a suite of drawing- 
rooms, wliicli even in dayliglit dazzled the 
unaccustomed eye, so rich were they in 
draperies, mirrors, alabaster groups, and 
other objects of ornament. Not that the 
luxurious prodigahty was too great, nor that 
it outstepped the bounds of refined taste. 
Every here and there, too, something of 
a more sober hue occurred, chastening 
the general tone, which otherwise might 
have been too gorgeous. In a fauteuil, 
leaning very far back, but yet gracefully, 
sat a lady who might have been about thirty 
years of age. She appeared immensely tall, 
even seated, her figure exquisitely propor- 
tioned, her head proudly beautiful ; it might 
have been the head of Juno, and was that of 
Lady Adelaide Curzon. 

How supremely beautiful she looked as 
she turned round that classical head, whose 
bright yellow locks were arranged like those 
of a statue, and displayed a set of features 
as faultless as artist or sculptor ever con- 
ceived, a finely-moulded brow, lips chiselled 
and still retaining the bright vermihon glow 
of earhest youth ! Her eyes — ^large, violet- 
coloured eyes — seemed to glow and melt at 



120 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

tlie same moment, and were shaded by 
rather dark lashes. Her complexion was not 
that pink and white which someway or other 
one associates with a country dairy, but pure 
white, like Carrara marble. 

Yes, Lady Adelaide was a beautiful crea- 
ture, most beautiful; but there w^as some- 
thing in that exquisite face like a tideless 
sea — something which said, "beneath this 
cold, grand surface lies no passion; this 
white bosom has never beat with love, or 
joy, or fear, or sorrow; seldom, if ever, with 
anger, as the clear, unlined brow shows." 
And truly Lady Adelaide had no passions, 
unless pride of position and pride of beauty 
be passions, and they only made her calmly 
satisfied with herself and with her place in 
society. She had never met with a human 
being sufficiently daring to dispute her pre* 
tensions, so nothing had ever occuiTcd to 
disturb the calm repose so habitual to her. 

The lady's dress was as faultless as her 
person; a plain skirt of white merino, a 
jacket of deep purple velvet, untrimmed, and 
tight to the throat. No ornaments — not 
even a ring on the white, cold-looking hands, 
except the wedding circlet, which Lady 
Adelaide had assumed without one throb of 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 121 

joy or reluctance, because she was of a mar- 
riageable age, because slie had no better 
offer, because she had no fortune, and be- 
cause the Hon. Mr. Curzon had a large 
income and a brilliant place in society. 

On a low chair, beside Lady Adelaide, sat 
an ugly, mean, miserable-looking woman, 
her companion; not old, perhaps, though 
she seemed fifty; and her worn, sharp face, 
little grey eyes, and withered skin, served ad- 
mirably to show off the proud beauty beside 
her. She had been reading to Lady Adelaide. 

" Dobson," said her ladyship. 

" Yes, your ladyship," said Miss Dobson, 
reverently rising — she always rose when 
Lady Adelaide did her the honour of ad- 
dressing her; and she thought there was 
something in the tone of the "Dobson" 
which imphed that a communication of some 
importance was about to be made. " Dobson, 
is it not to-day that that person is to call 
about the situation ?" 

" If your ladyship pleases." 

" Did you say in the note at what hour ?" 

" Yes, if your ladyship pleases, at three 
o'clock." 

" What o'clock is it, Dobson ?" 

" Nearly three, your ladyship." 



122 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Three ! if she is not here now, I shall be 
kept waiting ! Eing the bell, Dobson." 

At this moment the governess entered. 
TJndazzled by the brilliancy of the apart- 
ment, Annie stood, really fascinated by the 
beauty of that queen-like looking woman. 
She remained spell-bound at the entrance of 
the apartment, and thus prevented the page's 
shutting the door. 

" What gaucherie 1" murmured Lady Ade- 
laide. " I cannot make myself heard at this 
distance." The latter words were intended 
for the governess, but the preceding ones 
had reached her ears, and while they brought 
the blood to her cheeks, they also restored 
her self-possession. Annie advanced, quite 
free from embarrassment ; and as Lady Ade- 
laide made no demonstration of intending 
her to be seated, she took a chair uninvited. 

" You need not leave the room, Dobson," 
said her ladyship ; " you can go on with my 
purse." 

" Yes, my lady." 

" You are the person who advertised in 
the Morning Post ?^' asked Lady Adelaide, 
turning to Annie. 

" I am," replied Annie, who had suddenly 
acquired quite a democratic aversion to 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 123 

titles, and felt that she could not say " your 
ladyship." 

" How old are you?" 

" Twenty-four." 

" You look older." 

" Possibly." 

" Where have you lived ?" 

" In the family of Mr. Maberly." 

" Don't know the name ; what is he ?" 

" Mr. Maberly is not in any profession ; 
he lives in " 

" Oh, I suppose one of those petty squires 
who imagine themselves people of import- 
ance. What can you teach ?" 

" The usual branches of education." 

" An}"thing else ?" 

" Yes, Latin and Greek, and the elements 
of mathematics." 

" To what age can you go on ?" 

" If you mean to refer to my pupils' age, 
I could teach a boy till he reached his four- 
teenth year." 

" Do you know French ?" 

" A little." 

" Grerman and Itahan ?" 

" I read both." 

" You are not afraid to undertake boys ?" 

" I am not." 



124 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

''Three?" 

" Or more." 

" You are determined, decided in charac- 
ter? But I need not ask;" and Lady Ade- 
laide almost smiled, as she glanced over the 
plain pale face before her. " Eesolution will 
be wanted with my sons if they are to pro- 
gress. They must be well educated, but I 
will not have their natural characters inter- 
fered with. Your business will be to fur- 
nish their heads, and prepare them for 
Harrow. There must be no attempt to 
sentimentalize them, or make them unfit for 
the position they will occupy in life. Wliat 
salary do you ask?" 

" Sixty guineas," said Annie, with a bold- 
ness which quite surprised herself 

" Yery well ; I think you will suit me. If 
Mrs. Maberly's reply to my inquiries should 
be satisfactory, I shall engage you. Write 
your address. If you come to me, remember 
there must be no conversation with the 
servants. My last governess was dismissed 
in consequence of her over-fondness for the 
housekeeper's room. Dobson, go on with 
the book ; where were you ?" 

" I — I'm afraid I've lost the place, your 
ladyship." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 125 

" Stupid of you ! don't let it liappen 
asrain. What o'clock is the carriagfe ordered 
for ?" 

'Tour, please your ladyship.'* 

''Well, then, leave off; ring the bell for 
Benson." 

" Yes, your ladyship." 

" Dobson, do try to speak in a pleasanter 
voice." 

" Yes, my lady." 

" And Dobson " 

" Yes, my lady." 

"While I am out, go up to the school- 
room, and read a story to the young gentle- 
men. I promised to take Sydney with me, 
and a story will put it out of his head." 

'' Yery well, your ladyship." 

"Wasn't that person ugly, Dobson?" 

" Yery ugly, jout ladyship." 

"Do you believe she's only twenty-four ?" 

"Not the least, my lady; and I only 
wonder that she should hope to impose on 
your ladyship's discernment." 

" Dobson, you may have my violet satin 
dress ; but take it before Benson finds you 
out." 



126 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XII. 

When Annie withdrew from Lady Ade- 
laide's presence, it was with a strong incli- 
nation to dive farther beneath that icy 
surface, and discover if anything of human 
feeling dwelt in her. She did not feel so 
indignant at her hauteur as might have been 
expected, for her mind had been amused, 
and was so still, with the obsequiousness of 
the dependent. 

Wlien Annie was pursuing her way home, 
she encountered Dr. Sinclair, who nearly 
shook her hand off, while he inquired with 
fatherly interest after Ellen. " And you, 
what are you doing?" he asked. 

" Oh, Doctor !" replied Annie, with an 
assumption of proud importance which she 
counterfeited wonderfully well, "I am — if 
the stars are propitious — going to be pro- 
moted to great honour." 

" Wliat fresh mischief brewing ?" 

"I am about to be ' nominated to an 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 127 

appointment' in the family of Lady Ade- 
laide Cnrzon." 

'' Lady Adelaide Fiddlestick ! I'll tell 
you what, you'll put your foot in it l" 

"In what, Doctor?" 

"In a worse scrape than you've been in 
yet." 

" How so ?" 

" Why, as far as pride is concerned, you 
might as well have hired yourself out to 
Master Beelzebub in person. I know a good 
deal about these Curzons. The eldest boy — 
Sydney, they call him — fell down and broke 
his arm ; a bad case ; fever ensued ; surgeon 
in attendance called me in. I saved the 
boy's life; in return, the young dog drew 
himself up for all the world like his mother. 
Madam Juno, and asked, ' Do you know who 
I am ?' because I proposed his taking a dose 
he did not approve of. There's an epitome 
of the family spirit 1" 

" But he is so young," said Annie ; "he 
cannot know much better." 

" The boy is the father of the man. Miss 
Sherwood." 

" True ; but I shan't be troubled with 
him when he is a man. What sort of 
person is Mr, Curzon ?" 



128 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" A good sort of man ; talks away in tlie 
Honse, and sometimes says a clever thing, 
qnite by accident. Like the rest of the 
family, he overrates himself. Something in 
him of the fellow that Queen Jamie so 
cleverly put down with 'Hoot aw^a', mon; 
I did nae ken Adam was a younger son of 
the Lnmley family !' Mr. Curzon w^alks as 
if the earth weren't good enough for him to 
tread on ; but he's a gentlemanly, handsome 
fellow^" 

" What a beautiful creature Lad}- Adelaide 
is !" said Annie. 

" A beautiful d !" exclaimed the 

Doctor. 

" Doctor ! Doctor ! You w^ant my dear 
Ellen beside you, to say with her gentle 
gravity, ' You are wrong. Doctor ; very, very 
wrong.' " 

" So I should be, if I used the word for 
profane swearing; but I pronounce it ad- 
visedly, as the only one to describe Lady 
Adelaide Curzon. As calm and cold as she 
looks, only do something to rouse her, and 
you Vvdll wake a demon. Go to her, and 
you'll run your neck into a halter. An 
ordinary woman would do w^ell, particularly 
if she had a spice of the toad-eater in her, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 129 

like that thing Dobson ; but your spirit will 
never brook the treatment you'll meet with 
in the Curzons' house. You wont sit down 
in a corner, and knit a mitten or some other 
gimcrack, and cast your eyes down, and say 
' yes, your ladyship ;' ' thank your ladyship/ 
IN'o ; there'll be a pitched battle before a 
month !" 

" But I must go there, Doctor." 
" Must 1 You're a mule if you do !" 
" Never mind. Doctor, I must ; it's my 
' kismet,' as the Mussulmans say ; I am sure 
it is. Do you remember how earnestly Sche- 
herazade desired to be the wife of the Sultan, 
though likely to be adorned with the bow- 
string the day after the accomplishment of her 
wish ? So earnestly do I desire to see more 
of the Curzons' domicile. Besides, I have 
begun to make some verses on the Canova 
in the hall ; I must see the object of inspi- 
ration again, if they are ever to be finished." 
" Object of nonsense !" growled the Doctor ; 
" what right has a governess with verse- 
making ? Well, Lady Adelaide wont leave 
much poetry in you, I promise. I repeat, 
you'll repent it if you put your foot in 
that house. When you do, remember my 
words !" 

VOL. II. K 



130 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" I will, Doctor ; good-bye. Thank you 
for aU your kindness, and not least for your 
good advice." 

" None of which you mean to take ?" 

" I'm afraid I can t take it." 

" Why, pray ?" 

"To tell you the truth, I have golden 
reasons. Lady Adelaide gives sixty guineas 
a year — elsewhere I should probably have 
half the sum." 

" If it's only money " began the 

Doctor. 

" Oh, no, dear sir, not that alone," inter- 
rupted Annie, quickly ; " but this offer of 
Lady Adelaide's seems my only chance ; I 
dare not let it slip by. You don't know the 
difficulty of procuring an engagement; I 
have often walked a dozen miles a day in 
search of one." 

" Poor girl ! poor girl ! I hate the trade," 
said the Doctor, brushing his own hand 
across his face, and all the time holding 
Annie Sherwood's in his, as if he were going 
to say sometliing more — sometliing kind, 
something very foolish, perhaps, for he could 
not bear to see any one in distress ; but by 
the time the words were gathered together, 
the little hand had slipt out of his, and 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 131 

Annie was gone. "Very nearly put my 
foot in it/' said, or rather muttered, tlie 
Doctor, as he rushed into his brougham ; 
" very nearly, indeed. What an old fool I 
am ! How the wench would have laughed 
at me ! Makes verses, indeed 1 Yes, and I 
dare say would rather live in a garret with 
some threadbare artist, or crack-brained poet, 
than put up with the old Doctor and liis 
comforts. Comforts, indeed ! What com- 
forts has a lonely old fellow like me — with 
no prospect of any one to close his eyes, but 
a mercenary crew ? Well, the girl sha'n't 
starve when I'm gone, nor toil for proud 
upstarts, really her inferiors. She shall have 
—Timothy?" 

" Yes, sir." 

" Nothing ; never mind. I want nothing. 

Tell John to drive faster. What an old 

fool !" 

* * * * 

Before a week had elapsed, Annie was 
summoned, not to a second conference with 
Lady Adelaide, but to take up her residence 
at the lordly mansion of the Curzons. 

An unusual degree of animation filled 
Annie's mind. She felt like the soldier 
girding on his harness for the coming battle. 
K 2 



132 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

On arriving at G Square, she was 

shown to her rooms, of course at the top and 
back of the house. She well knew where 
she should find them beforehand. They 
were not exactly dirty nor shabby, but de- 
nuded of everything approaching comfort or 
neatness. No curtains shaded the windows, 
nor even a linen blind. The coarse drugget 
which partially covered the floor was of the 
most sombre and ugly hue which could have 
been chosen, and every article of furniture 
appeared to have been selected for its very 
incongruity. This seems to be the rule in 
very splendid mansions ; everything unfit to 
be seen is condemned to the school-room, 
even the cracked, ill-matched pieces of china. 

Annie, though utterly careless of personal 
indulgence, w^as pecuharly sensible of the 
annoyance occasioned by such a coup d'oeil ; 
it was like jarring discords to a refined ear. 
She had, however, learnt to command, not 
only her words, but her countenance. 

Little by little her school-room assumed 
a more habitable appearance. Some of the 
more unsightly objects w^ere turned out, and 
before the end of the week she had curtains 
at the widow, concealing the uninviting 
prospect without, and even a neat cover on 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 133 

the table — wliicli article of furniture tlie 
young gentlemen had adorned with hiero- 
glyphics which would puzzle a Champollion 
to decipher. 

On the first day of Annie's residence in 

G Square, she found her pupils on her 

arrival engaged in a very noisy game. 

They were beautiful boys — the eldest 
especially, though his beauty was somewhat 
marred by the haughty, defiant air which 
he wore even in play with his little brothers. 

As the new governess entered, the game 
was momentarily suspended. The three 
boys turned ; the two younger laughed and 
nodded; the eldest gave one sharp, quick 
look, which plainly said, " Remember who I 
am !" Then turning his back, he continued 
his game. 

Annie passed on into her sleeping-room, 
took off her bonnet and shawl, and returning, 
rang the bell. The boys were astonished ; 
the servants astonished and indignant too. 
The tailor's daughter never rang the bell. 
*' I will trouble you for tea." A daring 
woman was the new governess ! She turned 
to the children, and spoke in a clear, low 
voice, distinctly heard through the din. 
" Sydney, I wish to speak to you ; Herbert 



134 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

and Walter, you may go on with your 
game." 

Sydney Curzon looked round, surprised at 
the rash interruption. He raised his eye- 
brows ; but there was something in the new 
governess that made him see she meant 
what she said, and that it would not be quite 
so easy to manage her as it had been the 
tailor's daughter. So the young aristocrat 
walked up to the pale little woman, debating 
in his mind whether it was her voice or her 
eye that had moved him. 

Annie then proceeded to examine him, 
and found him lamentably ignorant even for 
so young a child. In answer to her inquiry 
as to the reason of his deficiencies, he said, 
" I did not choose to learn — it worries me, 
and I always make a point of letting people 
know who I am 1" 

" And I," said Annie, very coolly, " always 
make a point of letting people know ivliat I 
am; you will soon find out." 

" I have found out already." 

" That is well — it is a good beginning. 
And now tell me, are you fond of reading ?" 

" Don't know — really never tried," said 
the boy, yawning. " I want to go ; haven't 
you done ?" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 135 

" No, not quite — bring me yonr school- 
books ?" 

" Haven't any." 

" Indeed ! how have you learnt ?" 

" Ob, by conversational instruction ! Only 
old-fashioned teachers use books. By the 
by, mamma says you're to read stories to us." 

"Does she?" 

" Yes, I shall fetch Tales from Shakspeare. 
You must read Pericles, Prince of Tyre, 

" I shall not read this evening, Sydney." 

"Shall not?" 

" Shall not," repeated the same quiet voice. 
You may return to your play. At break- 
fast I will explain to you what I wish you 
to do." 

Sydney looked again at the new governess, 
and each look more clearly expressed, " Do 
you know who I am?" and the new 
governess looked again at the proud boy, 
and her calm face as plainly said, " You shall 
see what I am." 

Sydney Curzon was very like liis mother 
— ^beautiful, proud, and selfish ; but then a 
child's heart is rarely without some bright 
spot to relieve the darker shades. 

The two younger boys were wayward, 
selfish, and rebellious, but not quite so de- 



136 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

termined. They, too, were largely imbued 
with the aristocratic spirit, but in them it 
took a less offensive, though more vulgar 
tone. Their ideas of self-importance appeared 
such as v/ere derived from the tuition of 
mean dependents, avIio, from the first dawdl- 
ing of their intelligence, had taken pains to 
impress upon them that they "were not 
nohodys children." Early accustomed to 
the most fulsome flattery, the three boys 
seemed fully persuaded that the whole world 
was made for them. They were not fond of 
their mother ; she had not heart enough to 
attach them to her. Hitherto their every 
whim had been gratified — more, however, 
from Lady Adelaide's apathy than from her 
express desire. She had seen very little of 
her children, but she was proud of their 
beauty, and sometimes took Sydney out with 
her, to display him. In some of their drives 
she had accidentally discovered that the boy 
knew nothing, and was not likely to learn 
anything. She had consequently dismissed 
the tailor's daughter, and engaged Annie 
Sherwood. 

Lady Adelaide saw at a glance that Annie 
was exactly the person to manage her 
children. Her ladyship had very good sense. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 137 

Slie discovered that the new* governess had 
a strong, determined will. She saw that, 
even in her manner towards herself, but she 
was beginning to be tired of sycophants ; the 
contrast between Annie and Dobson amnsed 
her. If the new comer presumed, and in 
addition to that calm, independent manner, 
presumed on familiarity, Lady Adelaide could 
instantly check her — no one so well knew 
how. 

Lady Adelaide would, of course, see very 
little of her children's governess ; one half- 
hour daily at luncheon, otherwise never. 

At the table, of course. Miss Sherwood 
would have* the discretion to be silent; and 
she was so plain that no one w^ould think of 
noticing her. Altogether she would do very 
well, and Lady Adelaide gave herself no 
further trouble to know the person to whom 
her children's best interests were to be en- 
trusted, but consigned them to the care of 
the stranger governess, whose salary would 
be regularly paid, and who would, of course, 
carry on her work in silent contentment. 
Annie was well pleased that she had not a 
Mrs. Maberly to deal with, who, with equal 
haughtiness, had much less understanding 
than Lady Adelaide, and effectually coun- 



138 ANNE SHEUWOOD. 

teracted every effort to improve her chil- 
dren. 

Sydney Curzon was endowed with excel- 
lent natural abilities, and when his intellect 
was once aroused, he learnt with rapidity 
and success ; but in his character it seemed 
that no change could be effected. His intel- 
ligence became daily more developed under 
skilful culture, and the child learnt some- 
thing of his own powers. Ambition was 
awakened ; he knew his teacher's superiority, 
and he was proud of her praises, but his 
young heart was still cold and selfish. 

The Curzons were all clever children, and 
their habitual indolence gradually yielded to 
more skilful training than that to which 
they had been accustomed, Wlien the day 
had passed satisfactorily, Annie drew forth 
" Shakspeare," and read aloud, at once for 
Sydney's edification and reward ; and while 
she read, her voice, her countenance, so truly 
bore the impress of the characters she 
sought to portray, that even the selfish 
boy's heart beat with delight, and he would 
fix his intelligent eyes on the reader's face 
with absorbed delight. In fact, Annie Sher- 
wood's reading of "Shakspeare" was not 
reading ; it was more like animated, though 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 139 

subdued, recitation. She liad, besides, tlie 
art of changing her voice as she delineated 
separate characters, which produced almost 
the illusion of acting. " Beautiful ! oh, 
beautiful !" Sydney would exclaim as he 
listened to her ; but when Annie closed the 
volume, and thought that perchance his 
heart was beginning to warm towards her, 
she found that he relapsed immediately into 
his habitual state of feeling. 

There were few struggles in the Curzons' 
school-room, and no scenes. Annie had 
learnt a lesson at Mrs. Maberly's, cautiously 
to avoid all display of natural feeling, to 
command down excitement, preserve an un- 
ruffled exterior, and enforce respect if she 
could not win love. And yet she longed to 
love those fair children, and to be loved by 
them, and again and again hoped that time 
would draw their affections towards her; 
but whenever she attempted to show them 
any token of affection, the little fellows would 
burst from her impatiently, and though they 
did not venture on rebellion, they had a 
thousand ways to show that they appre- 
ciated her position and their own. Oh, 
the sickness of heart that comes over one 
who has to deal with a worldly child! 



140 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Annie's plan with her pupils had been 
equally successful when applied to the aristo- 
cratic servants. The calm, quiet tone of her 
requests told with them far more than 
querulous complaints would have done ; and 
any omission w^hich savoured of disrespect 
was reproved with a gentle dignity which 
seldom failed to ensure more attention. 

]N"ot long after Annie's arrival, an oppor- 
tunity occurred of trying her newly-formed 
tactics. At six o'clock on a cold winter's 
morning, a servant held a candle beside her 
bed, waking her at once with the glare 
and the words, " I've had orders to call 
up all the servants at six o'clock every 
morning." 

" Have you ?" said Annie, in her quietest 
tone ; " but you have mistaken my room for 
one of theirs ! Be so good as to bring me 
some warm water at half-past seven." Such 
a mistake never again occurred, and Annie's 
material comfort daily increased ; but the 
artificial existence she now led, ere long 
began to tell upon her health and spirits. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 141 



CHAPTEE XIII. 

Three montlis liad passed; and though 
Annie had daily seen Lady Adelaide at 
luncheon, there had been no conversation 
between them, at least nothing meriting the 
name of conversation. The children talked 
very little in their mother's presence, except 
Sydney, who was in aU respects a perfect 
little man of the w^orld, and conversed freely 
on all subjects. To give an idea of his 
precocity it may be remarked, that he per- 
fectly understood the nature and value of an 
entail, and was in the habit of saying that 
no conduct of his could possibly prevent his 
coming into possession of the family estate 
at his father's death — he could not be dis- 
inherited. He was accustomed to take his 
papa's seat at the table opposite to Lady 
Adelaide, help whatever dish was before 
him, and drink wine with her ladyship with 
most gentlemanly ease. 

Annie had not yet seen Mr. Curzon ; he 



142 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

never missed the House during the session, 
and spent a great deal of time at his club. 
The new ministry already appeared tottering. 
Mr. Curzon, an incarnation of rabid Toryism, 
hoped his party would soon return to office. 
Of course, he was too much pre-occupied to 
be often at home ; besides, the home circle 
had few charms for him. He had married 
for love; indeed, his attachment to Lady 
Adelaide had been most fervent, amounting 
to romantic passion ; but not very long after 
the wedding, he had discovered that his 
beautiful bride had given him a hand with- 
out a heart, and did not even possess 
sufficient sensibility to regret the sacrifice 
she had made. He was naturally affectionate 
and domesticated, and keenly felt his dis- 
appointment. Two or three efforts to win 
his wife's confidence and affection Mr. 
Curzon made ; they utterly failed ; and to 
forget his loveless, joyless home, he tlirev/ 
himself into the arena of poHtics, till politics 
became his passion. 

Lady Adelaide and Mr. Curzon never 
quarrelled ; a cold, undisturbed harmony 
reigned between them. Nothing could 
exceed the formal politeness with which the 
man of the world treated the once adored 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 143 

wife, except the cool chdlity with which 
that formal politeness was returned. 

Such was the ordinary coolness of their 
greeting, that when Mr. Curzon entered one 
day unexpectedly at luncheon time, and, bow- 
ing to Lady Adelaide, accepted her invitation 
to take a sandwich, and seated himself at 
the table, Annie had not the most distant 
conception that he was the husband of the 
proud beauty, and the master of the mansion. 

Mr. Curzon looked about thirty-eight ; he 
was a strikingly handsome man, with a 
great air of dignity and an absorbed manner. 
He scarcely spoke, unless in answer to a 
question. 

''Is Lord likely to keep in?" in- 
quired her ladyship. 

" Three weeks, perhaps. Has Townsend 
caUed?" 

"Ask John. I can't remember. Can 
you escort me to the opera to-night ?" 

" Sorry I can't. Must be at the House. 
Claude Douglas will." 

" I don't like Claude Douglas." 

" Don't you ? Send for Fanshawe." 

" I will." 

" Sorry I can't go with you. I know it 
looks boorish; but the truth is, I'm fagged." 



144 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Home late last niglit, I suppose ?" 

" About three. What opera to-night ?" 

" 'Lucrezia Borgia.' " 

" Sorry I can't hear it. Ah, Sydney ! 
how d'ye do ? Haven't seen you this week !" 

'' Yery well, thank you." 

And Mr. Curzon was gone, to meet his 
family again (by accident) in the course of a 
few days. On his first entrance he had given 
a cursory glance to Annie, nodded, and said 
" Good morning ;" but the overbearing 
haughtiness of his manner had appeared so 
offensive to her, that she turned away her 
head, and seemed neither to observe the 
action nor the word. 

" How do you like papa ?" asked Walter, 
when they had left the table. 

" I really don't know ; I have not seen 
him," said Annie. 

"Why, didn't you know that that was 
papa who came in at luncheon ?" 

" No, I did not." 

" Well, now you know it was he, how do 
you like him ?" 

" I cannot tell you till I know more of 
him." 

" Then you'll never tell us at all," said 
Sydney ; '' you will never know more of him." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 145 

"But I can tell you liow he likes you. 
Miss Sherwood," said Walter, laughing, ''and 
that is, not at all." 

"What shall we read to-night?" said 
Annie, v/illing to change the subject. 

. " Hamlet',' exclaimed Sydney, with ani- 
mation. " Do you know. Miss Sherwood, 
when you're reading I quite love you ; but, 
somehow, the minute the book is shut I am 
myself again, and all the love is gone. I'll 
tell you what I should like." 

" What should you like, Sydney ?" 

" Miss Sherwood, why do you call me 
Sydney ? Did you call your last pupils by 
their Christian names ?" 

" Certainly I did." 

" But I wish you would not do it to me. 
You might call me Master Curzon. Wlien 
you call me Sydney, it looks as if you forgot 
who I was." 

" Oh, no ! I never forget who you are, 
nor what I am ! mind you don't. But what 
should you like, Sydney ?" 

" To get Lord Claude up here one day, and 
you to read one part in Julius Ccesar and he 
the other ; it would be just like a real play. 
Lord Claude reads as well as you do, and he 
is so clever — so very clever." 

VOL. II. L 



146 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" But who is Lord Claude ?" 

'' Oil, Lord Claude Douglas ! don't you 
know ? He's half a Scotchman, and half a 
Frenchman. He's Lord Dryburgh's younger 
brother. His mother was a Frenchwoman, 
and he was born and brought up in France, 
I don't know whether he's really handsome, 
but he has such magnificent eyes. I'll tell 
you what they are like. Suppose you had a 
large jewel, so deep and dark, almost black, 
and you put a mind behind it and let it 
shine through." 

" I know what you mean," said Annie. 

" Yes, you always understand me. His 
eyes are jewels, through which a soul shines," 
repeated Sydney, '' and he is like Hamlet ; 
he always makes me think of Hamlet, except 
when he laughs merrily, and joins in our 
games. And he has such a beautiful voice. 
Miss SherAvood ; nobody's singing is half so 
beautiful as Lord Claude's speaking. I shall 
bring him up to see you some day." 

'' No, you must not, Sydney." 

"Wliy not. Miss Sherwood?" 

"Because I say veto; you can construe 
that?" 

" And I say voleo ; and you can construe 
ihatj Miss Sherwood." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 147 

" I shall not read Hamlet to-night." 

" Oh, pray, pray do !" 

" !No, I intend to write all the evening," 

Mr. Curzon said one day cursorily to his 
Avife — "' Was that Miss Sherwood I saw at 
luncheon on Tuesday?" 

" Yes." 

" She has neither air nor manner. I 
never saw such a plain woman — so dead-and- 
ahve looking. I should fear her intelligence 
is not very bright. I hope the school-room 
business goes on properly ?" 

" I suppose it does." 

" Have you been up at all lately ?" 

" No, I have not had time." 

"Not had time, Adelaide?" 

" No ; but if you have any doubts, you had 
better examine the boys. You have my 
leave to go to the school-room whenever you 
please. I am not jealous. I am not a 
Duchesse de Prashn, nor is Miss Sherwood 
a De Luzy." 

" Jealous 1" repeated Mr. Curzon, with a 
sigh; ''no, Adelaide, you never knew 
jealousy — nor love." 

'' Then I have never given you an hour's 
jealousy or uneasiness — more than can be 
said of most wives. I hate sentiment ; no- 
L 2 



148 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

thing tears the face to pieces so much as 
Yv^hat the French call les passions. Go up- 
stairs whenever you like." 

" I will." 

Mr. Curzon found time, two months later, 
to inquire into the progress which his chil- 
dren had made in their education. On en- 
tering the school-room he slightly howled 
his proud head. The governess rose and 
returned the salutation, as slightly as she 
could wdthout heing actually rude. 

Mr. Curzon asked the question usually 
addressed to governesses — " Have you walled 
to-day ?'' Nobody thinks of saying any- 
thing else to a governess. Sometimes the 
sentence is uttered by way of encoui'age- 
ment ; sometimes to denote condescension ; 
and is always accompanied by a ''Dorit-he- 
frigldened'' look. Perhaps the sentence in 
question is chosen on the principle which 
Chesterfield advocates, of leading people to 
speak on the subject wdth which they are 
most familiar, and which consequently they 
can best discuss. 

" The children have been in the Park," 
replied Annie, supposing that the question 
xelated to them. 

Mr. Curzon took up a grammar, and 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 149 

silently turned over tlie leaves. Tliougk 
proud, lie was a kind-hearted man, and did 
not want to frigliten the governess by a set 
examination ; he thought he could make his 
inquiries appear accidental. After a good 
deal of unskilful manoeuvring, such as is 
often displayed when one tries to do an ac- 
cidental thing on purpose, Mr. Curzon suc- 
ceeded in drawing forth some extremely un- 
satisfactory replies to his questions. The 
two younger boys were afraid of him, and 
fear produced absurdly stupid answers. 
Sydney was impatient for his father's ab- 
sence, as he was longing for a wild game, 
and his replies were worse than his brothers'. 
A book of arithmetic lay on the table, so 
intricately written, that it was a fitter study 
for mathematicians than mere children. 
With that usual discrimination shown by 
people who have never taught in their lives, 
Mr. Curzon pitched on the most difficult 
problem he could find, and purposely cloth- 
ing the statement of the question proposed, 
in more bewildering phraseology than the 
author of the book had used, he elicited such 
an absurd solution from his son and heir 
that he lost all patience, and exclaimed, — 
" You are either a great blockhead, Sydney, 



150 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

or you liave been badly taught." Then 
turning to the governess, who was looking 
on with a very calm and unmoved coun- 
tenance, he added, " Miss Sherwood, this 
boy is shamefully backward for liis age ; you 
must really get him on." 

" His progress will chiefly depend on his 
own abilities and industry," said the gover- 
ness, coldly. " I neither boast of my skill nor 
zeal ; my duty I shall honourably endeavour 
to perform. Should I fail, after a reason- 
able time, in producing the result you desire, 
you will dismiss me, or I shall relinquish 
my charge." 

Mr. Curzon bit his lip, and looked with a 
very surprised air at the bold speaker. Her 
pale, quiet face was as unmoved as if it had 
been cut in stone. He was astonished, very 
much astonished ; he took a particular dis- 
like to her ; but yet, though impressed wdth 
the idea that she was a most disagreeable 
woman, and that she had not made Crich- 
tons of his sons, he went away with the 
conviction that she was precisely the person 
for her office. 

" WeU, what result, Mr. Cui^zon?" 

" Not a very satisfactory one, Lady Ade- 
laide ; the boys know little enough." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 151 

" I liate the bore," said Lady Adelaide ; 
" but I will look out for another governess 
if you like." 

" By no means/' said Mr. Curzon ; "let 
Miss Sherwood go on. A¥liat a very odd 
person she is !" 

'' Yery odd, indeed ; one can't call her 
familiar ; nothing can be colder or more dis- 
tant ; but she is provokingly independent." 

" A very strange person — very strange, 
indeed," resumed Mr. Curzon. " Do the boys 
seem to like her ?" 

" I think not ; they stand in aw^e of her, 
however. Sydney, though, prefers her com- 
pany to that of any one else ; she seems to 
amuse him by reading and talking." 

From that time forth, whenever Mr. 
Curzon met Annie, which was very seldom, 
he favoured her with the shadow of a bow, the 
faintest of all inclinations of the head. 
"Nothing seemed to live 'twixt it and 
jiothing." But he never again asked her if 

she had walked. 

^ « * « 

It was Sydney's eager voice on the stairs: 
"Do, pray, come up ; I know you will like 
her !" 

" Probably ; but I can't go up," repHed a 



152 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

voice whicli, as it echoed up to lier lonely 
room, reminded Annie of Sydney's de- 
scription ; it was more musical than music. 

"Then you're very disagreeable, Lord 
Claude, and very ill-natured; and I hate you, 
that I do." 

" I am sorry for that, Sydney ; but you 
know I am a resolute man." 

"]N^ow, why wont you come up?" said 
Sydney, changing to a coaxing tone. 

" I have told you. I think Miss Sher- 
wood would be displeased : I have no right 
to intrude on her privacy." 

" Displeased !" repeated Sydney ; " what 
right has she to be displeased ? It is not her 
house, nor her school-room. Mamma pays 
her just as she does the housekeeper, or the 
cook, or the butler, and they never show 
any dignified airs. Come along, Lord Claude." 

" No, Sydney, I will not." 

" Why — why wont you ?" 

"You cannot understand my reasons, 
Sydney." 

" "Well, but suppose Miss Sherwood were 
to give leave ?" 

" That might alter the case. I suppose 
your governess is a lady, and she ought to 
be treated with consideration." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 153 

" I don't know about that," said Sydney ; 
" we found our last to be a tailor's daughter." 

" But Miss Sherwood, from your descrip- 
tion, must be very different ?" 

" Oh, yes ; quite different. Miss Smith 
was stupid ; Miss Sherwood is the most en- 
tertaining woman I ever met with in the 
course of my life !" 

" Indeed ! your experience of life must 
have been immense, and your acquaintance 
with ladies proportionably extensive !" 

" You need not laugh at me, Lord Claude ; 
I can tell you I'm not quite such a block- 
head as papa thinks ; but I shall go and see 
what she says." 

Sydney burst into the school-room, ex- 
claiming — 

" Miss Sherwood, I am going to bring up 
Lord Claude Douglas ! I told you I would. 
You don't mind, do you ?" 

" Not the least, as I am just going away !" 
replied Annie, leaving the room by another 
door at the moment she spoke. 

" Provoking!" muttered Sydney, returning 
to his friend. " Did you ever see anything 
like this in your life ?" 

" I have met with people of spirit, if that 
is what you mean." 



154 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Did you hear what she said ?" 

" Yes, very well." 

" Now, has she not a beautiful voice, even 
when she says disagreeable things ?" 

*' Her voice is beautiful." 

" Oh, I do wish you could hear her read 
Hamlet, or King Lear. It is beautiful, my 
Lord; much finer than all the singing in 
the drawing-room." 

" You are very fond of Miss Sherwood, 
Sydney ?" 

" Tond of her ! Dear me, not at all; only 
she amuses me !" 

" She amuses you ?" 

" Yes, to be sure ; but she's very ugly, 
Lord Claude — very ugly, indeed ! I know 
you would think her ugly. And yet, do 
you know% I have seen her look handsome ; 
yes, handsomer than mamma. It was when 
she was reading Midsummer Niglifs Bream, 
and there Avas a gleam like lightning playing 
over her face." 

" Sydney, you make me doubt whether 
you are ten years old, or five-and-twenty." 

" Never mind. Lord Claude, I shall be as 
big as you some day. You will let me 
ride with you to-day ?" 

" Yes, if you are allowed." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 155 

" What is your favourite liorse called ?" 
" The Kniglit of Snowdon, Sydney." 
"Ah, I know him," said Sydney; and 
the boy began to recite with wonderful pre- 
cision and propriety — 

" Upon his brow," &c. 

" Sydney, your intellect is growing ; I 
hope your heart wdll keep pace with it in 
growth," said Lord Claude. The boy was 
silent, but his beautiful lip slightly curled 
with something that seemed meant for scorn 



156. ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XIY. 

Lord Claude Douglas was the younger son 
of the late Marquis of Dryburgh, and brother 
of the actual representative of the mar- 
quisate. His father, before coming to the 
title, had made what the world calls a 
mesalliance ; that is to say, he had married 
an elegant, refined, and beautiful woman — 
possessing, too, that nobler quality which 
the wisest among men declared to have a 
price above rubies, but who could not trace 
her descent beyond four generations, and 
whose only nobility was self-derived. 

Of course it was a dreadful mesalliance ; 
and after enjoying many years of happiness 
(only interrupted by the clamours of inte- 
rested relations), the romantic lover had 
merged into the old married man, had en- 
circled his brows with the hereditary coronet, 
and discovered that he had made a very im- 
prudent marriage ; moreover, the Marquis 
of Dryburgh resolved that neither of his sons 
should make a similar yjr/2/c2?/'«5. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 157 

The beautiful Marcliioness was a Frencli- 
woman; not one of the gay flutterers of 
Paris and les Eaifcc, but a southern French- 
woman, born and reared on the sunny coast 
of the Mediterranean. She was a true child 
of the soil, full of w^arm, generous passions, 
and of that brilliant imagination which cha- 
racterises those of Greek origin. She had 
loved the stranger lord enthusiastically, re- 
gardless of his wealth and position ; had he 
been obscure and poor she would have loved 
him just the same — she w^ould have followed 
him just as readily, to the cold isle which 
the sun lights so grudgingly — even to colder 
regions. 

When first Lady Dryburgh became aware 
that her husband regretted the sacrifice lie 
had made in marrying her, she did not re- 
proach him, though every tender feeling of 
her sensitive nature was wounded to the 
quick. She only begged to be allowed to 
visit her own beautiful shore, and amid the 
familiar music of the southern weaves, to 
await the birth of her second, perchance her 
youngest-born son. She looked pale and 
dejected. Her husband granted her request, 
and bidding her farew^ell, as if they were 
soon to meet again, suffered her to depart. 



158 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Amid old familiar scenes and clierislied 
memories, the beantifal but broken-hearted 
woman brought forth her second son, and 
called him by his father's name, Claude. 
In writing to tell the Marquis of the event, 
she added — " It is a sad pleasure to me to 
think that my little Claude is born in his 
mother's land, and will be a Frenchman. 
Suffer him to be so, my Lord. If I am spared, 
let me rear him in my native land ; let him 
be taught to express love, joy, hope, and 
fear in his mother's language, and with her 
native accent. His eldest brother will re- 
present your dignity in England; let me 
have one son for a countryman. Think not 
that I undervalue your country (that it is 
such, is enough to make me love and vene- 
rate it), but hearts beat not there with the 
same warm, free pulse as in our sunny 
climate. 

" For myself, I shall be happier here than 
in England. In the days of our early love 
and happiness, my Lord, all places were alike 
to me. Your smile made my heaven even 
beneath a cloudy sky ; it would have made 
my heaven amid the horrors of a Siberian 
exile. But now — now that the world's pomps 
and the world's pride have taught you to 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 159 

view the happy past as (at best) a folly, I 
cannot live in the atmosphere of chilled affec- 
tions. I have no reproaches in my heart, 
Heaven is my mtness ; let me live on the 
remembrance of the Paradise that once was 
mine, and I will bless you still." 

The Marqnis, now a thorough man of the 
world and a busy politician, thought his 
wife a sentimental fool thus to renounce a 
brilliant position in England, but he ac- 
ceded to her wishes without much difficulty. 
The world was informed that the Mar- 
chioness was obliged to live in the South, 
on account of her delicate health. PoKtical 
affairs retained the Marquis constantly in 
England. 

Years shpped away. When the period 
arrived at which the education of the little 
Claude must be thought of, the Marquis des- 
patched an excellent tutor to take charge of 
his son, conjointly with the Marchioness. 
Claude acquired the language of his father's 
country with the facihty usual in childhood. 
When he had attained his twelfth year, his 
mother gave liim her blessing and died, and 
he was brought to England to join his 
stranger father, with feelings that hovered 
between interest, curiosity, and dismay, both 



160 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

with regard to the unknown parent and the 
untried country. 

The Marquis of Dry burgh soon discovered, 
with pride and exultation, that his youngest 
son had talents of a high order. Claude's 
education had been skilfully conducted, and 
he added to the charm of a vivid imagina- 
tion, a particularly graceful facility of cloth- 
ing his ideas in elegant and appropriate lan- 
guage. His father conceived brilliant hopes 
of his oratorical powers being one day suc- 
cessfully displayed on the grandest arena 
the world boasts, the British House of Com- 
mons. 

Lord Claude's talents were accordingly tobe 
cultivated so as to fit him for coming distinc- 
tion ; but the Marquis (who had run through 
all finer feelings, as a spendthrift runs through 
his estate in early youth) died of family 
pride and a heart complaint, just before Lord 
Claude left college, and, of course, before his 
ambitious expectations could have a chance 
of fulfilment. At the time of Lord Claude 
Douglas's introduction to our readers, he had 
entered his thirtieth year ; and so far from 
having thrilled the senate with his eloquence, 
his voice had never there been heard, nor 
was he in the least degree distinguished in 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 161 

public life ; indeed lie liad made no attempt 
to enter on its theatre. 

He had spent years loitering amid the 
fallen glories of Grreece and Italy — had 
travelled into the East and learnt Araoic — 
returned, and idly floated about the shores 
of his native Mediterranean. Shortly after, 
he had plunged into the depth of the High- 
lands, and charmed with the romantic beauties 
of the country, as well as Avitli the generous, 
independent character of the mountaineers, 
had suddenly remembered, that through his 
father, he too belonged to the land of flood 
and mountain, and was as true-hearted a 
Scot as though he had talked Gaelic and 
worn the philibeg all his life. Lord Claude 
was good-looking and accomplished in the 
best sense of the word ; a man of fashion, 
too, without being a slave to the w^orld's 
customs or vices. Wherever he came, he was 

" The observed of all observers." 
Generous to excess, frank, young in all 
his feelings, he had the graceful abandon 
of a polished Frenchman so finely mingled 
with the dignity of a British nobleman that 
society proclaimed him the most charming of 
men. 

Lord Claude had a passion for poetry, and 

VOL. II. M 



162 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

read and recited witli sucli tlirilling effect 
that lie could at pleasure produce tears and 
smiles in liis auditory. His many years of 
wandering had made him well acquainted 
with the poetry of the lands he had traversed, 
and he was as familiar with Dante as with 
Shakspeare. 

With all his advantages, natural and ac- 
quired, he was not vain; and though a 
Prenchman, and professedly a devotee of the 
beautiful, Lord Claude not only remained un- 
married, but had never been known to offer 
any attentions approaching gallantry to the 
beauties who distinguished him by their 
favours. Some one told a story, or rather 
hinted, that he had loved a young Greek 
girl of exquisite beauty some years pre- 
viously, and that the difference in their 
social position had rendered his passion 
unhappy ; but no one who witnessed the 
brilliant animation which often ht Claude 
Douglas's expressive face could beheve him 
the victim of hopeless love. Still he remained 
unwon, much to the grief of several gentle 
hearts, and greatly to the disappointment of 
a host of mothers and aunts, who had given 
strict orders to their daughters to fall liead- 
over-ears in love Avith Lord Claude, whose 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 163 

paternal uncle had left liim a brilliant for- 
tune, which made him, in fact, a much 
better match than his elder brother, who en- 
joyed the title. The injunctions of mothers 
and aunts were in some instances too faith- 
fully obeyed. But in vain did dowagers 
plan and beauties sigh. Lord Claude was 
fastidious ; the w^oman who could win his 
heart had not yet appeared, unless in the 
brilliant sphere of his own sunny imagina- 
tion. Therein he had depicted the lady of 
his love, fairer than '' the one fair spirit" 
the poet sighed for as his minister, endow^ed 
with the genius of Corinne, the tenderness 
of Lear's youngest daughter, and the pas- 
sionate heart of Juliet, tempered by the in- 
nocent modesty of " the most unfortunate of 
ladies, who sucked the honied music" of 
young Hamlet's vows. 

Thus had Claude dreamed, and vainly had 
he sought the realization of these dreams 
among the aristocratic beauties who flitted 
through the maze of fashion — as vainly had 
he sought in other spheres for the incarna- 
tion of his ideal. At thirty years of age, 
though young as ever in heart and fancy, 
he began to think that he would have been 
wiser to study politics, as the end and aim 

M 2 



164 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

of life, than to dream over the creations of 
poets, painters, and sculptors, till they had 
taught him to demand of actual life what 
actual life could never give — the impossible. 
Still Claude Douglas was of too bright and 
joyous a nature to rank among the disap- 
pointed, and wherever he came he seemed to 
bring with him " nods, and becks, and 
wreathed smiles," and to create an atmo- 
sphere of joy, which he could instantly, as 
if by magic, change to the most serious in- 
terest, by a quotation, given with the pathos 
of one who feels in his inmost soul the beau- 
tiful thought, which he pronounces in the 
most moving and exquisite of voices. 

Every one loved or admired Claude Dou- 
glas, and his friends were such who would 
have continued so still, had he been shorn of 
all his worldly advantages. His servants 
adored a master w^hose commands were issued 
in the gentle tone of requests, and who 
watched faithfully over the welfare of his 
humblest'foUower. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 165 



CHAPTEE XV. 

It must not be supposed that Annie had 
lost sight of her friends all this time. She 
was still enjoying the benefit of the amiable 
Julie's lessons — still occasionally receiving a 
visit from Bertha ; and when released from 
her rather strict confinement at Mr. Curzon's, 
she took the opportunity of going to see 
Mrs. Harrington. Those visits, however, 
became fewer, and farther between. 

It happened one day that she met Mr. 
Harrington. At first haughty and repulsive 
(in remembering her position), he gradually 
became attracted and interested by her con- 
versation ; and as he was a man without any 
refinement of feeling, he showed the pleasure 
he felt in her society by such marked at- 
tentions, that Annie was rather ofiended 
than gratified. 

Mrs. Harrington grew uneasy, and Annie 
read her thoughts. " This will not happen 
again," said she, mentally ; " he is so seldom 
home, I am not likely to meet him for a long 



166 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

time, and if I slionld, to-niglit's wliim will 
be forgotten." But it was not so. On her 
next visit Bertlia told her that Mr. Harring- 
ton had been much more at home lately ; 
and Annie was chagrined to hear him say, — 

" Are you going to stay, Miss Sherwood ? 
If you are, I shall not go out." 

" No," replied Annie, quickly, " I must 

return to Gr Square almost directly ; my 

pupils will expect me ; a governess must be 
at her post." She spoke thus, intending to 
recall to Mr. Harrington's mind that she 
was only his wife's very humble acquain- 
tance — an acquaintance in fact, with whose 
vulgarity he had once reproached her. 

"I will set you down at Mr. Curzon's," 
said Mr. Harrington. 

" Impossible ; thank you," repHed Annie, 
with an instinctive feeling that she would 
rather not look at Mrs. Harrington ; " it 
would he as much as my place is toorth to re- 
turn under the escort of a gentleman. Be- 
sides, Mr. Harrington, a person holding your 
position in society, could not be seen with a 
mere governess without losing caste !" So say- 
ing, she hurried off, scarcely waiting to pay a 
hurried adieu to Mrs. Harrington, who faintly 
expressed a hope that she would come again. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 167 

" Ah ! pray do," said Mr. Harrington ; 
*' if I did not dread your reproof I should 
quote Jessica's words, — ' Our house is — ' 
You know the rest ; but truly, your lively 
presence brings a sunshine to these dim, 
melancholy walls to which they are little 
accustomed." 

" A very charming woman," repeated Mr. 
Harrington, after having gallantly attended 
Annie down stairs. "A very charming 
woman. I wish you would have her with 
you often. Carry. Far too good for her 
trade. A pity to see a woman like that de- 
graded to such low drudgery ! By the way. 
Carry, why didn't you take her yourself? 
But I suppose it was your jealousy." 

Mrs. Harrington made no reply but the 
long deep-drawn sigh of the broken-hearted. 
She did not remind her husband (as many a 
wife so circumstanced would have done) of 
his coarse attack on her for her intimacy 
with the very woman he now thought so 
charming. Perhaps he would have been 
startled if his own words had been repeated 
to him. " Beally good-looking, too !" he 
continued, after a slight pause, " though it 
does not strike one at first. Fine eyes ! 
magnificent hair ! The only little woman I 



168 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

ever saw w^lio could look dignified. You 
must ask her next week, Carry." 

Mrs. Harrington obeyed. She was in 
the habit of obeying; but she found that 
Annie had as many engagements as a lady 
of the highest fashion, and could not spare a 
single evening. 

The letters of Ellen formed the great 
charm of Annie's existence ; they brought 
sunshine to her gloomiest minutes. Not only 
did they tell of the young wife's happiness, 
but they breathed such a spirit of undi- 
minished sisterly affection, and such assur- 
ances of brotherly good-will from Eichard, 
that Annie felt she had a haven of rest in 
their pleasant home, wdienever she felt the 
world's rough edges too harshly. Not that 
she contemplated flying to that refuge ; but 
still it was pleasant to know that such existed 
for her, and that she was not quite alone in 
a cold unfeeling world. 

Annie's pupils continued to progress. 
Sydney, whose intelligence was rare, es- 
pecially repaid the care bestoAved on his 
mental cultivation ; his mind was made to 
appreciate Annie's, though his heart could 
not understand her heart. It was a source 
of great grief to her, that the young creatures 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 169 

with whom she was so intimately associated — 
taking, indeed, their mother's place to them 
— were drawn no nearer towards her after the 
lapse of months, than w^hen she had come 
among them as a stranger. Their worldly 
parents she had almost ceased to notice ; but 
the heartless system on which they acted 
had the most unfortunate effect on her. The 
chilling atmosphere in which she lived seemed 
to have encrusted her so completely, that 
though she never gave way to anger or im- 
patience, and sedulously discharged her 
duties, she had grown as cold, and appa- 
rently as heartless, as those around her. One 
kindly word or look would have dissolved 
the spell ; but who was there in that grand, 
stately mansion to ofier either to the lonely 
governess ? 

Once or twice Annie met Dr. Sinclair. 
He made many kind inquiries after her 
welfare, and seemed anxious to know how 
she was situated. 

" I have no right to complain," Annie 
answered. " My salary is regularly paid ; 
no one interferes with me ; my pupils im- 
prove, and I have taught them to respect 
and obey me." 

"All that may be," said the Doctor, 



170 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

shaking his head, " but you are not happy — 
you know you're not. Tour face tells more 
truth than your lips. You're in bad health, 
too." 

" Indeed I am perfectly well." 

" You are nothing of the kind. I'll tell 
you what you must do, if you've taken such 
a fancy to those amiable people that you 
can't live without them." 

" What must I do ?" asked Annie, who 
was highly amused at her supposed attach- 
ment to the Curzons. 

" Make Madam Juno give -you a holiday, 
and go down to the Stancliifs. You have 
been with that angel a year?" 

"Nearly." 

" Then of course you must have a holiday." 

" I win see about it." 

" See about it ! Nonsense ! If you don't 
directly demand time for a rest, I shall call 
on Lady Adelaide and order country air for 
you. What would you say to that?" 

" I fear your powers would fail. I know 
of nothing that would influence Lady Ade- 
laide (if she did not choose to be influenced) 
short of a command from the throne itself. 
She has a particular dislike to the routine of 
her liousehold being interrupted ; otherwise. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 171 

I tHnk slie would long ago have replaced 
me. I am too independent to be a favourite. 
I don't think she will give me any holidays. 
But if you think it reaUy necessary that I 
should have a rest, I shaU of course ask for 
a little time. I do long to see Ellen and 
her baby." 

"What baby?" 

" Did I not tell you I was an aunt ?" ex- 
claimed Annie, with such proud delight, 
that she seemed to think no one had ever 
been so distinguished before, and that aunt- 
hood was a very good thing. With all the 
worldliness she was daily acquiring, Annie 
sometimes showed a trait of simplicity which 
did honour to her early training. 

There then followed a great many half- 
muttered exclamations from the Doctor 
about poor parsons, and large families, and 
the imprudence of early marriages, &c., 
while all the while he was mentally revolv- 
ing the expediency of sending the new- 
comer a little token of his good-will. Of 
course the infant prodigy would appreciate 
the said little token, and it would assist the 
young parents to meet the additional ex- 
pense entailed on them by the consumer of 
pap. " Eemember," said the Doctor, as he 



172 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

bid Annie good-bye, " you'll get a holiday, 
or I sball for you!" and he rushed away, de- 
livering to himself his opinion of Annie Sher- 
wood (as often as he had already informed 
himself on the subject), as well as that which 
he supposed her to entertain of him. And 
while he thus thought aloud, Annie went on 
her way with a brighter face, pondering w^hat 
a pleasant world this would be, if it held a 
great many golden hearts like the dear old 
Doctor's, or even a sprinkhng of them. 

Pursuant to Dr. Sinclair's advice, Annie 
requested an interview with Lady Adelaide, 
and stated her wish to have a holiday. " I 
cannot spare you," was the curt reply. But 
Annie, wdio had now thoroughly persuaded 
herself that she must see her sister, and her 
sister's prodigy, persevered in her demand, 
and, being full of the home topic, forgot 
herself so far as to speak pleadingly on the 
subject, and even momentarily to expose her 
feelings before the proud lady, talking ear- 
nestly of the love that bound Ellen and her- 
self together, and of her anxious wish to look 
on the face of Ellen's first-bom. In the 
midst of her eloquent appeal, Annie looked 
up at the beautiful Lady Adelaide, and saw 
a smile of scorn on her lips. An angry 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 173 

flush passed over tlie pale face of the 
speaker, that she should thus have displayed 
her most sacred feehngs to a worldlmg. 

" I tell you it is impossible, Miss Sher- 
wood," said Lady Adelaide ; " in a fortnight 
we leave London for the Continent." 

Annie started. 

" Leave London !" she repeated ; " leave 
England without seeing my sister ! Oh no ! 
I cannot do that — indeed I cannot." 

" As you please," said her ladyship. " I 
suppose that, however valuable Miss Sher- 
wood's services may be, on an emergency 
she could be replaced." And she turned 
away, to preclude any further conversation. 

Annie retired to ponder over her situation. 
She felt inclined to leave the Curzons imme- 
diately; and while she was debating the 
point, she was joined by Sydney. 

" Do you know that we are going abroad, 
Miss Sherwood?" 

" I hear that you are going, Sydney." 

" And you, too ; of course we shall take 
you." 

" But I am not sure that I shall agree to 
be taken." 

" Not agree to be taken ! You can't mean 
that? To leave us would be quite against 



174 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

your own interests ; I am sure it w^ould. I 
wouldn't consent to go without you," 

" All, Sydney/' said Annie, witli an un- 
wonted display of feeling, "if I thought 
that real aifection made you so speak, it 
w^ould reconcile me to much that is now 
painful." 

" What a funny woman you are ! Do you 
think, when I go to see Eranconi's troupe, 
that I have any ' real affection ' for the 
horses or riders? Certainly not; and yet 
they delight me. When mamma takes me 
to a play, I have no ' real affection ' for the 
actors ; but I can't bear not to see them. 
Now, I reckon you like one of the actors ; I 
could do wdthout any one better than you. 
You must not think of leaving us — indeed 
you must not. I think j^ou'd like to go 
abroad. Perhaps we shall go to Paris. 
You have never seen Paris ; it will give you 
new ideas. I know you will go. The only 
thing that worries me is about Lord Claude ; 
I don't like to leave him." 

" You love Lord Claude, I think ?" 

" Love him ! Well, I don't know^ ; I'm 
not sure ; he's a sort of hero to me, cer- 
tainly. It was a great shame in you to stoj) 
my reading Carlyle's IIe?v Wbrskip." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 175 

" You are too young for such a book." 

" Miss Sherwood 1" exclaimed the boy, 

suddenly changing the subject, " mamma 

can't bear Lord Claude ; do you know why ?" 

" No ; and I don't wish to hear." 

" I think it is because he does not flatter 

her. All the other gentlemen tell her how 

beautiful she is, but he never does. Papa 

likes him though, very much. I only wish 

Lord Dryburgh would die — that I do, and 

then Lord Claude would be a Marquis ; and 

then " But here Sydney perceived that 

he had lost his listener, for Annie was buried 
in the contents of a letter, so he turned away 
with an impatient exclamation. 

In the evening, Miss Dobson came into 
the school-room. She more frequently spent 
her evenings in the housekeeper's room — in- 
deed, whenever she could slip into those 
favourite precincts without being observed. 
Miss Dobson was the spy of the house, as 
well as the toad-eater of its mistress ; and it 
was on secret service that she approached 
the governess, whose conversation was to her 
peculiarly distasteful. She never willingly 
read anything. Lady Adelaide had increased 
her dislike to books, by imposing on her the 
task of reading aloud, not in moderation, but 



176 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

many hours daily. She was a woman of the 
most narrow and uncultivated mind, and had 
no solace but fancy work. 

Annie had a particular dislike to Miss 
Dobson, on account of her mean, parasitical 
character, but she pitied her. Indeed no one, 
however much they might despise her mean- 
ness, could help compassionating that poor, 
friendless dependent, who earned her bread 
by the hardest bondage ever imposed on 
humanity, or accepted by it — a bondage 
cemented by deceit and treachery. 

Wlien Miss Dobson visited Annie, it was 
to glean all she could, to carry to Lady Ade- 
laide. She never told Annie anything ; she 
was as prudent as Horace Walpole's man in 
the desert island, who, having one solitary 
companion, never confided anything to him 
but " how the wind blew, and that in a 
whisper, lest the wind should overhear." 
Miss Dobson had been desired by Lady 
Adelaide to learn (without seeming to in- 
quire) whether Miss Sherwood meant to 
leave. Lady Adelaide w^as particular^ 
anxious to retain Annie, feeling assured 
that she would find it difficult to secure a 
governess combining all the necessary quali- 
fications with retired habits and a plain 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 177 

person. Besides, lier ladyship felt little 
inclined to fatigue herself with the exami- 
nation of fresh candidates for the appoint- 
ment. 

Miss Dobson cautiously opened the busi- 
ness she had in hand. " I don't know whether 
you are aware that we are going abroad, Miss 
Sherwood." 

" I have been told so," replied Annie. 

"We shall be very gay in Paris," con- 
tinued Miss Dobson. " It will make a great 
difference to you and me. Not that I 
am fond of pleasure, but at our age, it is 
natural to desire a little." (There was only 
a difference of twenty years between Miss 
Dobson and Annie Sherwood.) "Ah! yes, 
^ve shall be very gay in Paris." 

" I am not sure I shall go," said Annie. 

"Not go ! Surely you would not relinquish 
the advantages you possess, in such a family 
as Lady Adelaide's !" 

" I really do think I could dare as much." 

" But what objection could you possibly 
have to going abroad ?" 

" None in the world. I am anxious to see 
Prance. I only object to leaving England 
without bidding my sister good-bye." 

" Oh ! if that is aU, I really think I could 

A^OL. II. N 



178 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

make interest with Lady Adelaide — ^yes, I'm 
sure I could." 

" What to do?" asked Annie. 

" To allow you to put some one in your 
place for a week (of course, as the projjosal 
would come from you, you must hear the expense), 
and that would give you time for your little 
trip into the country, and enable you to ac- 
company us." 

Miss Dobson always said " us," w^hen Lady 
Adelaide was not in the way to hear. 

" Your suggestion is very good, Miss Dob- 
son," said Annie (who knew all the time 
that it was Lady Adelaide's) ; " I shall act 
upon it." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 179 



CHAPTEE XVI. 

In mid-winter, the Curzon family were lo- 
cated, not in tlie most cliarming of all 
cities, Paris, but its miniature, tlie elegant, 
aspiring, ambitious, theatrical capital of 
Belgium. The beautiful little city puts 
forth all its fascinations, great and small, to 
cheat one into the belief that they are in 
France — ^l^right, sunny France — 

" Gay, sportive land of mirtli and social ease, 
Pleased with thyself, who all the world can please." 

Annie Sherwood was internally sadly dis- 
appointed ' to have lost the sight of Paris ; 
but of course she kept her disappointment 
quite to herself — it could be of no moment 
to any one else. Lady Adelaide was in a 
condescending humour, and informed Annie 
that Brussels was really very like Paris, 
only smaller. Annie looked without, and 
thought that Paris was then very insigni- 
ficant. 

The Curzons had put up at the Hotel de 
N 2 



180 ANKE SHERWOOD. 

L' , immediately adjoining the royal re- 
sidence. The Palace is nnimposing ; its 
plain, unadorned, and uniform frontage 
giving one an idea of an office for the trans- 
action of business — a post-office, for instance 
— or a Corn-Exchange, or any place in which 
a great many accounts would be cast up, and 
a great deal of money received. Probably, 
how^ever, neither ever occurred to an alarm- 
ing extent in the royal dwelling of Leopold 
the First, by the nation's good will. King of 
the Belgians. 

Opposite to the Hotel de L' was the 

comparatively small enclosure denominated 
the Park, with its avenues of leafless trees, 
its little fountain, with a little ice at the 
bottom, and here and there a bundle of 
straw, standing (as sailors would say) on its 
beam-ends. Strangers were told* that the 
aforesaid bundles of straw^ eclipsed the glory 
of some exquisite statues. If the strangers 
had faith as a grain of sand, they believed 
what was told them ; if not, they persisted in 
thinking that the straw-bundles were straw- 
bundles, and nothing more. 

Every one who knows Brussels (and that 
is every one who is any one) knows, too, 
what a dismal impression is made on the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 181 

stranger wlio arrives there in December, 
when the sky and atmosphere rival the far- 
famed murky reputation borne by those of 
England. Yes, he will remember it well, 
especially if he has been cheated into the 
behef that he w^as coming to another Paris ! 
Paris could never look dull and melancholy, 
if it tried ever so hard — how should it ? 

Our soHtary heroine thought — but no 
matter what she thought! — she was very 
sad, after the happiest month she had ever 
known in her life — a month spent as if in 
Paradise ! — and bright, sunny faces were still 
flitting before her eyes — sweet, loving voices 
still murmuring in her ears, but only like 
dreams — she could not realize them. She 
took up a book — the only one she had un- 
packed — but the type seemed upside down. 
She closed the volume and looked round the 
lonely Httle room, as if for some one to talk 
to. Then Annie took a pencil, and wrote 
some very bad verses on the back of an old 
letter, finally burst into tears, and cried, till 
she looked much plainer than nature had 
made her. Foolish girl ! she had never 
learnt crochet ! 

For " want of other idleness," Annie in- 
vested two whole francs (a great sum to 



182 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

lier) ill tlie purchase of tlie nuicli-reviled, 
but invariably jDatronized article — a guide- 
book. From that she learnt that a great 
deal more was to be seen in Brussels than 
the mimic fountain, the straw-bundles, &c., 
and she actually made some silly speech at 
luncheon, about liking to see interesting lo- 
calities. Lady Adelaide quickly put these 
ambitious views to flight, by giving her to 
understand that a passion for sight-seeing 
w^as indicative of a low origin. Of course 
nothing more was said on the subject. Lady 
Adelaide had pronounced quite enough to 
convince any right-minded person that see- 
ing old cathedrals, &c., was quite a plebeian 
proceeding ; but then, Annie Sherwood w^as 
not right-minded. Miss Dobson was of 
course more open to the reception of proper 
impressions. She did not wish to see any- 
thing like " those nasty, cold, grey, old 
places, only fit for bats to live in ; it gave 
her cold to look at the outside of them 
only !" 

Strange things were taking place in the 
Curzon family. Mr. Curzon was making 
another attempt to become more domes- 
ticated. The House w^as not in session; the 
clubs were deserted, the town empty. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 183 

Moreover, lie had by some means lately 
outrun his income ; he must retrench for a 
year or two — abroad, of course : great people 
can't retrench at home ; they never attempt 
it. Little debtors and Httle spendthrifts 
flock to Boulogne ; great defaulters and 
ruined men choose Brussels. The first class 
lose their characters, the second are only 
men of fashion. To be in debt a few hun- 
dreds, shows shocking depravity; to owe 
sixty or eighty thousand pounds, is to evince 
high breeding. The two sets of debtors, 
however, must never be compared : such a 
comparison is as odious as one between 
Dick Turpin and Napoleon, the Eobber and 
Alexander. 

Mr. Curzon was trying in earnest to cul- 
tivate liis family. Once more he condescended 
to examine into the progress of school-room 
affairs, was satisfied, and expressed his satis- 
faction in as gracious a speech as he could 
frame his aristocratic lips to utter. The 
governess did not seem as overwhelmed with 
the honour and favour of his approval as a 
right-minded person ought to have been ; 
and while resolving to continue to use her 
services as a very useful drudge, Mr. Curzon 
applauded his own discernment in having 



184 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

long ago discovered Miss Sherwood to be a 
very disagreeable person indeed. 

Mr. Curzon, though a " member of the 
late Ministry/' and though " an able speaker 
in the House/' had some of the weaknesses 
of humanity, in common with less distin- 
guished individuals : he was a vain man. 
Eminently handsome, he was quite aware of 
his personal advantages, and rather resented 
the fact that one of his pretensions, mental 
and personal, should converse for ten minutes 
with a female dependent, without her evinc- 
ing the least pleasure in his society. And 
Miss Sherwood plainly showed by her coun- 
tenance, however much she might endeavour 
to suppress the evidence in her manner, that 
she would feel immensely reHeved by the 
distinguished Mr. Curzon finishing his pa- 
tronizing harangue and withdrawing from 
her presence. 

After a month or two, Mr. Curzon and 
Lady Adelaide selected a handsome house 

in the Eue Du , which, though not 

quite so outwardly splendid as they could 
have wished, was inwardly decorated with 
art, which only wanted solidity, to merit the 
name of magnificence. 

About the same time, the severity of the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 185 \ 

] 

winter became great. The ground was ■ 

white with frost and snow, the mists were ■ 

dispersed, and the Brussels world of fashion 
rushed with enthusiasm to the delightful 
diversion of sledging. 



186 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XVII. 

Merry musical little bells those were, tink- 
ling through the frosty air, as the jaunty 
sledges, gaily painted and gilded, glided 
smoothly and swiftly along. AU the horses 
looked so spirited and proud, tossing their 
heads high, and displaying the strings of 
silver bells wdth wdiich their necks w^ere 
adorned. They wore the daintiest harness 
that could he devised, and some of them 
crimson or blue trappings, that floated in 
the air something in the guise of the scarfs 
wherewith, in the olden times, ladies were 
accustomed to deck their favourite knights. 

The exquisites in the sledges were trying 
hard, very hard, to look like Trenchmen ; 
but fruitlessly; fashionable as was their array, 
there was still wanting that nameless some- 
thing in their tournure which makes the 
high-bred Frenchman " the glass of fashion," 
even as the aristocratic Englishman is the 
" mould of form." 

It was a rarely bright, even a sunny day, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 187 

thougli the cold v/as intense, and the whole 
line of the Boulevard was a sheet of dazzling 
snow. Annie Sherwood and her three pupils 
were walking on the broad path allotted to 
pedestrians. It was Sydney's good pleasure 
to see the show, otherwise Annie would have 
chosen a more retired spot. 

Sledge after sledge passed by, each one 
more elaborately elegant than its predecessor. 
The promenade was crowded with admiring 
and admired ladies. All the Beiges are 
little ; but they are generally good-looking. 
They have regular feat ares, while ever and 
anon the recurrence of a deep, dark eye, and 
shining curls of jet, reminds one that Spanish 
blood has mingled wdth theirs. There is, 
how^ever, a hea^dness in the Beige coun- 
tenance, of wdiich they are doubtless con- 
scious, vdien they affect Gallic vivacity. 

Eastern w^omen are said to carry their 
fortunes on their persons ; and even so — 
though she binds no string of coins (destined 
to become her dowry) among the braids of 
her hair — the Belgian beauty appears to 
invest a large part of her fortune in her 
toilette. It is literally sumptuous. She 
wears the richest furs and velvets, &c. ; 
while even for the promenade, her robe is 



188 A^NE SHERWOOD. 

elaborately trimmed with lace flounces of the 
most costly make ; and her head adorned 
with the richest white satin bonnet, bearing 
a plumage of dazzling purity — this, even in 
winter ! 

The Beiges are magnificent in dress, 
horses, equipages, and everything which 
belongs to public life. In the home -circle 
they are sparing even to parsimony, that 
their narrow incomes may be enabled to 
meet the expense of their outward luxury. 

Every eye is turned towards the carriage- 
road. Some person of distinction approaches. 
The Eoyal Family ? No ; a Princess of 
Spain, with her husband and fair children. 
A Princess who has stooped from the 
2nestige of royal splendour to unite herself to 
one who had nothing to offer in exchange 
for the sacrifice, but a heart. The Princess 
is not beautiful, but the romance of her 
history creates an interest in her, which is 
deeply but silently felt. 

Not far behind the Infanta's sledge came 
one of peculiar elegance ; the front ter- 
minated with the head and antlers of a 
beautiful deer, while its skin served as an 
apron. The occupant of the sledge was 
wrapt in a rich fur coat, a black velvet cap 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 189 

surmoimted his liandsome, animated face, 
and the mass of hterally raven hair that fell 
round it. How heantiful that face was (and 
yet not regularly handsome), with its broad, 
proud brow, its finely-arched jetty eyebrows, 
and its large, lustrous, dark eyes, which said 
a thousand things — expressed every varied 
shade of meaning. The rest of the face was 
not remarkable ; it was dark, but very pale, 
and contrasted with the little black silky 
moustache which shaded the upper lip, with- 
out concealing the row of ivory teeth beneath. 
" TJn Anglais !" said some one — for every eye 
was attracted to the sledge-driver. "ISTon, 
non, c'est un rran9ais, je vous dis," replied 
another. " II est militaire !" 

The object of discussion suddenly leapt 
from the sledge, confiding his spirited, coal- 
black horse (whose neck was adorned with 
the daintiest ring of Spanish bells) to a 
servant, and eagerly advanced towards the 
promenaders. He was very tall, and had a 
mingled air of dignity and fashion. His figure 
looked like that of a man of thirty, while his 
bright, animated face made him appear con- 
siderably younger. " Lord Claude ! Lord 
Claude !" exclaimed Sydney, impetuously 
rushing to meet him. " Miss Sherwood, 



190 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

this is Lord Claude !" lie cried, turning his 
head over his shoulder. 

Annie stood still to await the boy's return. 
Sydney came back with his friend, who, 
taking off his cap with easy grace, bowed to 
Annie, as if he considered the boy's exclama- 
tion a sort of introduction. He did not 
speak to her, however. 

The boys, delighted to meet Lord Claude, 
who was a great favourite with them, began 
aU together to question him as to the cause 
of their unexpected meeting. He tried to 
satisfy them, but some minutes elapsed ere 
their vociferous questioning permitted them 
to understand the explanation given. " But, 
my dear boys, you must not keep Miss 
Sherwood standing in the cold !" said Lord 
Claude. 

" Oh, never mind !" exclaimed Sydney ; 
" she doesn't mind it at all ! do you, Miss 
Sherwood ?" 

" Yes ; I mind it very much 1" said Annie, 
though the tone in which she spoke rather 
contradicted her words. 

" I shah soon caU, Sydney," said Lord 
Claude ; then, once more bowing with an air 
of respectful gravity to Annie, he returned 
to his sledge. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 191 

" He bowed to you. Miss Sherwood ! How 
strange !" said Sydney. " Did you see that 
Lord Claude bowed to you, tliouyli he knows 
you're a governess /" 

Annie made no reply. She was deep 
in a fanciful reverie; such as, perchance, 
Miranda might have indulged in when she 
saw Ferdinand, than whom 

" Slie did not wish to see a goodlier man." 

It should not be reckoned as one of the 
grievances, but it is certainly one of the griefs 
of governess life, that the recluse existence 
to which the class are condemned, renders 
them peculiarly susceptible of romantic in- 
fluence, and weaves for them many an airy 
dream which a httle intercourse with the 
world would dispel. And perhaps our gover- 
ness-heroine may be excused, if, in her many 
lonely hours, uncheered by the sympathy of a 
friend, and even unenlivened by the society 
of a common acquaintance, she thought 
oft and again of the distinguished-looking 
man, whose mental refinement and generous 
character were unmistakeably portrayed on 
one of the most charming countenances that 
nature ever produced. Perhaps she may be 
pardoned, too, if her dreams were of sledging, 
and of one sledge in particular, guided with 



192 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

peculiar dexterity and grace ; and if a voice 
(which she had only heard uttering most 
common-place expressions) rang through her 
ears, even in sleejD making sweet music ! Poor, 
foolish Annie, to forget that she was a gover- 
ness ! — a governess, and twenty-five years 
of age ! Yes, Annie Sherwood had reached 
the mature age of twenty-five, and had, till 
that period of life, escaped all the foolish 
entanglements of unmeaning love affairs ; 
but for that very reason, she was the more 
capable of romantic passion, when the 
" Oue bright particular star " 

appeared, who answered to her beau-ideal ; 
and so it happened, that Annie dreamt more, 
da}^ and night, of the sledge-driver, than 
reason approved. Her dreams must have 
been very pleasant, for they lit her face 
with such radiance that she looked quite 
charming; and they did yet worse, they 
lent such animation to her manner, that 
Lady Adelaide began to fear (after a few 
hints from Dobson) that the governess was 
becoming too familiar, and for that reason, 
and another of yet greater importance, she 
contemplated doing away with the one- 
o'clock dinner down stairs, and making the 
school-room party confine themselves en- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 193 

tirely to their own precincts. To tliis plan, 
unfortunately, Mr. Curzon objected. He 
liad at length made the acquaintance of his 
children : he was stru.ck with Sydney's un- 
usually early-developed talents, was proud 
of him, and amused with the prattle of the 
younger ones. ISlo ; they were not again to 
be exiled to the school-room. He did not 
like quite to add, " Miss Sherwood might 
dine up-stairs," though he would' not have 
been at all displeased had it been so arranged. 
Lady Adelaide did not meet with all the 
homage she expected in B , and conse- 
quently began to experience ennui. 

Incapable of any mental exertion herself, 
she would now, in her liom's of weariness, 
have permitted the despised governess to 
amuse her ; but then she might presume on 
the condescension and become familiar ; and 
beside, if alloAved to come into the drawing- 
room wdien her patroness was alone, she 
might have the temerity to expect the same 
indulgence on other occasions ! 

Lady Adelaide formed the acquaintance 
of a literary lady, with whom she became very 
intimate. The literary lad}^ looked (I do not 
say she was) about fifty. She bore a strong 
resemblance to a speckled hen. She had 

VOL. II. 



194 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

written two or three books, and talked a 
great deal about picture-galleries, and the 
styles of different masters (she had certainly 
never read Peregrine TicUe), and, estimating 
herself very higlily, was fortunate enough 
to succeed in making a number of her friends 
and acquaintances accept the dogma of her 
being a very talented woman, without their 
taking any trouble to inquire into the 
matter for themselves. Au reste, Mrs. 
Bluington was amiable, and met Lady 
Adelaide's advances to intimacy with a very 
just estimate of her ladyship's position and 
pretensions, and with a most unfeigned ad- 
miration for the handsome and aristocratic 
Mr. Curzon ; of course, Mrs. Bluington was 
a favourite Avith both. 

Lady Adelaide was averse to exertion, and 
seldom visited her friend, but the literary 
lady constantly came to see her. 

Mrs. Bluington had one w^eakness or 
peculiarity, excessive timidity ! Though she 
had had the courage to rush into print, the 
courage to stand a broadside from the 
Quarterly, she was too young and timid to 
venture out alone ! When she came to spend 
several hours with Lady Adelaide (which 
ishe often did in the long mornings), Mr. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 195 

Bluington brought lier to the Eue Ducale : 
he called for her again at the expiration of 
her visit. Did anything prevent her hus- 
band's attendance, Mrs. Bluington was 
placed in the most painful dilemma. If Mr. 
Curzon were in the way, his escort of course 
was obtainable ; if not, the duty of con- 
ducting the timid lady home, devolved on 
Lady Adelaide's governess. At first Annie 
Sherwood felt indignant, and disposed to 
rebel against the absurd demand that she 
should chaperon a woman who might well 
have been her mother ; but then ihe ludi- 
crous thought of protecting those elderly 
and doubtful charms so irresistibly amused 
her fancy, that she grew accustomed to the 
jest, and found her charge really good-natured 
and pleasant, when for a short time she con- 
sented to step from the pedestal on w^hich 
imaginary Hterary distinction had placed her. 

On one of the duenna walks, Annie met 
Mr. Curzon as she was returning. 

"You have been re-conducting Mrs. 
Bluington, I suppose. Miss Sherwood ?" said 
he, graciously. 

"I have, Mr. Curzon," replied Annie, 
with an arch smile ; " but if I am to con- 
tinue my office of duenna, I hope you will 
o 2 



196 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

appoint some responsible person to bring 
me home wben my duty is performed?" 

" Take one of the boys," said Mr. Curzon, 
who, for the first time, was really struck with 
the ludicrous farce so frequently enacted ; 
and he too, would have smiled, but for the 
impropriety of being seen in familiar con- 
versation with his dependent; — slightly 
nodding, he passed on. 

Annie, rather ruffled by Mr. Curzon's 
manner, passed on too ; and it so hap- 
pened that she met the handsome sledge- 
driver who had been so much in her foolish 
thoughts lately. He was walking by the 
side of a beautiful girl, whose appearance 
denoted rank and w^ealth ; but he took off 
his hat to Annie as he passed, and she, be- 
tween confusion and pleased surprise that 
he should remember her at all, walked on 
hastily without returning the salutation, and 
thought that Sydney was not far wrong in 
his estimation of Lord Claude when he said, 
" I make him my hero." 

And yet Claude Douglas had not the fault- 
less beauty of the Mros de roman. He pos- 
sessed neither a Eoman nose nor a Grecian 
outline ; but the charm of his face w^as that 
which the boy had described — those eyes, like 



AISNE SHERWOOD. 197 

jewels, tlirougli which a soul shone. Un- 
mistakeable nobility was to be traced in every 
line of his face, in every motion of his 
elegant figure, even in the high-bred hand, 
which, like those of Sue's hero, might have 
made a woman jealous. But the most ad- 
mirable point in Claude Douglas, was that 
apparent absence of self-consciousness : he 
always seemed pleased and occupied with 
those around him, always as if forgetful of 
his own existence. The influence which he 
unconsciously acquired, and almost as un- 
consciously exercised, among his friends and 
acquaintance, had not made him vain ; he 
was too proud for the littleness of vanity. 



198 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XVIII. 

In the spring of the year, Mr. Curzon, 
leaving his family in Brussels (requesting 
his friend, Lord Claude Douglas, to take a 
general care of them, and to give his escort 
and protection to Lady Adelaide whenever 
required), departed for England, to watch 
over his own interests in a forthcoming 
general election. It appeared to him, how- 
ever, a mere matter of form. He had repre- 
sented B for many years, and had not 

the least doubt of being unanimously re- 
turned for his accustomed seat. The pos- 
sibility of a contested election never occurred 

to him ; and when, on his arrival in B , 

he found that a Liberal candidate w^as already 
in the field, his aristocratic surprise was very 
considerable. His astonishment increased 
prodigiously when his former constituents, 
coming to the conclusion that his Toryism 
ran too high for the nineteenth century, 
actually returned his opponent ! In a 
paroxysm of mortified vanity and patrician 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 199 

disdain, Mr. Cnrzon cut the contumacious 
borough for ever, and rushed from the shores 
of his ungrateful country. Cahuly (as he 
thought) reviewing his past career, it struck 
him that he had been a most disinterested 
patriot, from the first day of his sitting in 
ParHament ; that no personal considerations 
had ever influenced his conduct, and that 
the interests of B had constantly pre- 
occupied his mind, even to the exclusion 
of family affairs and domestic affections. 
Finally, Mr. Curzon determined to thrust 
the matter from his mind, and consequently 
thought of little else. 

" Ell songeaut qu'il faut oublier, en s'en souvient." 

Alas ! such was the case with the disap- 
pointed patriot. On his return to Brussels, 
Mr. Curzon was rather shy of English 
society for a short time ; hut at length, 
finding he was likely to he consumed by 
ennid, he gathered round him a circle of 
men as well born, but much poorer, than 
himself ; of whom, if the equal in one sense, 
he became the patron in another, — they never 
contradicted Mr. Curzon ! 

Almost the only exception to this rule, 
was Lord Claude Douglas ; who, having no 
motive for being parasitical, and being too 



200 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

proud to be so if lie liad liad a motive, often 
argued with. Mr. Curzon certain points on 
wMcli they disagreed. 

It happened one day, at a dinner-party at 
Mr. Curzon's, that the two gentlemen were 
at issue on a certain point of great political 
interest. The discussion became animated. 
Something inspired Mr. Curzon w^ith the 
desire to quote himself. He wished to bring 
forward a passage from some speech he had 
made in the previous session, but his memory 
proved treacherous. 

It was dessert-time ; the boys were present. 
Sydney listened to the conversation, with the 
interest of one who knew that in coming 
years, his A^oice would probably be heard 
in the Senate. He remembered the in- 
terest that Miss Sherwood took in politics. 
He remembered, too, that she possessed a 
remarkably tenacious memory ; and he 
thought it just possible that she might have 
read and remembered the speech to which 
his father referred. He slipped out of the 
door, and flying up to the school-room, re- 
called the subject to her recollection, and 
asked if she could give the required clue. 

" Yes," said Annie, and very soon pro- 
duced from her desk the very identical speech 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 201 

of Mr. Curzon's, cut from the columns of a 
newspaper. 

Sydney flew off, and triumphantly pro- 
duced the slip of paper at the dinner-table. 
The ladies had retired ; the gentlemen w^ere 
continuing their discussion. 

" Dear me, the very speech !" exclaimed 
Mr. Curzon. " "Wliere did you get it from, 
Sydney?" 

" From Miss Sherwood ; she has kept it 
a long time in her desk." 

From that day Miss Sherwood ceased to 
be ''a very disagreeable person" in Mr. 
Curzon's eyes. Probably the result would 
have been rather different had some one 
Avhispered in the honourable gentleman's 
ear that his cherished speech (it was a pet 
one, and he had taken great pains to con 
it) had been preserved so carefully — not 
for its acute reasoning, not for its pure 
eloquence, but simply as a particularly good 
specimen of " that species of rhetoric called 
rigmarole !" 

" Oh, wad some power the giftie gie us 
To see ourselves as others see us, 
It wad frae mony a blunder free us. 
An' foolish notion !" 

Thenceforth Mr. Curzon became the de- 



202 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

cided patron of the governess, thougli liis 
patronage was mingled with becoming con- 
descension, as a matter of course. 

TiJ ^ * -j.^ 

Once upon a time a select party at Mr. 
Curzon's were on the high road to ennui. 
Lady Adelaide was the only musical lady 
present. In fact, very few ladies were present 
at all, musical or unmusical, at Lady Ade- 
laide's reunions. Had there been, they might 
have withdrawn from her a portion of the 
homage which she always exacted from 
the opposite sex. Not that her ladyship 
ever flirted; she w^as no more guilty of 
flirtation than a statue of Lysippus would 
have been ; and her virtue resulted from the 
source whence the propriety of the statue 
would have proceeded. No, Lady Adelaide 
never flirted. 

Lady Adelaide had sung a number of 
scientific pieces in a magnificent voice and 
with great execution. Her singing sur- 
prised, but it affected no one. She had no 
feeling, and was not sufliciently an actress 
to assume any. She had played, besides, 
several " firework pieces of music," full of 
" chromatic scales like fire-rockets," as Cuth- 
bert Bede, of venerable memory, would say ; 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 203 

but now the fireworks were over, conversa- 
tion languished, and there was a general hut 
unexpressed feeling that some fresh excite- 
ment was wanted — in fact, that it would he 
a " mercy" if some one would smash a lamp^ 
or some one's dress would catch fire, or some 
one would faint, or produce a sensation of 
any kind. This state of things produced 
a demand for musical reinforcements ; but 
they were not to be obtained. Of the few 
ladies present, none were under fifty ; and if 
they had sung, their singing days were over 
— the glory was departed from their voices. 

The timid literary lady promenaded her 
hearers from the Dresden to the Dulwich 
gallery — from the Florentine to the Louvre. 
She discussed Titian's colouring and Mu- 
rillo's grace; Michael Angelo's grandeur 
and Salvator Eosa's wildness, till some one 
in a corner (yawning behind the welcome 
shadow of a screen) started the subject of 
the Derby, as a relief to the chiaro scuro. 

" Lady Adelaide, you are positively cruel 
to give us no more of your divine harmony !" 
said a young exquisite, who was remarkable 
for the exploit of running through a hundred 
thousand pounds before his lip had acquired 
the down preluding manhood. Perhaps, 



204 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

thougli, as some one said of Dupin's calcu- 
lations, there is a zero de trop in the story. 

" Most harhavous^' said a gentleman in 
the decline of life, who wished to pass for a 
youth, and thought that lisping would make 
him appear juvenile, "Most barbavous! — it 
quite depv esses my s^ivits ! '' 

" Lady Adelaide !" — interposed an old 
Colonel, whose seventy winters had left him 
all the gallant air of a man of fashion, and, 
alas ! the unmistakeable stamp of a roue — 
" if we poor mortals are no longer to hear 
the strains of St. Cecilia, indulge us with 
those of her humble follower. You have a 
dame de conipapiie, I think ; is she not musi- 
cal ? — if so, do let her appear. I am sure, 
if you do but tap the floor (like another 
Belinda) with your exquisite little slipper, 
your sylph-like satellite wdll appear. Of 
course she is sylph-like — everything attend- 
ing you must catch a reflection of your 
elegance." 

" What say you to that, my Lord ?" said 
Lady Adelaide, turning to Claude Douglas. 

" I say, Lady Adelaide, what Sir Andrew 
Ague-cheek said of Cesario, ' That youth's a 
rare courtier ! rain odours, &c. Ill get them 
all ready !' " 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 205 

" I did not mean tlie complimentary part 
of the Colonel's speech," said her ladyship, 
biting her lip with the slightest possible air 
houdeur ; " I mean, about Dobson. You have 
seen her. Do you advise my having her 
summoned to give us some music?" 

" I cannot advise anything which would 
be painful to your ladyship's feelings, as 
well as to those of the party concerned," 
said Claude, gravely. " To mortify must be 
as repugnant as to be mortified." 

" Another Daniel !" said Lady Adelaide. 
" My Lord, you should have been the con- 
fidant of Solomon, or the bosom friend of 
Seneca." 

Lord Claude bowed and smiled. 

" Suppose we were to act charades," said 
the timid literary lady, or " unprotected 
female." 

" Or get up an improvise tableau," said 
Mr. Sackington Eeynard. " Paris and the 
Goddesses. Lady Adelaide would make a 
magnificent Juno !" 

" But there is no Paris 1" said Lord 
Claude ; and it was very unkind to say so, as 
Mr. Sackington Eeynard thought himself at 
least equal to the fair shepherd of Mount Ida. 

" A scene from the Bride of Lammermuir 



206 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

would be enchaiitiiig," said the literary lady ; 
" I could personate Lucy Asliton, and you, 
my Lord, are the perfect type of the Master 
of Eavenswood/' 

'' But there is one great obstacle to the 
plan/' said his lordship, smiling ; "I am 
habitually too indolent to make love, even 
en tableau J however insjoiring the object 
before me might be." 

" You are a monster, Lord Claude !" said 
Lady Adelaide, with some meaning. 

"I am 'indifferent honest,' your lady- 
ship," said Lord Claude, looking very cool. 

The tableaux fell to the ground, — the old 
Colonel returning to the charge with regard 
to the mifortunate Dobson. 

Lady Adelaide, secretly more desirous of 
Lord Claude's good opinion than of any other 
person's, inasmuch as he never paid a bond 
fide compliment, determined to show him 
vdth what indifference she could brave his 
censure, and therefore gave the antiquated 
Adonis fall permission to ring, and send a 
servant in her name, to summon the dame 
de compagnie, and when she arrived, to ex- 
tract as much music from her as he coidd. 
No sooner said than done ; the summons w^as 
dispatched. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 207 

Lord Claude rose and walked away. He 
was chafed to think that the poor dependent 
should he summoned only to make sport for 
the goodly company; hut as he could not 
prevent the iroHc, he would retire from the 
immediate scene of action. The messenger 
had heen gone ahout twenty minutes, when 
the door opened, and poor Miss Dohson 
sailed in (adorned with all the gaudy finery 
she could command, in honour of a cUhut 
in the salon of her patroness), alternately 
giggling, blushing, and ogling the company. 
How pitiful it did look — that poor, yellow, 
wrinkled face ! like a piece of discoloured 
parchment dra^vn over hones, while the 
head-dress wdth which she had attempted to 
decorate herself only made her appear more 
unsightly still. She stood near the door, 
poor mean, vulgar soul, awkward, not timid, 
and so proud of herself and her faded flowers 
and flounces, and of Lady Adelaide's favour ! 
She had never ventured to hope for such an 
hour as that ! The dehght of the moment 
was worth twenty years of ordinary life; 
certainly it w^as 1 

As soon as Miss Dohson had recovered 
from the pleasant surprise of finding herself 
in the midst of a throng (to mingle with 



208 ANNE SHERAVOOD. 

which her highest flight of ambition had 
never led her to aspire), she took in the 
meaning of the petition made by several 
gentlemen grouped round her. She blu*shed, 
and, like Lady Heron, assured them that she 
" durst not play." How much in earnest 
she thought they all were ! And some one 
spoke of Zuleika's beautiful description, 
quoting — 

" The music breathing from her face !" 

and poor little Dobson really thought they 
meant her. They asked her if she had read 
the Bride of Abydos ? No ; but she had read 
Alinda, or the Mysterious Marriage I 

Quite half an hour elapsed before Miss 
Dobson succeeded in convincing the incre- 
dulous gallants who surrounded her, that 
she was neither a Pasta nor a female Thal- 
berg ; and even then, she allowed it to re- 
main doubtfal, whether modesty had not as 
much to do with her refusal to sing and play 
as want of skill or cultivation. 

In the meanwhile, no one had thought of 
oiSering the poor little woman a chair. Mr. 
Curzon had passed her with a haughty 
glance, and " I'll trouble you to move. Miss 
Dobson." Mr. Curzon wanted a portfolio of 
engravings which lay upon a console behind 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 209 

her, and the unfortunate parasite had started 
from her pleasant dream, and remembered 
who she was ! Wlien the haughty patron 
turned away, she tried to be as happy and 
sprightly as before ; but it would not do, and 
she began to feel hot and tired, and to want 
to get to the housekeeper's room for that 
particular cup of tea that had been drawing 
when she came up stairs ! Suddenly a voice 
exclaimed, in a tone of mock seriousness — 
" Eoom for the Master of Eavenswood !" 
and Lord Claude's tall figure breaking the 
group, he placed a chair for the unfortunate 
victim, saying, in his gentlest tone, " Will 
you not be seated ?" Afterwards he brought 
her an ice ; for the white-gloved footmen 
were carrying refreshments round, and care- 
fully offering them to every one else. 

Miss Dobson looked up doubtingly, but 
soon she discovered, that though he did not 
smile and talk exaggerated nonsense. Lord 
Claude meant to be kind, and even she under- 
stood something of the motives which in- 
fluenced him ; and, despite her blinding 
vanity, began to suspect that she had been 
mocked by the others, pitied by him ! Gra- 
dually the gentlemen lounged away, having 
"used up" the fun; and then the little 

VOL. II, p 



210 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

woman had the satisfaction of finding that 
when she was left in that embarrassing 
situation — quite alone — Lord Claude again 
advanced, and drawing a chair near, tried to 
converse with her. Now and then he looked 
at Lady Adelaide, and though he might not 
have meant it, his look took the character of 
grave reproof, and seemed to say, " Have 
you a woman's heart?" And when Lady 
Adelaide had read that look clearly, she said, 
loudly enough for the words to reach him — 
" No success with Miss Dobson, Colonel? I 
give you leave to try the governess ! Dis- 
cover, if you can, if there is any latent har- 
mony in her composition !" 

And again Lord Claude looked at Lady 
Adelaide, and again she spoke : " Do try 
your powers with Miss Sherwood, Colonel ! 
Orpheus drew music from stones and rocks ; 
you will be greater than Orpheus, if you 
extract music from her." 

The above amiable speech Miss Dobson 
most faithfully committed to memory for 
Annie Sherwood's benefit ; she had no con- 
cealments from her, wdien she could commu- 
nicate anything disagreeable. 

" Lady Adelaide !" began Lord Claude, in 
a tone of gentle expostulation ; but her lady- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 211' 

ship was in a very determined Iramour. 
" Lady Adelaide !" lie repeated — " surely 

you will not " 

'' My Lord !" said Lady Adelaide, with 
hauteur; then, affecting playfulness, she 
added, " Surely you Avould not have Miss 
Sherwood's powers ' wasted on the desert 
air r to use the worn-out quotation." 

" So far from it," said Lord Claude, re- 
solutely, "that^ from Sydney's account of 
her, I have often felt surprised that your 
Ladyship had not been better acquainted 
with " 

" Well, we'll have her down stairs, as- 
suredly," said Lady Adelaide. " I am not 
sure but that she may be able to sing us 
some rustic ballads. She has lived much in 
the country, I believe." 

"No, mamma; she can't sing," said Sydney, 
who, notwithstanding his usual acuteness, 
thought his mother was in earnest ; " she 
can't sing, but she can do something better 
than singing. She can give you a Shak- 
spearian reading, like Mrs. Kemble." 

" Wliat a good dodge !" exclaimed Mr. 
Sackington Eeynard. "Let us have her 
down by all means !" 

Lady Adelaide looked at Lord Claude. 
p 2 



212 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" You are not going, my Lord ?" said slie, 
quickly. 

" I fear I must," replied Claude, bowing 
as he passed by, but not so low as usual. 

" ISio, no ; you shall not go, my Lord," 
cried Sydney, detaining him by a vigorous 
exertion. 

"Wliat is this?" said Mr. Curzon, ad- 
vancing. 

" Miss Sherwood is coming down to read 
some scenes from Shakspeare, papa, and 
Lord Claude w^ants to go aw^ay, and I am 
determined he shan't ! Do make him stay, 
papa." 

And Claude was constrained to stay, wdie- 
ther he would or not. A message was 
despatched (by Sydney) to the governess. 
After using all his persuasive powers, the 
boy returned to say, " Mamma, she wont 
come !" 

" Wont !" repeated Lady Adelaide, for- 
getful of her dignity. " She shall !" 

" Tell, Miss Sherwood, that I request her 
to come down," said Mr. Curzon, with 
pompous dignity. 

Sydney went up again, and presently 
returned, leading in the contumacious go- 
verness. Annie was plainly dressed in black 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 213 

silk. The masses of lier jetty hair were 
twined round her head somewhat in the 
fashion of a turban, and gave an additional 
paleness to her cheeks, shaded wdth lashes 
of unusual darkness. 

Goaded by what she considered an unwar- 
rantable exercise of authority, Annie had 
determined to yield to a request amounting, 
in fact, to a command ; but in doing so, to 
evince that she considered her admission to 
Lady Adelaide's salon only such as a profes- 
sional artist might command. She felt, too, 
perhaps, a proud consciousness that she 
could and w^ould surpass what might be 
expected from her, and would leave no room, 
by elation or servility, for receiving insults 
like those wdiich had been heaped on Miss 
Dobson. Sydney (while Annie was making 
a hasty preparation for her appearance in 
public) had informed her of the mock 
ovation wdiich had greeted the companion's 
entree. 

Wlien Annie Sherwood entered the draw- 
ing-room, she bowed to the circle, precisely 
as if she had been a hired performer, but 
noticed no one in particular. 

" I will trouble you to place a table here," 
said she to a servant wdio was crossing the 



214 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

room. " Thank you ; candles on the tahle, 
if yon please. Be so good as to give me a 
chair. WiU yon bring me a thick volume 
which lies on the school-room table ?" 

Then Annie seated herself, and, dropping 
the dark fringed lids over her expressive 
eyes, sat composedly awaiting the servant's 
return. 

The book was brought ; Mr. Curzon him- 
self did Annie the honour of arranging the 
lights, which courtesy she acknowledged by 
a grave bow without looking towards him. 

Then, with as much sang froid as " the 
sublime Fanny" could have shown on a 
similar occasion, Annie said, in a peculiarly 
clear, sweet voice, " I shall have the honour 
of reading to you Shakspeare's Merchant of 
Venice^ Dramatis Tersonce^^ &c. 

No one spoke. Every eye turned on the 
reader. Lady Adelaide affected to yawn. 
She was sorry, very sorry, for her own act. 
She had brought down the "ugly gover- 
ness" to show that she w^ould, and also to 
enjoy her humiliation when assailed by ridi- 
cule. But now, now she feared that admi- 
rpition would take the place of that ridicule. 
The play began. The voice alone of the 
reader held every ear captive; but as she 



ANNE SHERAVOOD. 215 

warmed in her subject, as lier expressive 
countenance became animated and reflected 
every sbade of passion she sought to deh- 
neate, her audience became fascinated ; they 
quite forgot her identity with the school- 
room drudge, so excluded from intercourse 
with her noble patrons, so carefully hidden 
from their guests, as though too unsightly 
an object to be seen. And Annie soon for- 
got of whom her audience consisted. Reading 
her triumph in every eye, she rose to a proud 
height in her declamation ; - it ceased to be 
such — she became identified with every cha- 
racter, grave or gay, which she assumed. 
The coldest heart thrilled in listening to 
her, — the very coldest, except that of the 
proud Adelaide. The fiercest passion of 
envy was awakened in her bosom. She — 
she envious of the plain little governess ! 
— ^the fright ! — the dowdy, who had been as , 
a worm in her path ! She, the matchless 
beauty, who looked down on her as the 
eagle might gaze from its eyrie on the nest 
of the lowly wren ! 

When fatigue made Annie pause between 
the parts of the play, the men gathered 
round her, as they had gathered round poor 
little Dobson; but this time they were in 



216 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

earnest, quite in earnest, and Annie knew 
they were, but a half-disdainful smile curled 
her lips, and her only reply to their flatter- 
ing comphments was a cold how. The dis- 
dainful smile changed into one of radiant 
beauty when Claude Douglas approached and 
offered a few remarks which showed he had 
a just appreciation of the performance : in- 
deed, his expressive face had sufficiently 
shown the intense interest with which he 
had drunk in every word. 

Encouraged by her success, Annie began 
the second part, and proceeded with re- 
doubled feeling and animation. She did not 
direct her speech, nor even her eyes, to the 
one particular shady corner; but she was 
conscious that a person was seated there, 
whose applause was worth that of all else in 
the room, and, to win that applause, she 
surpassed herself. 

The play was over ; Annie closed the book 
and looked up, her face still radiant with 
the words she had just uttered ; but she 
caught a cold, cruel eye fixed on her, which 
soon recalled her to her senses, and reminded 
her " who and what she was'' Quickly reco- 
vering her self-possession, Annie bowed as 
at her entrance, and, amidst murmurs of ap-. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 217 

planse, made lier exit by a door wliicli she 
felt, rather than knew, was held open for 
her by Lord Claude Douglas. 

Annie walked with a firm step till out of 
sight ; but when she reached her own pre- 
cincts, fatigue and excitement overcoming 
her, she sank on a sofa and burst into tears. 
They were not tears of unmingled bitterness, 
nevertheless. True, she remembered Lady 
Adelaide's inexorable eye, — remembered, too, 
what it had promised her ; but beside that 
eye, she recalled a glance so beautiful in its 
soul-breathing expression, so long bent on 
her in respectful admiration, in appreciating 
interest, that the gracious memory chased 
away the painful one, and Annie sank into 
a charmed reverie — a reverie which Titania 
might have envied, and from which she was 
only aroused by some one addressing her. 

The light was imperfect, she could not at 
first distinguish her visitor : how great was 
Annie's surprise to find, by the tone, that it 
was none other than the aristocratic Mr. 
Curzon ! Could it be ? Was she awake, or 
dreaming ? Mr. Curzon had come to inquire 
whether she were fatigued by her exertions, 
to express a hope that she had taken some 
refreshment after so much fatigue, and to 



218 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

thank her for the delight she had given to 
his guests and himself ! 

What a silly dream that was ! Annie 
Sherwood rubbed her eyes, looked up, and 
beheld she was alone ! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 219 



CHAPTEE XIX. 

Not many days after the previous " scene/' 
as Lady Adelaide and her dame de compagnie 
designated Annie Sherwood's performance, 
her Ladyship took occasion to inform Mr. 
Cnrzon that she intended parting with the 
obnoxious governess. 

"That must not be," said Mr. Curzon, 
very decidedly. " We could not replace Miss 
Sherwood ; she understands the boys' charac- 
ters perfectly; their progress is immense. 
Moreover, they like her. Since she came to 
us, there are no more riots in the school-room. 
I can't imagine what has made you conceive 
such a design, Adelaide ! Certainly no fault 
in her ; she is most conscientious in the dis- 
charge of her duties." 

" I think she carries her independence to 
a height which reaches impertinence," said 
Lady Adelaide. " Her manner towards me 
is far from respectful." 

"But she is scarcely ever in your pre- 
sence." 



220 ANNE SHERAVOOD. 

" Excuse me, she always comes down at 
luncheon time." 

"Yes, for half-an-hour. Wliat does she 
say then ?" 

" Nothing : she never opens her lips ; but 
her very silence is impertinent." 

" Perhaps you never speak to her?" 

" I don't consider myself obliged to exert 
my conversational powers for a person in her 
position," said her Ladyship, haughtily. 

" You know that I did not mean to sup- 
pose such a thing," said Mr. Curzon. " But, 
of course, if you never speak to the poor 
gM 

" Poor girl !" repeated Lady Adelaide, con- 
temptuously. " She will never see thirty-five 
again !" 

" Well, that is quite unimportant," said 
Mr. Curzon. " But I must beg of you (as 
you see so little of Miss Sherwood, and as 
her offences are of such a negative kind) — I 
must beg of you not to disturb the boys' 
studies for a mere whim !" 

" Mr. Curzon !" said Adelaide. 

" I am sorry if the word offends you, Ade- 
laide." 

" I should think your introduction of such 
a person as Miss Sherwood to the drawing- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 221 

room for a theatrical display quite a sufficient 
insult to me, Mr. Curzon, without the pre- 
sent addition !" 

" My introduction, Lady Adelaide ! — you 
are dreaming ! You Avill next accuse me of 
having given your vile follower, Dohson, the 
entree of the drawing-room. Was it not at 
your desire that Miss Sherwood came dowm 
the other evening?" 

" ]N^o, at your entreaty." 

"I think not," said Mr. Curzon, rather 
softened, for he was flattered by the idea 
that his simple request had had more power 
than an absolute command. " But you must 
allow that she made no attempt to enter 
into conversation with any one, and withdrew 
most modestly directly she had finished 
reading. She has certainly never showm the 
least desire to be on familiar terms with us." 

''Familiar terms !" repeated Lady Adelaide. 
" She would find it rather difficult to be on 
famiHar terms wdth me !" 

" Assuredly she would," said Mr. Curzon, 
smiling. " But pray remember, Adelaide, 
that we must not think of making a change, 
or at least not till Sydney is fit for Harrow. 
He would rebel against any alteration in 
plans, I am sure he w^ould." 



222 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Then I must beg of you, Mr. Curzon, to 
allow Miss Sherwood to confine herself to 
her actual duties ; or, if she must rant for 
your pleasure, let it be in her own precincts, 
and for your edification alone. I give you a 
carte blanche to attend her rehearsals : you 
know, as I told you before, I am not a 
jealous wife." 

Lady Adelaide prided herself on her 
policy ; but she had shown herself very weak 
in the art. Thenceforth, Mr. Curzon thought 
of the governess as a very interesting victim, 
doubly interesting, inasmuch as he was 
now quite persuaded that she appreciated 
him ! Yes, she did appreciate Mr. Curzon ; 
but the result of her appreciation was some- 
thing very like contempt for his understand- 
ing, though he had been a member of Par- 
liament, an'^able speaker, and eke a minister 
of state ! 

Had Annie suspected the extent of Lady 
Adelaide's dislike to her, and her wish to get 
rid of one whom she had learnt to fear as a 
rival, she would immediately have given up 
her " preferment " in her Ladyship's family. 
As it was, she remained ignorant of the 
doom she had narrowly escaped, though per- 
fectly conscious that she found no favour in 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 223 

the eyes of lier patroness. Still lier pre- 
sent position was preferable to the actual 
persecution she had sometimes endured, and 
she resolved not to seek a change. 

Mr. Curzon and Lady Adelaide had so 
long lived a la mode, that, after a last fruitless 
attempt on the husband's part to establish 
domestic arrangements on a rational, if not 
a natural footing, their paths again diverged, 
and each sought their separate diversions and 
pleasures. Mr. Curzon had never gambled ; 
but now he turned, he scarcely knew why, to 
the billiard-table, while her Ladyship sud- 
denly acquired a taste for cards, which only 
stopped short of becoming a passion because 
she had no passions ! Mr. Curzon and Lady 
Adelaide frequently spent the evening in 
different mansions, — seldom appeared to- 
gether in public, unless he attended her to 
the Opera, or to the English Ambassador's. 

At the E all the English in Brussels 

occasionally appeared, though they invariably 
grumbled at the entertainment of their noble 
host. It was affirmed that at one of the 

rare dinner parties at Lord 's, a tureen 

placed on the table was found to contain 
nothing more delectable than cobwebs ! 
Brussels, however, is the favourite soil for 



224 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

scandal of all sorts, wliether it affects the 
modest reputation of a grisette, or the has- 
pitable reputation of an ambassador. 

Despite billiards, Mr. Curzon, divorced 
from his wonted patriotic labours, found time 
hang heavily on his hands. To the vexation 
and annoyance of Annie (who, of course, 
could not venture to protest against his 
visits), he came day after day into the school- 
room, to witness the studies and urge them 
on. He was full of condescension and encou- 
ragement. Annie dreaded his tiresome com- 
mendations far more than she had feared his 
former criticisms ; oft and again a sigh of 
relief escaped from her when he withdrew. 

Annie was never more called on for a 
Shakspearian reading in the drawing-room ; 
but she often read a play for the children's 
entertaiimient, and grew as animated with 
that scanty audience as though her hearers 
had been numerous. Sometimes Mr. Curzon 
would drop in at such a time, then the 
reader closed the book ; often, however, he 
pressed her to continue, hi a tone of such 
patronising tranquillity, mingled with con- 
descending compliments, that the request 
must be interpreted as a command. Glad 
and happy was the governess when the door 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 225 

closed behind her patron, and she was left 
alone to pursue her vagrant fancies in com- 
position, or to talk with Sydney. Not that 
the conversation of Sydney was all it ought 
to have been ; — it did not always fall on his 
books and studies, nor did it always con- 
sist of sage remarks ; for often, very often, 
his theme was his friend Lord Claude ; and 
foolish Annie, though she said nothing, 
always let him go on unchecked — there was 
one subject that never tired her ! 

Annie went out with her charges one 
bright spring morning, and Sydney, who 
was w^alking by her side, repeated the com- 
pliments Lord Claude had paid her perform- 
ance. The repetition of his encomiums was 
of course checked ; but very gently indeed, 
and the listener was not at all displeased 
with his Lordship for his praises, nor wdtli 
the child for re-echoing them. It was, as w^e 
have said, a very bright spring day, which 
perhaps accounted for Annie Sherwood's very 
recent discovery that Brussels was a beau- 
tiful city, and that the previously despised 
enclosure of the Park was the perfection of 
a public promenade. The trees w^ere now 
clothed in their freshest robes, their branches 
were gently swayed by the most musical of 

VOL. II. Q 



226 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

breezes, and the lofty avenues looked at once 
graceful and majestic, where bright flow^ers 
sprang up every here and there, and per- 
fumed the atmosphere. The bundles of 
straw had disappeared, and in their places 
stood some white marble statues of great 
beauty, — especially beautiful was a Diana. 
The fountain, too, had burst from its long 
sleep, and in its waters sported a multitude of 
gold-fish, which some gaily-dressed children 
were feeding. There w^as a tolerably good 
musical performance taking j)lace in a kind 
of rotunda, raised in the middle of the Park, 
and inscribed with the names of eminent 
composers. The rotunda wore the air of a 
temple dedicated to genius. 

From one of the Park entrances is seen a 
noble view of the magnificent "Place," with its 
fine equestrian statue of the great Crusader, 
Godefroi de Bouillon. At that entrance, 
Annie and her pu.pils paused a moment in 
admiration ; they then went dowai a slope 
into one of those pleasant shady bas-fonds in 
which the unfortunate Hollanders (in the 
Belgian Eevolution) fought and fell like so 
many lions at bay : they were buried wdiere 
they feU. 

Seated on the turf, near a small fountain 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 227 

(consecrated by tlie memory of Peter the 
Great), was a gentleman whom (although his 
back was turned) all the little party recog- 
nised. 

"We were just talking of you, Lord 
Claude !" said Sydney. " I have been telling 
Miss Sherwood all you said about The 
Merchant of Venice, and about her !" 

Lord Claude looked pleased with his own 
thoughts, or with the boy's naivete, and 
taking one of the children's hands, imme- 
diately joined them in their promenade. 

For a little time they walked on in silence, 
listening to the sweet strains from the 
rotunda as they came to them, softened by 
the slight distance. It w^as foohsli, vain, 
w^eak-minded ; but yet Annie Sherwood had 
not felt such happiness since the days of her 
childhood, as she experienced that hour walk- 
ing beside the acquaintance of a day. Wliat 
right had she so to feel ! Assuredly none ; 
and there was no one at hand to remind her 
of her now forgotten position — no one to 
point out the gulf which rank and fortune 
had placed between the daughter of a poor, 
obscure, country vicar, and the high-born 
heir to splendid titles and princely fortunes ! 
Perhaps it was well there was none to awaken 
Q 2 



228 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

her from her dream, it was such a pleasant 
one — she would have so few such through 
life. At a pause in the music, Lord Claude 
began to tallv, in a voice sweeter than the 
music which had preceded it, and told Annie 
the story of all the interesting spots in the 
fair city. He told her to go and walk some 
twilight hour in the grand old cathedral, and 
watch the effect of the dying day on the rich 
tombs, as it streamed through the gorgeous 
coloured glass of the wdndow^s. He told her 
to look, too, at the exquisite sculpture of 
Verbruggen, which forms the pulpit, or 
rather supports it. 'Tis the first father of 
men, with his fair partner in sin and sorrow, 
drooping under the oppressive sense of un- 
accustomed guilt, and driven forth from 
Paradise ; but their hands are tightly clasped, 
as though love must be to them in future, 
instead of the Eden they had lost. Death, the 
newly-created enemy, hovers over, to remind 
them that their love is to be an ephemera 
like their existence. Then Claude repeated 
" De Musset's" lines— 

" Oui, les premiers baisers— oui, les premiers serments. 
Que deux etres mortels echangerent sur terre, 
Ce fut au pied d'un arbre effeuillc par les vents 
Sur uu roc en poussiere. 



AKNE SHERWOOD. 229 

"lis prirent a temoia de leur joie epheraere 
Un ciel toujours voile qui change a tout moment, 
Et des astres sans nom, que leur propre lumicre 
Devore incessamment. 

" Tout niourait autour d'eux, I'oiseau dans le feuillage, 
La fleur entre leurs mains, I'insecte sous leurs pieds, 
La source dessecliee oii vaciUait I'image 
De leurs traits oublies ; 

" Et sur tous ces debris joignant leurs mains d'argile, 
Etourdis des eclairs d'un instant de plaisir, 
lis croyaient echapper " 

This melancholy picture awoke Annie from 
her pleasant dream; but her new acquain- 
tance, passing rapidly from grave to gay, 
drew such lively satires of the Beiges and 
their miniature court, that the tears which 
had gathered in Annie Sherwood's eyes were 
chased away by smiles. 

The little party returned to the more 
public promenade. It was almost entirely 
filled by crow^ds of fashionables, dressed in 
the liveliest colours they could assume with- 
out overstepping the bounds of taste. Here 
and there might be seen a bourgeoise, wear- 
ing a black silk mantle over her head — a 
remnant and remembrance of the graceful 
Spanish mantilla, that looks at once " both 
mystical and gay." Among the crowd 
walked two fair youths, with gentle, modest 



230 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

demeanours, bowing low every now and tlien, 
in acknowledgment of the respectful homage 
they received. The elder bore an unmis- 
takeable likeness to his royal father — once an 
eminently handsome man — the younger, to a 
regal but exiled ancestor. Altogether there 
was far less of state and conscious position 
about those two young and beautiful princes, 
than was affected by the footman of the 
Curzon family. 

When mingling with the crowd of gaily- 
clad, smiling fashionables, with whom she 
had probably not one feeling in common, 
Annie felt depressed and solitary, barely 
conscious that her newly-found, fascinating 
acquaintance was still walking by her side, 
and occasionally addressing her in the most 
charming of all voices ; but even that voice 
lost some of its music in a crowd. 

How Annie started ! "What a vague pain 
went through her heart when Claude Douglas, 
disengaging his hand from that of the child 
with whom he was walking, bowed, and 
hastily turning away, joined a group of ladies 
he had just met in the avenue. He walked 
beside the youngest and fairest. She was 
beautiful, and had all the entourage of adorn- 
ment to enhance her beauty, and all the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 231 

consciousness of loveliness to make iier 
doubly charming. She was, moreover, a 
high-born lady — you could see that in the 
long arching neck, the straight nose, the 
dainty little foot. And how sweetly she 
smiled on Lord Claude Douglas ! How 
plainly her eyes said, " I have singled you 
out in this throng — I have forgotten all 
others — I see but you !" 

What right had that plain little gover- 
ness, in a shabby brown merino dress, and a 
coarse straw bonnet, to look after the beau- 
tiful smiling lady, and to wish, even for a 
moment, that they might exchange places ! 
Oh ! the world is full of vain wishes and 
foolish aspirations ! No wonder poor Annie 
had some. She was very lonely, very sad, 
as she turned from that scene in which she 
had no share, and began her solitary evening 
by reading over all Antonia's old letters. 
It is so difficult to forget old loves and old 
friendships 1 So much more difficult if they 
have proved as the apples of Sodom, beautiful 
without, but within — ashes ! 

The letters had been all read and replaced 
in the desk, together with a lock of long 
dark hair, severed from Antonia's head on 
the day when she had said, with all the 



282 ANNE SHERAVOOD. 

warmth of sincerity, " There is no scene of 
my future hfe in which you are not mingled ; 
no plan, for days to come, in which you 
have not a part !" The wreck of such a 
friendship on the world's quicksands was 
enough to chill a heart's warmest pulses ; it 
had all hut hroken Annie Sherwood's. 
" Cold words will hreak the fine heart, even 
as sharp frost will shiver the delicate crystal." 

Annie was going up to her sleeping-room, 
there to deposit her treasures (for Antonia's 
letters were still treasures to her) ; she loved 
them, as she loved the writer, for the past. 
She passed Lady Adelaide's dressing-room. 
The door was open ; her Ladyship sat before 
a cheval glass which reached the floor, and 
reflected the whole of her fair form, from 
the crown of golden hair (in which her maid 
was arranging jewels scarcely brighter), 
down to the aristocratic foot in the small 
white satin slipper. The dark stufi' gown of 
the governess seemed to cast a shadow over 
the light silvery dress in which the beautiful 
woman was arrayed to appear in a loge 
d' opera. 

" Miss Sherwood," said her Ladyship. The 
governess stood still. " Come in." She 
entered. " I wish you to go to 's 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 233 

Library, Montagne cle la Cour, and to ask 
for the Yicomte de Bragelonne." 

'' To-morrow, Lady Adelaide ?" 

" 'No ; this evening." 

"Alone?" 

" Yes ; it is too late for the children to 
go out." 

" May I desire one of the servants to go 
with me ?" 

" Certainly not, or they might do the 
errand. You don't require any protection." 

Annie withdrew without making any 
reply, without once looking up. She would 
not raise her eyes to the proud beauty's 
triumphant smile, though she knew it w^as 
there. They were lighting the gas in the 
streets. It was twilight. Annie went forth 
as she was desired, executed her commission ; 
but knowing the town imperfectly, she lost 
her way, and wandered on in uncertainty, till 
she stood in the midst of the old " Place," 
with its beautiful Hotel de Yille, so like a 
venerable church. Li the twilight, one may 
look round the picturesque square, with its 
middle-age aspect, till we fancy ourselves 
back to the days of Froissart. Here the 
most august potentate of his age resigned the 
splendours of the purple, and laid down the 



234 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

sceptre ere it had grown too heavy for en- 
feebled hands — greater in renouncing empire 
than others in attaining it. Here had perished 
the great-hearted patriots, Egmont andHorn; 
here the savage Alva had gloated over their 
heroically endured sufferings ! 

But a busy crowd of market people were 
clearing away the stands and stalls on wdiich 
they ]iad just displayed their w^ares, and 
jostling against Annie, roughly reminded her 
that she had stood too long gazing. So she 
went on with a quickened step, and at length 
regained her home — no, not her home, Mr. 
Curzon's house ; and the footman stared as 
he let her in so late, and promised himself 
a joke with the housemaid, at the expense 
of the demure governess, who had been 
wandering out alone till nine o'clock at 
night 1 

The next evening, finding herself unex- 
pectedly released from her charges at an 
unwontedly early hour, Annie ventured to 
steal out on her owai account, and hastily 
walked towards the cathedral. A special 
service was celebrating ; she took a conve- 
nient station, from which she could at once 
contemplate the effect of the setting sun on 
the gorgeous windows, and also examine the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 235 

piece of sculpture wliicli Lord Claude had 
pointed out to her attention. 

Por some time Annie stood motionless, 
lulled into a pleasing sadness by the ex- 
quisite music which floated around her, as 
well as by the scene she witnessed. 

" You are dreaming l" said a low, sweet 
voice close beside her, in Trench. 

"Of Paradise r answered Annie, as Claude, 
slightly bowing, passed on. She stood quite 
still, as if fearing to dissolve a spell ; when 
at length she left the church, she involun- 
tarily whispered, " Ut cefut tm reve r 

"When Annie re-entered it was half-past 
seven, too late for a young woman to have 
been wandering out alone, even to enjoy an 
innocent, poetical dream ; but then she had 
been just told that a governess needed no 
protection, and she had been so long treated 
as one quite divorced from youth, that she 
sometimes forgot what was suitable ! Be- 
sides, she had for months acted as chaperon 
to the elderly charms of a lady of fifty 1 

And when Annie received a reprimand for 
her excursion to the cathedral, she did think 
her Ladyship rather inconsistent and un- 
reasonable. She became more sensible than 
ever of Lady Adelaide's growing dislike to 



236 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

lier, and resolved to relinquish lier post. 
She was now neither destitute nor friendless : 
she might withdraw if she chose ; she had 
not Ellen to think of, before she decided on 
giving up the many advantages she enjoyed 
in the very aristocratic family of Mr. Curzon. 
Yes, she would leave ; but not just yet. She 
had not seen any of the interesting things 
Lord Claude had told her she ought to see. 
She must see them ; she would stay a few 
months longer for that purpose, and also 
that she might improve her Trench ! Of 
course, Annie could have no other reason ! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 237 



CHAPTEE XX. 

Despite Lady Adelaide's contemptuous man- 
ner to Annie, and the depreciating remarks 
in which she indulged whenever accident or 
design made her the subject of conversation, 
she had become an object of curiosity, if not 
of interest, to many of her Ladyship's aris- 
tocratic acquaintance. Several of them gra- 
ciously determined to extend to her the 
honour and advantage of their notice, 
of course with the full conviction that she 
would be sensible of that honour and advan- 
tage, and ready gratefully to meet their ad- 
vances on their own terms. They were all 
gentlemen ! 

One day Annie found a beautiful bouquet 
on her table. She contemplated it with ill- 
concealed dehght, for she had a silly fancy 
that those bright flowers were chosen and 
sent by the reigning hero of her imagina- 
tion. To say that she was flattered by the 
gift, would be to say too little. 

The boys watched her while she held the 



238 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

flowers so caressingly, and their smiling tell- 
tale faces made lier think she was betra}dng 
her thonghts. So, contenting herself with a 
stolen look now and then, she pnt the flow^ers 
in a vase and pursued her avocations. How 
much less dingy and sombre the school- 
books and slates looked that day! How 
bright the sky was ! How many a sun- 
beam strayed in and lit up the lonely room 1 
The children were less tiresome than usual, 
or they seemed so to her ; Lady Adelaide's 
supercilious looks, and even her words at 
luncheon, had lost half their power to w^ound. 
The only thing really tiresome and vexatious 
that day, was Mr. Curzon's half-hour's 
prosing, about matters of which he under- 
stood little or nothing ! 

In the evening Mr. Curzon and Lady 
Adelaide went out in two separate direc- 
tions. The boys spent that evening with 
Annie. Lord Claude w^as expected to peep 
in. He was going to a state ball at the 
Palace, and had promised Sydney to show 
himself to him first, in the Highland garb, 
which he intended to assume ; for he was a 
true Scot, and prou.d of being one. 

" You wont let Lord Claude come up here. 
Miss Sherwood, I suppose?" said Sydney, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 239 

well remembering the misuccessful efforts 
made by several gentlemen, who thought 
themselves quite irresistible, to gain ingress 
to the regions over which Annie presided. 
" There he is 1 I hear the carriage stopping ! 
Ah ! I see by your face that you mean him 
to come up ! You know he is not like the 
rest ; don't you ?" 

Before Annie could make any reply, the 
boy w^as bounding over the staircase, voci- 
ferating, '' Come up. Lord Claude 1 Come up 
to the school-room ! Will you come ?" 

" Have I Miss Sherwood's permission ?" 

" Oh, yes 1 all's right ! — she'll be very glad 
to see you." 

And Annie was glad, though ashamed and 
confused that her feelings should be inter- 
preted so plainly. 

How^ grand he looked 1 that nobly-born 
man, with his tall, elegant figure, clad in the 
tartan of his clan, a tightly-fitting, black 
velvet-jacket, wdth massive silver ornaments, 
resplendent Avith cairn-gorms ! How fine 
that face, shaded with raven locks, and lit 
by those lustrous, speaking eyes ! It was at 
once a countenance of power and gentleness, 
proud yet tender, spirited yet yielding. 

Lord Claude's salutation of Annie was at 



240 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

once full of deference and cordiality. He 
was less animated than usual ; but that was 
as if to assure her of his respect. He re- 
mained ten minutes or a quarter of an hour 
talking to her and the children ; fortunately 
not longer, or Miss Dobson might have 
grow^n tired of kneeling outside the school- 
room door, alternately applying ear and eye 
to the keyhole. 

" You have a beautiful bouquet," said 
Lord Claude to Annie, Avhen, for the boys' 
edification, he had finished the separate his- 
tories of '' philibeg," " sporran," " dirk," 
" skian-dhu," &c. &c. 

" Yes," said Annie, colouring, as if the 
flowers were stolen. 

" I have seen it before," said Lord Claude, 
looking very hard at Annie, and seeming 
very serious. 

" Have you, my Lord ?" stammered she, 
quite conscious of the look that was bent on 
her, but entirely misinterpreting its meaning, 
and not daring to raise her own eyes. 

" Yes, I have ; but do you know what the 
bouquet says to you?" 

" No, my Lord." 

" Then you do not know the language of 
the flowers ?" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 241 

" I know it very imperfectly." 

" May I be your interpreter ?" 

" If yon will be so obliging." 

" Perhaps yon already divine from wliom 
it comes ?" 

Annie's only reply was the deep crimson 
whicli suffused her face and neck ; for worlds 
she could not have spoken. 

" It means," said Lord Claude, very slowly^ 
'' it means a declaration of love ; so fervent,, 
that if it were equally sincere and respectful, 
it would be worth a king's ransom." Then 
pointing to each separate flower, he gave a 
brief interpretation of its signification, aU the 
while looking as serious as though he had 
been enlarging on the best interests of 
humanity. " The clock upbraids me !" said 
Lord Claude, starting, as he accidentally 
caught sight of the timepiece. 

" With the waste of time !" said Annie, 
finishing the quotation. 

" No," replied Claude ; '' with a lesser sin, 
the want of punctuality. I have an appoint- 
ment at the Hotel de I'Europe before I 
proceed to the Palace. But to return to 
*the theme,' — have you untied the ribbon 
which bound the bouquet ?" 

'' No," said Annie, " I did not like to — I 

VOL. II. R 



242. ANNE SHERWOOD. 

mean, I have not." " Ah, certainly lie must 
have sent them!" thought Annie; "how 
else could he know of the ribbon which tied 
the flowers together, and which the vase 
in which they were placed entirely con- 
cealed ?" 

" They will die if they continue so tightly 
bound," said Lord Claude; "you should 
loosen and give them fresh water; indeed 
you should cut the ends of the stems — at 
least, if you care for prolonging their brief 
life !" 

" Assuredly I do, my Lord." 

"They seem very precious to you?" 

Annie gave no answer in words, but she 
looked very much as if they were precious 
indeed. 

" Let me cut the gordian knot before I 
depart," said Claude. " Have I your leave ?" 

Before Annie could reply, he drew forth 
his skian-dliu. 

" Do you know whence my weapon takes 
its name ?" he asked. 

" No, indeed, my Lord." 

"It is called skian-dliu, or black -knife, 
because of the dark deeds it was wont to 
perpetrate in the so-called good old times," 
said Claude, as he cut most relentlessly 



ANNE SHERWOOD. ^4S 

tlu'ough several of the most beautiful flowers, 
utterly destro3dng them. 

" Oh, my Lord, spare them ! they are so 
beautiful !" exclaimed Amiie, with more 
fervour than the occasion demanded, and 
stooping to pick up some of the severed 
petals. 

" Forgive my spoliation," said Claude. 
" How wicked I have been, though ! See, I 
have actually annihilated the most impas- 
sioned part of the message !" and, as he 
spoke, the skian-dhu passed through the rose- 
coloured ligature, and from the heart of the 
bouquet a little billet fell at Annie's feet. 
" I hope I have your forgiveness to bear with 
me !" said he, and bowing, withdrew ere 
Annie could reply, or recover from her sur- 
prise and vexation at finding herself, as she 
supposed, trifled with by the last man in 
the world from whom she could have 
expected a deliberate insult, and as an insult 
she could not help considering the billet so 
clandestinely conveyed. 

But Annie's indignation was considerably 
heightened, when on opening her note, she 
found that it conveyed a high-flown but 
really insultmg declaration from the old roue 
Colonel ! She was angry with Lord Claude 
R 2 



244 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

angry with herself. She felt sure that she 
had betrayed a childish pleasure in the pos- 
session of the unfortunate bouquet, while 
supposing that it came from Claude ; with 
him she was angry for witnessing her folly, 
and probably putting his own interpretation 
on it. But how did he know from wdiom it 
came ? What could have inspired him w^ith 
the design of mocking her credulity ? How 
came it about that her mortification took 
place in his presence? The result of her 
annoyance was, that the pretty, pink-scented 
note Avas torn into as many pieces as it could 
produce, and the rare flowers shred petal from 
petal, as if Annie had been repeating over 
and over again, " // maime un 2^eu, tendre- 
ment, constamment, pas die tout f in that 
pretty floral fortune-telling wdiich romantic 
girls love so much. Poor Annie ! how that 
day's gleam of brightness passed away 1 
How she remembered a tliousand little 
trifles of an annoying nature, which she had 
disdained to notice a few hours earlier ! 
How^ bitter her tears w^ere that night ! 
How firm were her resolutions of leavin<r 
the Curzons, though she had not seen one- 
eighth part of the lions of Brussels, nor 
even caught a distant glimpse of the glorious 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 245 

field on which the defeat of a stricken easrle, 
when soaring beyond the limits of humanity, 
had changed the face of the w^orld. Lady Ade- 
laide had been several times to Waterloo — 
had taken the children there; but it had never 
occurred to her to let the governess occupy 
the vacant seat, with the back to the horses ; 
she would rather have given it to her maid ! 

The morning following her discomfiture, 
Annie and the boys met Lord Claude in the 
Park. He immediately joined them, and 
after the usual greeting, said — 

" T am afraid I offended you yesterday 
evening, Miss Sherwood." 

"You did offend me, my Lord," said 
Annie, deliberately. 

" By destroying your bouquet ?" 

"No, my Lord, but by suffering me to 
receive it : as you appear to have been quite 
aware of the insult intended to be offered 
me — the deepest insult which could be offered 
to a woman in my unprotected situation." 

"Miss Sherwood, you astonish me !" 

" Possibly, my Lord ; it would astonish 
most of the great world in which you move, 
perhaps, to find that any person in my 
position has sufficient refinement to feel an 
insult, or enough spirit to resent it." 



246 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" But, surely, you cannot believe me ca- 
pable of " 

" I do suppose you, my Lord, capable of 
having, as you yourself remarked, seen tliat 
unfortunate bouquet in otlier bands than 
mine; and, from your observations and action, 
I perceived that you knew something of its 
contents." 

" What then, Miss Sherwood ?" 

" What then, my Lord 1 It may be that 
my estimate of you w^as false ; it may be 
that I have exaggerated the consideration 
due to a defenceless woman ; but from you, 
my Lord — from you I should have expected 
that, instead of enjoying my surprise and 
embarrassment — instead of drawing from me 
childish expressions of pleasure (which never 
would have been uttered had I known from 
whence the odious gift came) — ^yes, how- 
ever unreasonable, I should have expected 
that you would have offered a remonstrance 
to Colonel Annesley, or at least have warned 
me of the insult I was going to receive." 

" And your expectations would have been 
perfectly just," said Claude, who had listened 
quite calmly, though Avith respectful atten- 
tion ; " but I assure you (on the word of an 
honour which has never been forfeited) that 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 247 

though I certainly saw the Colonel choose 
the bouquet in the Passage St. Hubert, and 
saw him insert a billet in the centre, then 
carefully tie round it a piece of pink ribbon, 
I had no idea for whom it was destined. 
At least I made a very mistaken conjecture 
on the subject ; for seeing him disappear 
immediately afterwards in a shop at the end 
of the Passage (which is equally famous for 
Scotch buns, and for two showy-looking 
Scotch girls), I really supposed it intended 
to propitiate one of them. Indeed, I did 
not give the affair a second thought, till, re- 
cognising the bouquet on your table, I must 
own I felt desirous to know whether you had 
found the billet. I acknowledge, too, that 
I was struck with your seeming delight in 
receiving the flowers, and " 

" The flowers, Lord Claude," interrupted 
Sydney, who had caught the last words 
only. " Are you talking of Miss Sherwood's 
bouquet ?" 

" I am, Sydney." 

" Well, then, I can tell you we were all 
nicely taken in by it — Miss Sherwood and all !" 

" What do you mean ?" 

" Why, we all thought it was a present 
from you !" 



248 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Me !" exclaimed Claude ; wliile Annie 
looked very mucli as if she would be greatly 
relieved by a sudden earthquake which would 
swallow her up. 

. " Yes/' said Sydney, '' it was one of your 
servants brought them." 

" One of my servants ?" 

" Yes, your German, Heinrich." 

" If this be really so," exclaimed Claude, 
*' he shall leave my service directly." 

" Oh, not so, my Lord ; not so, on my 
account, I beseech you," said Annie. " This 
affair has made me very wretched. I should 
be yet more so, were any one to suffer on my 
account." 

" It must be so," said Claude, hurriedly ; 
"it is the only reparation I can offer you. 
If the fellow has hired himself as the instru- 
ment of Colonel Annesley's baseness, he de- 
serves punishment. And yet I am sorry for 
his disgrace. I always thought him honest 
before, and attached to me. He nursed me 
through a long illness at Manheim." 

" This is his first offence, and it will very 
likely be his last, my Lord," pleaded Annie. 
" Pray, pray forgive him ! I have made a 
foolish fuss about this affair. Do let it be 
forgotten !" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 249 

Not that Annie, though she thus spoke, 
ever would forget it — it had caused her too 
much humiliation — but she was w^ell pleased 
with Lord Claude's explanation. 

Before leaving her, he, with peculiar 
tact, succeeded in giving Annie so many 
things to think about, so many new thoughts 
to analyse, that she could not dwell as con- 
stantly on Colonel Annesley's offence as she 
otherwise would have done. The affair for- 
tunately did not reach Lady Adelaide's ears 
in detail. The children were very httle with 
their mother. When they were, they never 
climbed her knees, as other children would, 
to tell their mother all that had happened, 
and more than had happened ! Miss 
Dobson's tale was imperfect, from the 
fact of her having been unable to apply 
both eye and ear to the keyhole at the 
same time. Lady Adelaide seldom made 
any direct inquiries (except of Dobson), 
lest she should fancy herself of too much 
importance. 

A fortnight later, Lady Adelaide acci- 
dentally entered the school-room. She came 
there in quest of a History of France (her 
Ladyship was reading a novel of Dumas, 
and wanted to learn lolio Henry the Great 



250 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

was. Probably other reasons miglit have 
brought her to regions with which she was 
so little acquainted. 

A bouquet, at least as beautiful as Colonel 
Annesley's, was on the table. Lady Adelaide 
deliberately took it from the vase, and threw 
the crushed, broken flowers into the fire- 
place, remarking that the smell was unwhole- 
some for the children. Annie neither moved 
nor spoke, but carefully closed the door after 
her Ladyship. Those were not Colonel 
Annesley's flowers ; Annie had, however, 
some reason for valuing them. She knelt 
down before the fire-place, and gathering up 
the broken flowers, put them in a sheet of 
paper, and locked them in her desk, all the 
time as tearful as a child whose pet canary 
has died, and caused her " first grief." 

Poor, foolish Annie ! She knew that she 
was dreaming an idle dream, that would end 
in darkness. She knew that she was setting 
up an idol to worship, that would haply fall 
from the high altar whereon she had placed 
it, and crush her in its fall ! But a woman 
in love for the first and last time, at an age 
when the heart clings to its choice wdth a 
tenacity of which earlier youth is incapable, 
seldom reasons, nor did she. She little, little 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 251 

knew that when the proud scion of a noble 
house had first addressed her, he had been 
greatly prompted by the compassion of a 
generous nature : compassion for her lonely 
lot — her life of trial and oppression. She 
little knew that the first time of their meet- 
ing he had mentally decided that there could 
exist no danger to his heart, in showing 
sympathy for, and interest in, so plain a 
w^oman 1 True, he soon felt drawn towards 
her by respect and admiration — soon reahzed 
the existence of real beauty in her, irrespec- 
tive of mere form and colouring; but Lord 
Claude was a man of the world, and he was 
not in love ! 

Annie did not wait to think whether he 
were or were not ; she had enough to do to 
watch over herself, lest one unguarded look 
or act should lead to the betrayal of her pre- 
sumptuous secret. Presumptuous, indeed — 
and yet, who could blame the poor lonely 
girl for her foolish dream? Shut from all 
society, excluded from all converse bat that 
of books and her own thoughts, week after 
week, month after month went by, and not 
a human being crossed her path who ad- 
dressed one word of sympathy or kindness to 
her excepting Claude Douglas, and accident 



252 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

or fate threw him constantly in her path. 
Did she go out into the crowded promenade, 
his was the first smile that greeted her ; did 
she lead the children to some quiet spot, he 
was there reading. Perhaps it was poetry 
he read ; then he w^ould lend her the volume, 
lining the passages which he thought the 
most striking or beautiful. She was sure to 
think of them as he thought. 

Besides these apparently accidental rencoji- 
/r^5, Sydney constantly drew Lord Claude into 
the school-room ; once there, he seemed to 
forget time — certainly Annie forgot it ! Some- 
times Claude came in with Mr. Curzon, osten- 
sibly to note the children's progress, but 
really because Annie's society had become 
necessary to him — he said her conversation 
was so varied, her reading so extensive, her 
taste so pure and true ; yet her mind was so 
free from pedantry. 

The day seemed long to Claude when he 
had not seen Annie — the societyof his fashion- 
able friends vapid and tiresome ; but he was 
not in love — how could he be so with a plain 
little governess, dressed in brown merino? 
No, Claude was net in love ! 

As for Lady Adelaide, she looked on, and 
wondered with a contemptuous wonder. She 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 253 

was prevented dismissing Annie by Mr. Cur- 
zon, so she could not abruptly get rid of her, 
but she could and did make her life very 
wretched — so wretched, that she would pro- 
bably leave of herself. In this plan Lady 
Adelaide would have found full success, but 
that Annie was now chained to her bondage 
by stronger links than the deepest poverty 
ever wove. 

Lady Adelaide did not understand her; she 
knew her pride, she knew her resolution, but 
she did not know her ^s^oman's heart. She 
did not know how long, how enduringly the 
poor oppressed governess would bear the 
daily torture of insults and sneers, rather 
than cease to hear the music of a loved voice, 
that made all discord harmony. 

Mr. Curzon, happy, self-satisfied Mr. Cur- 
zon, the last man in the world who would 
have done a dishonourable thing advisedly, 
or thought an evil thought unless it were 
suggested to him, applauded himself for his 
management, considered that his children 
were profiting very much by Miss Sherwood's 
labours, scarcely less by the constant pre- 
sence of Lord Claude, who so kindly gave up so 
much of his time to them, and had actually 
volunteered to direct Sydney's French studies. 



254 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

It never occurred to him that Lord Claude 
was reading aloud, for Sydney's edification, 
French books which Sydney could not un- 
derstand, and to which Sydney did not even 
pretend to listen. Mr. Curzon never noticed 
that Andre Chenier was sometimes ex- 
changed for Petrarca, Lamartine and Victor 
Hugo for Goethe. 

When the tired governess seemed to have 
cast off her manteau de plomh, and looked 
radiantly happy, Mr. Curzon thought she 
was animated by gratitude for his con- 
descending kindness, and applauded himself 
as the most just and liberal of employers. 
After all, it was a great pleasure to oneself 
to make poor dependents happy ! Mr. Curzon 
almost wished lie had tried the experiment 
before. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 255 



CHAPTEE XXI. 

*' I NEED not be in a liurry to choose my 
wife !" remarked Sydney, with the pose air 
of a man who had spent a dozen seasons in 
the great world. " I shall only have to look 
round and fix wherever fancy leads me. Of 
course, however, I shall remember who I 
am. Ought I not to do so, Lord Claude ?" 

" Assuredly," said Lord Claude, smiling ; 
" but really, Sydney, there seems very little 
danger of your forgetting who you are. I 
sometimes wish I could forget who I am." 

" I can't think why you should, my Lord ; 
if I were you, I should be too proud of my- 
self to want to forget for a minute." 

" But I am not the least proud of myself," 
said Claude, sighing ; " and often wdsli I were 
any one else." 

"For what would you exchange, my 
Lord ?" asked Annie Sherwood, who was very 
much of Sydney's way of thinking. 

" For what ?" said Claude, starting. " Oh, 
for some poor, ambitious artist, battling his 



256 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

way lip to fame and distinction; for some 
aspiring soldier, cutting out a patent of real 
nobility for liimself by his sword. To be 
born accidentally noble is, if one has any 
aspirations, a thorough weariness. To be 
distinguished accidentally, and lack real no- 
bility, is next to the wretchedness of being 
a monarch by fate, and being such only in 
name. Do you remember, Miss Sherwood, 
the passage in * Sardanapalus,' in which he 
wishes to share ' a cottage ' with Myrrha 
' on the Caucasus, and wear no crown but 
Howlers ?' " 

" A very stupid wish, m}^ Lord," said 
Sydney. '' A crown is a very pretty bauble, 
whatever people may say." 

" Most men must think it such," said 
Annie, " or why is it that so very few 
instances are recorded of those who have 
had strength of mind to refuse a throne ?" 

" Cromwell and Washington are a host in 
themselves," said Claude. 

" Don't put those two names together," 
said Annie, warmly. " Cromwell only re- 
fused the crown more firmly to grasp kingly 
power ; but the great, the Eoman-heai*ted 
Washington desired neither power nor the 
emblem of power." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 257 

" True ; I was irreverently mixing fine 
gold with alloy," said Claude. '' But if, as 
you say, men have so rarely strength to 
resist a crown's temptation, we have little 
right to condemn usurpation." 

" I think, my Lord, that we have a right 
to condemn usurpation, but none to be 
severe upon the usurper, when the strength 
of his temptation is considered. I have 
always thought Napoleon too harshly cen- 
sured for accepting the vacant throne of the 
country he had rescued from anarchy — ac- 
cepting it at a moment when his mind must 
have been equally dazzled by the applause 
of millions, and the light of his own genius. 
By-the-bye, did you not attend Lady Ade- 
laide to Waterloo the other day ?" 

"To Waterloo, Miss Sherwood? Vous 
oubliez que je suis Fran^ais 1" 

*' Indeed, indeed, I forgot," exclaimed 
Annie ; " if I had remembered " 

'' I was merely jesting," said Claude, laugh- 
ing ; " my interest is equally strong in both 
countries. I am proud of being a Briton, 
but France is very dear to me, — my heart 
clings to my mother's country. I often 
think how natural was the young King of 
Bome's exclamation, 'Moi aussi, je suis 

VOL. II. s 



258 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Fran^ais V Yes, I divide my affections 
between France and England. You know 
what De Belloi says — 

* Le ciel en misericorde au reste de la terre. 
Fit separer la France^ et I'Aiigleterre par la mer.' 

But how desultory our conversation is be- 
coming ! We want Frobel here to square 
our ideas. He proposes teaching children 
mathematics from the cradle." 

" I am glad Frobel is not my tutor," said 
Sydney. " I hate mathematics !" Then, 
abruptly enough, the boy added, " Lord 
Claude, why don't you marry ?" 

*' I can give you a Yerj good reason for 
my old bachelorship, Sydney," said Claude, 
laughing ; ''I cannot make a choice which 
would please myself, and please the world 
at the same time." 

" The world I I thought you cared nothing 
about the world. Are you not always 
laughing at me for thinking of rank and 
fashion, and those things ?" 

" True, Sydney ; but we are all, whatever 
we may profess, more or less cowardly with 
regard to the opinions of a world we pretend 
to despise. But, may I ask, what has set 
your brain the task of speculating on your 
own marriage and mine ?" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 259 

" Oh ! nothing very pai-ticular, only I was 
wondering, as Lord Dryburgh has no sons, 
and yon are the next heir, who would come 
after you. I wish you could adopt an heir, 
as they used to in old Eome !" 

" Why, my boy ?" 

" Because then I hope you would choose 
me. I should make a very good Marquis of 
Dryburgh. I should, as papa would say, 
represent the family with dignity." 

" Indeed ! Well, so much for your specu- 
lations on one subject ; now for your matri- 
monial prospects T' 

" To tell you the truth, I have been playing 
at la grace every day for six weeks with 
Alicia Seymour; and I am beginning to 
wonder whether she will suppose I mean to 
pay her serious attentions ! She is really a 
very pretty girl, but she would not be a 
match for me ! What do you think, my 
Lord ?" 

" Think, Sydney ! I think that you may 
continue to play at la grace with Alicia for 
seven or eight years to come without the 
least danger of your attentions being mis- 
construed ; after that period they might be 
open to misconstruction 1" 

" Thank you, my Lord, for your advice," 



260 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

replied the boy, drawing himself up with an 
air of grave self-satisfaction. " I really 
should not like to break with her at present ! 
What should you do, my Lord, if you had 
been drawn in to paying attention to a 
person of an unsuitable rank to your own ?" 

" Eeally, your mature speculations puzzle 
me, Sydney !" said Claude, with a heightened 
colour. " Miss Sherwood, you must pursue 
a very eccentric plan in this boy's edu- 
cation !" 

"I do not claim the credit of forming 
Sydney's character, my Lord," said Annie ; 
'' Lady Adelaide particularly pointed out to 
me that I was simply to furnish his head." 

"And his heart?" 

" Is left to nature ; its spontaneous growth 
has never been interfered with, as far as I 
know." 

" Of course not," said Sydney ; "to inter- 
fere with my natural bent would, indeed, be 
useless labour. I was born w^hat I am !" 

Lord Claude sighed and looked thoughtful ; 
Annie thought he looked sad. She had been 
much Aviser not to have thought about him 
at all. She had much better have let her 
thousrhts rest on the handsome little Grerman 
master who daily attended her pupils, and 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 261 

paid her compliments which meant nothing 
when translated, but sounded well in the 
language of Schiller ; and while he paid her 
those comphments, expatiated on his owti ex- 
cellent qualities and talents. Yes, Annie would 
have done well not to ponder on the sweet 
sadness of Claude's face, for two long months 

passed ere she saw it again, and then 

But to speak en regie. 

" How is he to-day ?" asked Lady Ade- 
laide, at luncheon one day. 

"In a raging fever ; quite delirious ; 
doesn't knowHeinrich. I hear that Dryburgh 
has been sent for," said Mr. Curzon. 

"What is the matter, papa? Is Lord 
Claude ill ?" exclaimed Sydney. 

" Very ill, indeed," said Mr. Curzon. " I 
am afraid, dangerously so." 

" How unfortunate !" cried Sydney ; " he 
promised to take me sledging next winter. 
Dear me, how sorry I am !" 

" Poor feUow !" said Mr. Curzon, with 
feeling ; "it seems he caught this fever in a 
Quixotic expedition in search of one of his 
many objects of charity, in some wretched 
prison. But, Miss Sherwood, you are iU !" 

" No, thank you, Mr. Curzon," said Annie, 
with a desperate effort, and continuing her 



262 ANNE SHEUWOOD. 

dinner, though each attempt to eat nearly 
choked her. " I am quite well." 

But Lady Adelaide's l3rnx eye was not to 
be deceived, and, even while affecting to look 
another way, she was reading Annie's very 
soul. "I wonder how Amabel Dalrymple 
will bear this ? it must be a great trial to 
her, poor girl." 

" Wliat do you mean ?" said Mr. Curzon, 
with some surprise ; "I did not know they 
were intimate." 

" Dear me, did you not ? There has been 
a most romantic attachment between Lord 
Claude and Amabel for years, though family 
affairs have hitherto prevented the denouement 
desired by both parties. You know poor 
Lord Claude's sentimental turn which he 
derives from la helle France. I assure you 
he has often talked to me of Amabel, quite 
in the 'Pastor Fido' style." 

" Ah, then, that is the secret of his con- 
tinuing unmarried," said Mr. Curzon. " Miss 
Sherwood, pray take a glass of wine ; let me 
pour it out for you, your hand is shaking. 
Are you often nervous ? Then, if he recovers, 
Lady Adelaide, it will certainly be a match ?" 

" Oh, yes," said Lady Adelaide, " un de 
ces beaux jours ! We shall have VMizir 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 263 

if Amove at tlie St. Hubert to-niglit; you'll 
go, Mr. Curzon?" 

" I don't think it will be worth hearing." 

" Oh, yes, it will. There's that pretty little 
pocket edition of Adonis, Calzolari ; Claude 
Douglas mischievously calls him Calzolaio. 
You'll go, Mr. Curzon ?" 

" I shall think about it ; but I really am 
not in spirits for the affair." 

" Not in spirits ! What is the matter ?" 

" I am thinking of poor Douglas !" . 

" Oh, yes, to be sure ; I had quite forgotten 
him. I dare say he'll recover; and if he 
does not, you know it will all be for the 
best. A man of his romantic notions is not 
fit for the w^orld. Besides, if he goes, it will 
force Dryburgh to marry, and will probably 
prove a good thing for my cousin Flora, 
who is determined to have him, or rather his 
title." 

" You must excuse my agreeing with you 
as to its being a good thing should Lord 
Claude die," said Mr. Curzon ; " a host of 
rare talents and generous passions would 
perish with him." 

"Mr. Curzon, you talk as solemnly as 
' The Ancient Mariner 1' Miss Sherwood, let 
the children go out directly ; later we shall 



264 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

have showers. You can go to the Boulevard 
de Waterloo, and leave a note for me there." 

Annie howed her head in acquiescence, 
and withdrew. She went with languid steps 
to her room ; hut once there, hurst into a 
passionate flood of tears, more vehement 
from their long-forced suppression. A few 
minutes passed ; she rememhered her orders, 
rose, and prepared to go out, though soh- 
hing all the time like a hroken-hearted 
child. 

Annie was soon equipped, and was about 
to leave her room, hut on opening her door 
found Miss Dohson posted thereat, in a 
crouching attitude, her face red as a peony. 
" Lady Adelaide sent me to see why you 
were not ready," she stammered, "and — 
and I have dropped something ;" and Miss 
Dohson continued kneeling on the floor, as 
if in search of something she had dropped. 

" Lost something 1 yes, I think you have," 
said Annie ; " you have lost all self-respect, 
all good feehng, or you would not sell your- 
self to be a spy 1" 

" Miss Sherwood, what do you mean by 
your insinuations?" cried Miss Dohson, 
starting up. 

" I mean that I despise and pity you !" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 265 

said Annie, looking steadily in Miss Dob- 
son's face, as she passed her by. 

'' Depend on it. Lady Adelaide sliall bear 
of this. Miss Sherwood ! I shall conceal 
nothing from her !" 

" Come, children !" said Annie, going down 
stairs, without taking any notice of the last 
remark. Miss Dobson went to report to 
Lady Adelaide what had occurred, and the 
governess walked out with her three pupils, 
taking the path indicated. 

They were obliged to pass Lord Claude's 
house. Already, to the eye of anxious love, 
it bore a funereal appearance. Annie's eyes 
seemed fixed by fascination on that dwelling ; 
in vain she strove to remove them. 

" Poor Lord Claude !" said Sydney, with 
much apparent feeling, and with a deep 
sigh. Annie unconsciously pressed the boy's 
hand. " I shall lose all my sledging 1" said 
Sydney, with a deeper sigh. Annie dropped 
his hand. '' Everybody loves him !" said 
Sydney. 

" You love the sledging better !" said 
Annie, sharply. And then the thought came 
into her mind, whether Claude (for his rank 
was all forgotten) — whether Claude would be 
left to die alone in the stranger's land 1 



266 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

wliat the beautiful Amabel would think, or 
feel, or say; whether, if she really loved 
him, and was beloved again, whether she 
would burst the restraints imposed upon her 
by an unfeeling w^orld's opinion, rush to 
him, be his ministering angel, and share his 
danger — perchance share his early grave. 
Ah, if she did ! happy, happy Amabel ! 
What would Annie Sherwood give to be 
allowed to approach the sufferer ! to minister 
to him, even in the lowdiest offices, though 
the price paid might be life itself, even like 
the maiden who died of the plague (with 
her lover), and whose farewell sigh the fallen 
spirit stole, and bore to Heaven's gate, think- 
ing it precious enough to Avin back a for- 
feited Paradise. 

There were quantities of straw laid down 
in front of the rich man's house, and the 
carriages rolled noiselessly over it; and 
around him, in his splendid mansion, was 
everything that wealth could purchase in 
the shape of comfort and relief But a 
burning fever Avas raging in his brain, riot- 
ing in his blood, and Avild, fantastic visions 
were dancing before him ; but there was no 
gentle hand to smooth his pillow, and bathe 
his burning forehead. The rich man was 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 267 

alone. The menials shrunk back; they 
loved him ; he was a kind, generous master, 
but they could not risk their lives for him — 
the fever was catching ! All this the eye of 
love saw plainly enough through the thick 
stone walls, and the closed doors. And she 
who saw it stood still in her misery, and 
pressed her hand upon her bursting heart, 
in a vain attempt to still its throbs, while 
wild visions, as wild as fche sick man's, went 
through her brain — ^visions of what she would 
do, if she dared ! How she would forget 
all consequences — the misery, the ruin it 
might bring upon her — and go to him, if 
only she could be sure that he would never 
know of her presumptuous love 1 

" I have a great mind to knock at the 
door and ask how he is 1" exclaimed Sydney. 
^' Shall I, Miss Sherwood?" 

" Do what your own heart dictates, 
Sydney," said Annie, in a broken voice. 
Sydney rang the bell. At the same moment 
a respectable-looking young woman of the 
bourgeoise class came up. The door was 
opened by Heinrich. " I want to see 
milord," said the woman. 

"You can't; he's ill." 

'' That is the very reason I must see him." 



268 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" I am sure you can't see him 1" 
" I hear you want a nurse ?" said the 
woman. 

"We do; but we can't get one." 
" I am willing to nurse milord." 
*' Are you not afraid of the fever ?" 
" Yes ; but your master once saved my 
life ; I would risk something to save his." 
" Well, then, I'm sure you're welcome." 
" Is Lord Claude better ?" asked Sydney. 
The man shook his head. 
'' Is he worse ?" 

He nodded, and Sydney turned away. 
How Annie envied the w^oman on whom 
the door closed ! How jealous she was 
to think that that woman was to watch 
hour after hour over Claude, and anticipate 
his every want ! And yet how thankful 
was she that a kind woman's heart was 
beating near him, and that that woman's 
heart was not Amabel Dalrymple's. 

Lady Adelaide noted well the feverish 
flush on Annie's face, the eyes swollen and 
red with weeping, the nervous start she 
gave every now and then when any one spoke 
to her. Lady Adelaide knew Annie's heart 
was breaking — she knew well why; and 
just that time she chose for tyrannizing 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 269 

over and oppressing lier as slie had never 
done before. 

Mr. Curzon still refused to consent to her 
dismissal, but now Lady Adelaide had her in 
her power, and exercising that power with re- 
fined cruelty, vfould of course force the ill- 
used dependent to withdraw of herself. 
But the proud lady miscalculated. Annie 
was absorbed by grief; she was as one that 
hears not. The insults directed towards 
her she either saw not, or they had lost all 
power to wound. She could not think of 
herself at all — she thought only of Claude. 
To leave Brussels while his fate was un- 
certain would have been impossible, had she 
conceived the thought, but such a thing had 
never occurred to her. She knew Lady 
Adelaide hated her, but she forgot it now — 
forgot her very existence. Annie had but 
one thought, waking or sleeping. The words 
" a little better !" gave her life for the day ; 
" not quite so well !" plunged her in despair. 
At length came a glad sound, " he is out of 
danger !" Sydney shouted, clapped his 
hands, and rushing to Annie in his exube- 
rant joy, kissed her cheek for the very first 
time, and she forgave him that he talked con- 
fidently of next winter's sledging. Mr. 



270 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Curzon was really glad. Lady Adelaide 
was out of humour. 

The first day he went out, Lord Claude 
looked like a ghost ; he was walking on the 
Boulevard, leaning on Heinrich's arm. Annie 
and Sydney met him ; he stopped and shook 
hands with both. 

"You, too, have been ill," said he to 
Annie, in his low, sweet voice. 

'' No, my Lord," said Annie, not trusting 
herself to add more, for she was conscious 
that he was examining every shade that 
passed over her face; nay, that he w^as 
reading her thoughts. Yes, he was reading 
them ; and as he read, he started, and grew 
even paler than before. In the little minute 
in which Annie's cold, trembling hand had 
rested in his, Claude had found out the secret 
of her heart. The poor dependent of Lady 
Adelaide Curzon loved him, the heir of high- 
sounding titles ; and he — he loved her. It 
was rather an unfortunate discovery to make; 
but probably people of rank have a way of 
getting over these little difiiculties of which 
humble mortals are ignorant. 

"I must turn,Heinrich," said Lord Claude; 
'' I am faint and tired." 

Annie did not dare to say " take care of so 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 271 

precious a life !" but she thought it, and 
with her to think was to speak, for her face 
was the mirror of her soul. 

Once more Claude pressed her hand, looked 
at her with a sorrowful glance, and with a 
deep sigh turned away. 

" Well, St. Preux is gone, I suppose^?" said 
Lady Adelaide, at luncheon, a fortnight later. 

''Yes, I saw him off," said Mr. Curzon, 
" and his destination is Eome." 

*' Dear me, what will he do there ?" said 
Lady Adelaide ; " what an absurd place for a 
sick man ! He will grow melancholy mad, 
among the debris of the past !" 

" I remarked to him, that in his place I 
should prefer Naples," said Mr. Curzon; 
" but he answered, with a sad smile, ' Eome 
will suit my present humour. I am not in 
very brilliant sphits ; besides, if I die soon, 
I should like to be buried in Eome.' By the 
bye, Sydney, you'U lose your sledging ; Lord 
Claude threatens not to return to Brussels." 

"I suppose you know that the Dal- 
rymples are going to Italy ?" said Lady 
Adelaide ; "of course, to please Amabel. I 
think that she and Lord Claude have got 
up the plan of going there between them. 
Perhaps she wiU return a bride !" 



272 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XXII. 

Annie was so tlioroughly harassed in mind 
and worn in health, that she felt inclined to 
withdraw immediately from her appoint- 
ment ; but when she contemplated such a 
movement, she started with the remembrance, 
that by leaving the Curzons she would lose 
all chance of hearing anything of Claude. 
She would leave, of course ; but she would 
put oft* the day till she had heard that his 
health was entirely re-established. Then, 
especially if he married Miss Dalrymple, she 
would remove from scenes and people who 
would for ever recall to her remembrance 
one, whom it would then become her duty to 
forget. How many a destiny has been 
marred, how many a life wasted, by the 
words "not yet !" 

While Annie was thinking over lier future 
course, a letter from her sister arrived. 
Ellen was expecting another cherub to in- 
crease the happiness of her already happy 
lot; and she longed so much, pleaded so 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 273 

earnestly, for Annie's presence, that she re- 
solved to ask for a brief holiday. Probably 
her request would have been refused, but 
that Lady Adelaide had persuaded Mr. Curzon 
to send Sydney to Harrow. Of course her 
Ladyship's ultimate object was Annie's 
dismissal; but she knew that, like most 
weak men, her husband was very obstinate, 
and so she determined to obtain one thing at 
a time. Miss Sherwood was to conduct the 
boy to England by way of Ostend. 

The journey was a melancholy one to Annie. 
Sydney's selfish nature was unchanged, and 
though so young he was deeply imbued with 
the worldly spirit ; nor had he ever shown 
her much affection. Still, he was an object of 
interest to her, from his rare intelligence ; 
and yet more in that he was so intimately 
associated in her mind with Claude Douglas. 
She never could think of Claude without re- 
membering the beautiful bright-eyed boy 
who had always formed a third in their 
conversation. When Annie parted from 
Sydney, her tears flowed freely; for she 
thought not only of leaving him, but of 
another sadder parting. Sydney, however, 
smiled exultingly as he shook hands with 
her, and said — 

VOL. II. T 



274 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" I shall find great names on tlie walls at 
Harrow, Miss Sherwood ! I shall write mine 
among them, and when I am a great man, 
people will go to look at it. Good-bye." 

'' You will write to me, Sydney ?" 

" Oh, yes, if I can." 

" If you can ?" 

"Why, you see, I shall have no end of 
work ; it will be a great bore to sit down 
and write, after I have done my " 

" Never mind writing, then," said Annie ; 
'* but I hope you will be a good boy, and do 
your duty." 

" Pray don't talk so, Miss Sherwood ; it 
sounds so like brown-holland pinafores and 
nursery habits ! I shall remember who I 
am, and act as a Curzon should; Harrow 
shall be one day proud of me. By the way, 
did you know Lord Claude was a Harrow 
boy ? I shall look for his name the first 
thing I do ;" and nodding to Annie, the 
proud, ambitious, but, alas ! heartless boy 
turned away, and left the truest friend he 
would ever meet, without the tribute of one 
sigh. 

"Ah," said Annie, as her lingering eye 
followed the boy's retreating form, " Made- 
moiselle Eoulard was right when she said to 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 275 

me, ' Expect neither attacliinent nor friend- 
ship from those to whom you are but a hired 
dependant. The governess who hopes to 
form any permanent tie to her pupils, Hves 
in a romantic dream, and wakes to bitter 
disappointment.' " 

The above-quoted Mademoiselle Eoulard 
was a very good, conscientious sort of 
person, but one who knew the world well ; 
she had spent nearly thirty years in the 
profession of a governess — ten of theni in 
one family. 

The farther Annie went from Brussels, 
the sadder grew her heart ; and yet she was 
going to Ellen — to dear Ellen, w^hose love 
had been the one absorbing passion of her 
soul, until lately — who was still the dearest 
object in life to her, save the one distant 
idol. But how a few hours' journey and 
absence did away with all reality in the last 
pages of Annie Sherwood's life ! The time 
which she had spent in the beautiful city 
was now a dream — half pleasing, half pain- 
ful, and yet she could not wish it undreamt. 
Foolish, foolish heart ! Annie should have 
known better than to murmur, 

" Give me the pleasure Vith tlie pain ; 
So would I live— so love again !" 



276 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Ambitious love has always something enno- 
bling in its very weakness. There can be 
no shame in the heart's choice, when we 
have aspired to a star, and forgotten the 
clods of earth; no shame, unless the fond 
secret is discovered — and Annie foolishly 
fancied her secret was her own, and that she 
could keep it even from Ellen ! 

It was sunset — rich autumnal sunset — 
wdien Annie Sherwood arrived in the most 
beautiful of English cities, the elegant Bath, 
where art and nature have striven which 
shall bear away the palm of beauty, and 
neither art nor nature have triumphed. The 
city owes half its beauty to the loveliness of 
surrounding nature, and nature is enhanced 
by the gem set in her rich bosom. 

Annie had gazed around her with delight, 
as the train shot rapidly through the rich 
scenery. But now it had reached its desti- 
nation. Expecting friends crowded the 
23latform, and of course looked in every 
carriage but the right one for those they 
awaited ; and in the midst of the confusion 
Annie caught sight of Eichard Stancliff's 
tall, slight figure rushing to the contrary 
end of the long line of carriages, looking for 
her, and utterly deaf to her voice. Then, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 277 

provokingly enough, Annie's carriage was 
the very, very last that the guard came to 
open. But at length she was released — at 
length Eichard's cordial grasp of her hand 
reassured her that she was not to he impri- 
soned. 

" How is Ellen ? Is she here ? Did you 
receive my letter ? Did you " 

" She is quite well," answered Eichard, 
hastily ; " hut I wouldn't let her come. I 
thought it might he too much for her. Be- 
sides, I had borrowed a gig that would only 
hold two ; and But where' s your lug- 
gage ? I had forgotten all about it ! How 
you are altered !" 

" Yes, I am two years older." 

" Indeed you look younger instead of 
older. The Curzons must have been kind 
to you ! How different you looked when I 
saw you first ! you had then just left the 
Maberlys. Yes, the Curzons must have 
been kind !" 

" You have no idea of the extent of 
their kindness !" said Annie, laughing ; and 
Eichard thought it all earnest, and talked 
very pleasantly of the endearing tie that 
must exist between a governess and her 
pupils, when the parents make her their 



278 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

friend ! The conversation diverged of course 
to Ellen, for the young curate was a lover 
still, and he had a thousand things to tell 
(and how proudly he did tell them !) of the 
precocious talents of his first-horn. The 
prodigy was just two years old, and of course 
had done and said a great many clever 
things, and attempted more. 

Then Eichard added how happy he and 
Ellen were among their poor neighbours ; 
what a blessing her gentle visitations had 
been to many ; how she had nursed a sick 
child so tenderly and patiently that she 
had been the means of awakening its un- 
godly parents from error, and thus had she 
proved the guardian angel of a seemingly 
lost family. He told how Ellen had read 
the Scriptures to the blind old man and the 
bedridden woman, and went like a pitying 
spirit fi'om house to house, mildly reprov- 
ing the guilty, encouraging the timid, in- 
structing the ignorant, alluring to brighter 
worlds by the traces of her footsteps, but 
blushing at the praises even of Eichard 
himself. 

There is no saying how long Eichard 
might have gone on dilating on the virtues 
of his beloved, had not the cottage suddenly 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 279 

stood before tliem, and Ellen too, eagerly 
wat oiling for their arrival. 

How joyous was the greeting of the fond 
sisters 1 how wildly Annie's heart beat as 
she clasped Ellen in her arms, for a moment ! 
but only for a moment — even Claude and 
Eome were forgotten. 

" What a paradise this is !" exclaimed 
Amiie, looking round at the sweet spot. 

" And yet, perhaps we must leave it !" 
said Ellen, sighing. 

" Leave it !" repeated Annie, uneasily, as 
the thought darted into her mind that per- 
haps Bichard was about to lose his curacy. 

" Has not Eichard told you, dear, that he 
has the promise of a good living in Kent ?" 

"No, indeed!" 

" The truth is, I forgot it, Annie," said 
Eichard; " I was so glad to see you, and had 
so many things to tell. But I must now 
repair my omission. Some friend unknown, 
' who blushes to call' his goodness ' fame,' 
has made interest for me with no less a per- 
sonage than the P , and I am to have 

Eectory, which is likely to fall in 

soon. If I consulted only inclination, I 
should certainly stay where I am, and so 
would Ellen; but this thing seems pro- 



280 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

videntially put in our way. We have prayed 
earnestly for direction, and our way seems 
clear. You know our income is at present 
very small. I care little about it, but still 
I am often grieved to see poor Ellen under- 
taking, for economy's sake, tasks for which 
she is unfit. You would scarcely believe it, 
but she irons all my shirts and neckcloths, 
though I try to prevent her !" 

" But I am so happy doing it, dearest !" 
said Ellen, looking up with such a light in 
her innocent eyes that Annie thought, " Oh, 
how pleasant it would be if Claude Douglas 
were a poor curate like Eichard, and loved 
me as Eichard does Ellen, and I had to work 
for him as Ellen does for Eichard 1" And 
how deep was the sigh that followed the 
vain thought ! 

"Is not Annie altered? I mean beau- 
tified?" said Eichard, snatching off her 
bonnet. 

" She cannot be beautified in my eyes," 
«aid Ellen, fondly, kissing her. " But come, 
you have not seen baby. He can say almost 
anything. You should hear him repeat 
Mason's hymn — 

* Soon will the evening star, with silver ray.' 

He has such a beautiful idea of emphasis, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 281 

Annie. What do you think he said the 
other day?" 

Now, what the young mother's prodigy 
said the other day, though of course highly 
interesting to papa, mamma, and auntie, would 
not be the least so, perhaps, to the reader, so 
he must be spared the infliction of its recital. 

By this time Annie was in the neat 
sitting-room on the ground floor, arranged 
very much in the sort of old-fashioned way 
that the parlour had been at Merton in the 
good old vicar's time ; and there was the 
vicar's very identical old chair, shabby and 
rubbed, but not more so than it had been 
when he had last sat in it. Annie's eyes 
fixed on it through a mist of tears. 

" Good, kind Charles Turner sent it to 
me, with all the dear old books," said Ellen, 
" the moment he knew that we had settled 
down here. Oh, Annie !" she continued, with 
a broken voice, " how much has happened 
since our father sat in this chair ! How 
many, many mercies we have received !" 

Annie did not answer — she could not. 
She was reckoning up, not her mercies, but 
her trials. 

"Come to Aunt Annie, my pet," said 
EUen, lifting a curtain which divided the 



382 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

front from tlie back room, which latter was 
only used on grand occasions, for it rejoiced 
in the magnificence of a handsome carpet, a 
cabinet piano, white muslin curtains, and 
china vases. 

In a shady corner was sitting an old 
gentleman, with a sweet child on his knee 
busily employed in endeavours to pull a 
watch to pieces ; but that, of course, was 
only a proof of an inquiring mind, like 
that of the young philosopher who ripped 
open a pair of bellows in search of the wind. 

" My dear Doctor 1 what a joyful sur- 
prise !" exclaimed Annie ; " but don't kill 
my nephew !" she added, as the Doctor 
bounded from his chair, and very nearly let 
the little boy fall. 

"Eh! what! Annie Sherwood! WeU, 
this is a surprise ! I thought you'd have 
been married by this time to one of those 
whiskered, mustached fellows who " 

" Your surprise is not greater than mine. 
Doctor," said Annie. " I had not the least 
idea of finding you here." All this time 
Annie was busily hugging her little godson, 
who was equally busy in dislodging a bow 
of ribbon from her dress, and in pulling 
do^vn her back hair. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 283 

" Wliy, you've grown quite handsome !" 
said the Doctor, as the mass of jetty hair 
fell round Anne's shoulders ; " quite hand- 
some, I declare 1" The Doctor was not far 
from speaking the truth, for Annie's face 
had largely gained that deepest of all 
beauties — intellectual grace, while the newly- 
awakened feelings of her heart had spread 
a roseate hue over her formerly pale cheeks. 

It was long before sufficient order had 
been established in the little circle for its 
members to understand each other. That 
object once attained, the first question was, 
" How long can you stay ?" 

"Not longer than three weeks," said 
Annie. 

" Not longer than three weeks 1" re- 
peated Ellen, with a face of blank disap- 
pointment. 

" I am afraid I can't stay longer, clear,'* 
said Annie, tenderly kissing her sister. 

" Can't you write to Lady Adelaide, and 
beg her to prolong your holiday ?" 

"No, dear, I must not do that; she is rather 
particular. My holiday is for a month ; in 
the month must be reckoned the time spent 
in travelling here, that which returning will 
take also. Besides, I must stay a few days 



284 ANNE SHERWOOD, 



in London, where I have a little private 
business." 

" What is it ?" asked Ellen, for a secret 
between Annie and herself seemed an im- 
possibility. 

" You must not ask me, dear Ellen," said 
Annie, smiling, but you will know some day. 
By the bye, do you know I have serious 
thoughts of retiring from my professional 
labours." 

" Then j'-ou're going to be married !" 
growled the Doctor. 

i; ["No, Doctor, I shall never marry," said 
Annie, seriously. "You forget how old I 
am growing. Do you know I am twenty- 
seven ?" 

" Oh, I am so glad !" said Ellen. 

" Wliat, glad I am growing old?" 

" ISTo," said Ellen, laughing ; " but glad to 
think that you have made up your mind to 
stay at home with me. You must write and 
tell the Curzons you can't return." 

" Impossible !" said Annie, starting. " I 
could not, dear Ellen; it would not be 
right in me, to leave them without fair 
warning. You would not wish me to do 
what was wrong or dishonourable, Ellen, 
I am sure !" she added quickly. " Am I 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 285 

not right, Eichard ? Must I not give tliem 
warning ?" 

" Yes, I tliink you should," said Eichard. 
" The J ought to have time to provide a suc- 
cessor ; but pray mention your intentions 
directly you return, for indeed Ellen wants 
you sadly." 

" I will," said Annie, sighing. 

" Brussels is a pleasant place, I suppose ?" 
said Ellen. 

"Oh yes," replied Annie, with animation. 
'a)elightful !" 

" Did you know any nice people there ?" 
asked Eichard. 

" Delightful people !" said the Doctor, 
mimicking Annie's tone; ''as precious anest of 
pickpockets as the United Kingdoms ever dis- 
gorged. A set of fellows, bankrupts at home 
in name and fortune, who go across the water 
to fleece the unfortunate monkeys who trust 
them, and to finish their style, I suppose. I 
dare say you have found Lady Adelaide quite 
an angel?" 

" I have seen very little of her." 

"And those young scrapegraces? The little 
dog that used to toss up his head and ask, 
* Do you remember who I am ?' How did 
you get on with him?" 



286 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Perfectly well !" said Annie. " We have 
been on excellent terms. Sydney is a very 
clever and intelligent boy 1" 

" And very fond of you, no doubt !" said 
the Doctor. 

" We were inseparable," said Annie. 

" By the bye," said Eichard, " what has 
become of that charming Trench Scotchman, 
whom you spoke of in your first letters, but 
have never named since ?" 

" He ! Oh, he is gone I think, I believe 
to Italy, or somewhere." 

" Oh ! oh !" grunted the Doctor, as he 
watched the fluctuating colour in Annie's 
cheeks. 

" I suppose he will return to Brussels, 
during the time that you are so conscienti- 
ously giving Lady Adelaide fair warning ?" 

" I really don't know ; I am not in his 
counsels," said Annie, very busily playing 
with her nephew's curls, very busily too 
hiding her blushing face away behind his 
shoulders, while pretending to play bo-peep. 

''I suppose you speak French quite con 
amore ?'' added the Doctor. 

" I have made some progress in speaking, 
I hope," said Annie. 

" Like Trench poetry, eh ?" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 287 

" I do," said Annie, " though I believe I 
am singular in my taste. I like the modern 
school of French poetry extremely, beginning 
with Andre Chenier." 

" When I was young, Miss Sherwood," 
said the Doctor, " I studied French (on the 
principle that one fool makes many) because 
others did the same. I learnt to say hong 
jour and avez vousfang, with so vile an accent, 
that when I talked I was obliged to put my 
hands over my ears, not to hear my own 
words ! Still I picked up a good deal of the 
gibberish, and I, too, grew fond of poetry, 
but of all I read I can only remember this 
pretty, pathetic verse." Then the old man 
recited in very good French — 

" Le monde de sots est tout rempli, 
Et pour ue les jamais voir, 
II faut se cacher chez lui, 
Et casser sou miroir !" 

" Very good advice, Doctor, but my glass 
is not my own, otherwise I might profit by 
it!" 

" I suppose you've heard plenty of French 
poetry from the boy's master, eh ? Those 
fellows make love to every girl they meet." 

" Yes, I heard a great deal of poetry from 
Sydney's master, but he did not make love 



288 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

to me," said Annie, trying to laugli off the 
subject; " bnt. Doctor, what has become of 
the clever vender of iron 'skivers/ as he 
called them?" 

" Don't ask me anything about him," 
said the Doctor, half vexed, and yet unable 
to suppress the laugh that would revel in 
his good-humoured eyes. " The dog turned 
out ungrateful ; ran away, and joined a com- 
pany of strolling players. I heard of him 
ranting Othello in a barn the other day. I 
suppose he'll die in the workhouse, in the 
course of life's ' wicissitoodinous changes !' " 

" I suppose he didn't run away with any 
forks and spoons. Doctor?" 

" Who told you he did ? I didn't say so !" 
said the Doctor, nervously fidgetting in his 
chair, and in his turn eager to divert the 
conversation into another channel. "Do 
you remember," he asked quickly, " do you 
remember a quick, clever little woman, full 
of furbelows and flounces and talk, that had 

a place at Sir William S 's ? She had 

an odd, high-sounding name." 

" I know who you mean, Hortensia May- 
nard; she was very kind-hearted," said 
Annie. 

" To be sure she was, and knew a great 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 289 

many lords and ladies. AVell, she's mar- 
ried !" 

" Married ?" repeated Annie. 

"Yes — is that very wonderful?" 

" Bather so ; governesses so seldom 
marry ." 

" Nevertheless, she is married," said the 
Doctor. 

" Well and happily, I hope ?" 

" That rather depends on whether she is 
a contented disposition. But I must tell 
you all ahout it, and afterwards you can go 
on with what you were going to say about 
the Scotch Frenchman." 

" I was not going to say anything about 
him," said Annie, colouring. 

" Nonsense, 3^ou know you were ; but now 
for my discourse. About three weeks ago, 
as I was passing a great church, to which 
earls and countesses, and young guardsmen 
and heiresses go to be married, because it's 
the fashion — I saw by the string of carriages 
standing at the doors, that a wedding was 
going on. What must I do, like an old fool, 
as I always am, but stand still till the bride 
came out. Of course I expected to see a 
pretty girl, after waiting long enough to 
physic and kill a whole ward of patients ! 

VOL. II. u 



290 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

WelljOut she came at last — the expected bride ! 
Bather a matronly figure ; her face I couldn't 
see, for she hid her blushes in a Brobdignag 

' bucket/ as Mrs. H calls those sort of 

things. But the bridegroom ! I am a young 
man — a Celadon ! an Adonis, compared to 
him ! Something between Lismehago and 
Quixote ! I wanted sadly to pull some one's 
sleeve, and ask if the poor old fellow hadn't 
come to be buried, and by mistake had got 
married instead. I had the curiosity to ask 
afterwards who he was, and found that he 
was a lieutenant in the army on half-pay, 
who was marrying his sixth wife, or some- 
thing of that sort. I rather think the 
groomsmen were his grandsons ! At last I 
caught a glimpse of the lady's face, and soon 
recognised the little woman who came to 
Ellen's wedding, and talked so much of the 
Marquis of some unpronounceable some- 
thing. I suppose, poor thing, she was tired 
of geographies and grammars — perhaps tired 
of her place and her mistress's airs !" 

" Doctor, why will you persist in calling 
an ' appointment' a place ?" 

" Because it is one. You know very well 
the whole pack of you are treated like servants, 
and to call your employment by a fine name, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 291 

is only gilding a bitter pill. I will call 
tilings by their names, whoever I offend; 
I'm determined I will." 

" Poor Hortensia !" said Annie. 

" Poor l" repeated the Doctor, senten- 
tionsly ; "I don't see what pity she wants. 
Wasn't she married at St. George's ? Hadn't 
she two titles at her wedding ? Didn't she 
wear a beautiful lace gown, and wasn't it all 
put in the papers ? Didn't Gunter provide 
the breakfast? Poor Hortensia, indeed !" 

" But what a dismal fate is hers now I" 

" She is vegetating in the country, some- 
where in Wales, on the Lieutenant's half- 
pay, I think," said the Doctor. " But what 
of that? If she does sometimes say, like 
Lady Montagu's woman, 

' Oh, odious, odious trees !' 

I dare say she soon makes up for it, with 

' Come what may, I have been blessed.' 

Then hasn't she got her wedding gown to 
look at ? And her veil, and her flowers, 
and kickshaws ? Pity her ! I should as 
soon think of pitying the Great Mogul !" 

" You are spiteful, Doctor," said Annie. 
"But do tell me if you have seen Mrs. 
Harrington." 

u 2 



292 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Of course I have ; but don't you know 
the news ?" 

" No, indeed ; my friend who lives with 
the Harringtons, has not written to me for 
some time. Have you heard from Bertha, 
Ellen?" 

" Not for the last three months," said 
EUen. 

"Then my news will be news indeed," 
said the Doctor. " They have experienced 
some of what our old friend called * life's 
wicissitoodinous changes.' Harrington, I am 
glad to say, is tied by the leg. He has had 
a paralytic stroke, and lost the use of his 
limbs. She, like the good angel she always 
was, forgives and forgets, waits on him 
tenderly night and day. The fellow seems 
at last a little sensible of and grateful for 

her devotion. Your friend. Miss what's 

her name?" 

" Somerton." 

" Well, she is not like Miss Hortensia 
Maynard, married, only going to be. But 
whether it is to a marquis, a dancing-master, 
or a footman, I don't know ; I dare say 
it's one or the other." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 29S 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

The very day after Annie's arrival at Bath, 
she found herself an aunt for the second 
time, and ere her pleasant visit terminated, 
she once more took on herself the office of 
godmother, giving to the new comer her 
own name, at Ellen's entreaty. 

Though full of anxiety for Claude Douglas,, 
remembering the uncertain state of his 
health, Annie could not do other than yield 
to the pleasant atmosphere of peace and com- 
fort in which she was for awhile living ; to 
see Ellen so deeply blessed, outweighed all 
her own trials, and when they parted, Annie's 
spirit was at once softened and elevated. 

Happy had it been for Annie Sherwood 
had that parting never been 1 but it was 
only for a short season ! Annie would soon 
return, and for ever. In that assured hope, 
the sisters forgot to weep, parting with 
smiles, and utterly unconscious of any of 
those painful presentiments which often come 
as shadows cast before trials. 



294 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Only tliree montlis, darling!" said Annie, 
as slie kissed her sister. 

" They will soon be gone !" responded 
Ellen. 

" Auntie come soon ! bring Henry horse 1" 
said the curly-headed boy. 

" Very soon, dear pet. One more kiss, 
EUen." 

" God bless you, Annie !" said Eichard. 
" Eead the little book I put in your bag, 
and Kyle's tracts. Promise me you will." 

" And bring me Csesar Malan's Sermons 
in French." 

" Shall I send them over ?" 

" Oh no y I can wait till you can come 
yourself. You will so soon be with us !" 

" Good-bye 1 God bless you, once more !" 
said Annie, looking back with a bright 
smile. 

" I commend you to your father's God !" 
said Eichard, solemnly; and Annie was 
gone. 

The young curate sighed. 

"What is that deep sigh for, dearest?" 
asked Ellen, passing her arm affectionately 
through Eichard' s. 

" It was following poor Annie, love." 

" Why, dear ? I am not the least anxious 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 295 

about her now. We sliall so soon have her 
with ns." 

" I hope so !" said Eichard. 

"You doubt it, then?" 

" To tell you the truth, I do. She has 
some tie to Brussels w^hich will keep her 
there or make her leave it with a crushed 
heart." 

'' Dear me, Hichard, what can have sug- 
gested such an idea to your mind?" 

" The Doctor, the day before he left us ; 
otherwise I never should have thought of 
such a thing. She is certainly attached to 
that Lord Claude Douglas, and in all human 
probability, hopelessly." 

" Impossible ! Annie would never keep a 
secret from me. She has always told me her 
inward thoughts." 

" And did you return the confidence, my 
Ellen?" 

'' Nearly, I think," said Ellen ; " and yet 
my conscience whispers that I did not tell 
her all, not quite all, about that shabby 
curate with the broken-rimmed hat, that 

used to go by our little window in N 

Street every evening at five o'clock, long, 
long ago. But I really think you are wrong 
about Annie. She has too high a spirit to 



296 ANNE SHERWOOD, 

yield to the weakness of loving one who is 
indifferent to her." 

" But if he should not be indifferent ?" 
said Eichard. 

" Then you know all will end well. 'No 
one would dare to trifle with such a woman 
as Annie !" replied Ellen, who still thought 
of her sister with the same sort of proud re- 
liance, with which she had been accustomed 
to speak of her in olden times as her " elder 
sister." 

" Well, you are right to hope the best, 
dearest," said Eichard, with another sigh; 
" but now I must go and see my sick." 

" Are you going to Widow Bentham's ?" 

" Yes, dear." 

'' Then put this piece of flannel in your 
pocket ; I promised her some because she 
suffers from rheumatism. Try and come 
round by the mill, returning, that you may 
leave this little packet of tea at the old 
soldier's, and here are ten shillings which 
Annie gave me for the poor. But I have 
never told you what she has done, Eichard. 
She has put all the money she has received 
from the Curzons into a savings bank in 
Henry's name." 

*' Grod bless her kind heart !" said Eichard, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 297 

with emotion ; " but we must not take it from 
her, Ellen." 

"Of course not/' said Ellen; ''the little 
she has saved must he a store for herself, the 
last person in the world she is likely to 
think of. You don't know, you never can 
know, Kichard, the generous, self-sacrificing 
heart of my dear Annie." 

" She is my Ellen's sister 1" said Eichard ; 
and taking the parcels from Ellen's hand, he 
turned into the garden path, and yielded up 
his mind to the solemn thoughts a Christian 
pastor should have, when he is just going 
forth to minister among the aged, the sick, 
and the dying. 

7ic iiJ ^i * 

On her arrival in London, Annie proceeded 

to her old lodgings in N Street, and 

immediately busied herself in making up 
tw^o parcels of MSS., one of which she was 
going to carry in the morning to her old 

friend, the editor of the F , and which 

contained three distinct tales : the other held 
the MS. of a three -volume novel. The novel 
was an ambitious attempt, which she never 
thought of without a beating heart, and 
which she was about to submit to one of the 
great publishers wdiose names strike some- 



298 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

times more terror into a timid young au- 
thor, tlian that of the autocrat into many a 
serf. 

That MS. Annie thought would decide 
the destiny of her Hfe : if it succeeded — if it 
were received and acknowledged as the work 
of genius, it would raise her from obscurity, 
would wipe off the stain which the name of 
dependent had fixed upon her, and would 
annihilate the distance between her station 
and that of Claude. How often she had 
heard him say genius was real nobihty ! 
What a joyful thought it was that her 
writings might perchance, ere long, reach 
him — charm his imagination, and make liis 
heart beat with sympathy and enthusiasm ! 
But would he recognise the anonymous 
author as she who had shared so many of 
his intellectual dreams? Would he here 
and there recognise beautiful images he had 
himself suggested, eloquent words he had 
himself spoken, and which she had loved 
and adopted because they w^ere his ? Would 
he recognise himself in her hero ? Per- 
chance he would, but still he would never 
suspect that more than warm friendship and 
esteem had guided her pen. Perhaps he 
would recognise her in every page, and if 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 399 

they never met again, she would at least 
live in his memory. 

In Brussels, Annie knew that she must 
hear of Claude's health and welfare. There, 
too, she would learn whether Amabel Dal- 
rymple was the chosen of his heart or not. 
Those two questions settled, Annie would 
redeem the promise she had made her sister, 
settle down with her family in their quiet 
country home, educate little Henry, and 
learn to go about doing good as Eichard 
and Ellen did — and if the life which she 
proposed to lead did not give the serene 
happiness she had observed in them, at least 
it would bring with it contentment and 
resignation ! 

Such were Annie's thoughts during a 
long, sleepless night, for sleep was banished 
by excitement. Eising at a very early hour, 
something suggested to Annie to take a 

wall^ in the E Square Gardens, just to 

glance at the old young women whom she 
had been accustomed to meet there, prome- 
nading their charges, and especially to see 
Julie, whose gentle face and sweet voice had 
often come back to her memory in visions, 
since they parted. 

It was a cold autumn morning. The 



300 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

leaves, still laden with summer's dust, were 
rustling and dancing down in showers on 
the wings of a sharp east wind. There were 
still the same prematurely old, care-worn, 
wrinkled faces — at least some of them, for 
several families had changed their gover- 
nesses ; but those who replaced the dismissed 
ones, showed exactly the usual type. A few 
of the poor women had married men as poor 
as themselves, by w^ay of bettering their 
condition ; two had become the wives of 
tradesmen — one of a grocer, the other of a 
bookseller. Luck}^ girl ! she had gone into 
his shop humbly to solicit permission to 
have letters (in answer to an advertisement) 
left at his shop ; and after a daily visit of 
six weeks, the result was hopeless disap- 
pointment. Some of the letters contained 
remarks which made the poor governess's 
cheek glow, and her tears drop. The book- 
seller one day made her an offer ; perhaps 
actuated by pity, perhaps by the pride of 
securing a wife so superior to his own class. 
How^ever that might be, the offer was not 
analysed, but gratefully accepted ; for Miss 

had been long without employment, 

and was quite destitute of friends able or 
wilHng to assist her. Moreover, she had 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 301 

caught sight of a handsomely furnished 
room behind the shop, with luxurious sofas 
and easy chairs, a cabinet piano, and re- 
cherche engravings. Something had made 
her contrast that room with some at the top 
of the great fashionable houses — with bare 
floors or threadbare carpets, hard, uneasy 
chairs, w^orm-eaten tables, and tinkHng 
pianos ; curtainless windows, permitting ex- 
tensive views of long ranges of mews ! 
There was a contrast, too, between the quiet- 
ness of the shopkeeper's parlour, and the 
noise of the spoilt, crying, scratching, 
tyrannical children. Beyond all, she thought 
of the lady mother, at whose step the 
governess would tremble like a detected 
pickpocket, if the trace of a tear was to be 
seen on the cheeks of the hopeful progeny ! 

So the governess had wisely given up the 
hope of living in " a nobleman or gentleman's 
family," as she had humbly begged per- 
mission to do in her advertisement, and had 
married the bookseller. 

Happy governess ! happy bookseller ! She 
had acquired more than she had ever dared 
to hope for — a home ! He had obtained a 
superior woman for his wife, and could look 
up and down his street with the satisfied air 



302 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

of a man who had done something which 
raised him far above his less ambitious 
neighbours. 

Annie missed Hortensia Ma3rQard and her 
anecdotes of people of rank — saw nothing of 
Julie, but met Clarisse. Clarisse was not 
much altered, only her face had grown 
sharper, and she laughed louder and oftener. 
She was harder than she had been ; the 
children who walked by her hand w^ere afraid 
of her ; she w^as their tyrant. They seldom 
saw their mother, and had neither the op- 
portunity nor the courage to complain. They 
had grown like their preceptress, cunning and 
deceitful; they often succeeded in outwit- 
ting her. 

" Do you know anything of Julie An- 
gelet ?" asked Annie. 

" Yes, she has been ver' imprudent, ma 
chere. She has gone contre mon avis, elle n'a 
pas voulu m'ecouter, and enfin, she has 
killed lierseK wid le chagrin and le travail !" 

" You cannot mean that she is dead ?" 

" Vy no, not quite, pas tout a fait, mais 
elle se meurt." 

'' Dreadfal 1" exclaimed Annie. " But you 
have seen her — of course you have seen her ?" 

" Ma foi, non ! As good go in de lion's 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 303 

cage as go to my-lady — my-lady von 
dragon 1" 

" But who takes care of poor Julie ?" 

" Vy, just no one at all ! Ecoutez, ma 
chere ; I say, Julie, amusez vous 1 Slie not 
listen. She vork, vork always to please my- 
lady. My-lady storm and rage like de sea. 
She say ' York, vork. Mademoiselle. Yy you 
not make de children clever ? Yy you not 
give dem esprit ?' Ma foi ! Julie try all she 
can ; mais les enfants not vork du tout, dey si 
mechants, si betes. Julie von't beat dem when 
I say beat ; wouldn't scold ; try again. Cette 
pauvre Julie ! Ah, quel coeur ! quel coeur ! 
mais enfin, elle se meurt 1" 

" I will go to her !" exclaimed Annie. 

" My-lady put you hors de la porte ! Ah, 
if Julie avait voulu m'ecouter !" 

" She would have been dishonourable if 
she had," said Annie. " Better die a martyr, 
than betray one's trust !" 

" Yer fine dat in a roman ! Ma chere, you 
will know wiser some day ! Attendez 1 at- 
tendez 1 TJn de ces jours vous serez endurcie 
comme moi ! You know dis poesie : 

" O juste Nemesis ! si jamais je puis etre 
Le plus fort a mon tour, si je puis me voir maitre, 
Je serai dur, mediant, intraitable, sans foi, 
Sanguinaire, cruel comme on Test avec moi.'* 



304 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Cela vous fait liorreur ?" she added, as 
the repugnance her words inspired was plainly 
painted on Annie's face. " Yonce it made 
me horror too ! Yes, vonce I was credule ; 
vn ce I had bon coeur 1 Adieu ! amusez 
vous bien !" and with a laugh that sounded 
harsh and discordant, the hardened woman 
turned awa}^ giving a visibly hard tug to 
the hand of the child by her side, who re- 
turned the favour hj accidefitall^ iYeiidmg on 
her corns. 

Annie had just turned out of the Gardens, 
when Clarisse called to her through the 
railings — 

" Yous rappelez-vous cette rousse An- 
glaise, vot lived wid a Comtesse, and vos 
too good for to speak us ?" 

" Yes, I remember." 

*' Yell, she has had von chute. She live 
wid a modiste, Oxford Street. Go to de 
magazin, achetez y quelque-chose ; you can 
riez, laugh her at de nose !" 

" Thank you, it would give me no plea- 
sure. I must hasten to poor Julie." 

" Inutile, I tell you ; elle se meurt. Cela 
vous attristerait." 

" But I may console her !" said Annie. 

" Ah, vous avez bon ca?ur ! So had I 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 305 

vonce, but it is done ! c'est fini 1" said 
Clarisse, sighing, "but it vont come back !" 

* * 7^ * 

On a wretched bed, in a more wretched 
room, lay the dpng governess of the rich 
man's family. Still a girl in years ; the 
trusting, simple innocence of youth still 
lingered in her soft blue eyes. She w^as 
alone — quite alone ; and ever and anon put 
forth her attenuated hand to reach a glass 
of toast and water which stood on a chair 
by the bedside, or to get a basin which con- 
tained a quantity of blood, for Julie had 
broken a bloodvessel. After each exertion, 
she sank back exhausted, and paler than her 
sheets would have been, had they been clean. 

It seemed strange in that home of opu- 
lence, that any one should lie there djing 
alone, unsoothed by the commonplace com- 
forts ! Yery strange ! but it is true, reader 
— true as the Gospel story of the diseased 
beggar dying at the gate of Dives, w^ho w^as 
clothed in purple and fine linen ! 

Lady w^as absent ; the feelings of 

the other ladies of the family were so refined 
that they could not witness suffering. So, 
wdien Mademoiselle was so maladroite as to 
be taken dangerously ill, they had ordered 

VOL. II. X 



306 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the carriage and left the house, leaving the 
sick governess in the cook's charge. But 
the cook — poor, fat, unwieldy soul — though 
perhaps she meant to do what she could, for 
cooks are usually soft-hearted, had quite 
enough occupation to roast and hoil, and 
make pastry for the ladies and gentlemen in 
the servants' hall; so she put all that 
" madamosel" could possibly want on a chair 
near her. The doctor said she mustn't talk, 
and what good could there be in sitting and 
watching her ? None in the world. 

At last some one, perhaps the doctor, had 
suggested greater care, so a person was sent 
for to sit by the sick girl. The person in 
question was a German soubrette, or some- 
thing of that sort. She just waited till 
poor Julie dozed off; then having found 
the sick-room very dull, she was going in 
quest of company, when a bright idea struck 
her. She would like to peep into the 
drawers ! No sooner thought than acted 
upon ; and when the dying girl opened her 
eyes, her nurse was deep in the perusal of a 
packet of letters. The natural exclamation 
of grief and indignation in the sufferer 
startled her a little. " You know the doctor 
forbid your talking," she exclaimed, after a 



ANNE SHERAVOOD. 307 

moment, with all the coolness of effrontery ; 
" if you wont mind what he tells you — if 
you will break his rules, you must expect to 
suffer. Ah, more spitting of blood ! that's 
just what I expected !" 

Again exhausted nature found a temporary 
repose, and Julie's pale cheek, here and 
there stained with crimson, sunk on the 
pillow. The watcher having satisfied her 
curiosity, went away to chat with the butler. 
Just then Annie entered. " Poor, poor 
Julie 1" was all she uttered, as she sunk on 
her knees beside the desolate bed, and took 
the white thin hand that hung down so help- 
lessly ; but Julie heard her not. She was 
in a blessed dream, kneeling beside her 
mother in the Evangelical congregation of 
her native valley, and presently her thin 
lips quivered, opened, and she began to 
chant, in a feeble, broken voice — ■ 

" L'Eternel lui-mcme 

Paitra ses tronpeaux ; 

La tendresse extreme 

Sera leur rcpos. 
* * * * 

" Aux celestes rives, 

L'agueau nous paitra ; 

La ileuve d'eaii vive 

Nous abreuvera !" 

X 2 



808 A^'XE SHERWOOD. 

And then Julie smiled a sweet, sad smile, 
and murmured, " Oui, ma mere, je viens — je 
viens ! Attends-moi !" Then the smile 
faded away, and her vision changed, for she 
added — " Seule ! bien seule ! Ah! Madame 
la Comtesse, j'ai fait mon possible ! Ne me 
renvoyez pas ! Charlotte, recitez votre verbe- 
Emilie, faites votre devoir. Dites, Madame 
la Comtesse, etes-vous contente de moi ? Je 
ne demande pas a aller an salon ! Oh, non ! 
non ! je ne me suis jamais plainte de vous, 
jamais ! Demain — oui, demain, j'aurai deux 
cents francs, ma mere cherie; je te les enverrai 
tons. Ah, je ferai tout ce qui depend de 
moi pour garder ma place ! Mais j'ai si 
mal a la poitrine ! si mal ! si mal ! And 
poor Julie woke herself with heartrending 
sobs. 

Surprise, joy to see a friend's sympathising 
face bending over her, was too much for the 
feeble frame of Julie. She could not speak, 
but stretched out her arms, and made a help- 
less effort to throw them round Annie. 

" Don't talk, dear Julie!*' whispered Annie, 
while she tenderly supported her, and the 
girl's feeble head rested on her shoulder. 
" Ee comforted, you shall not be left to the 
mercy of careless strangers. I will take 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 309 

care of you, and will bring a kind doctor to 
do you good. Poor, poor Julie I" 

Julie tried to smile ; but a convulsive strus- 
gle quivered on her lips. She looked up wist- 
fully in Annie's flice, then at a little Geneva 
w^atch that lay beside her on the bed, and 
murmuring "Oh, ma mere!" died — died 
while the merry bells were ringing for a 
bridal. 

A deep awe settled upon Annie Sherwood ; 
she did not stir nor utter a word, scarcely 
did she dare to breathe, and the fair clay 
still rested in her arms, when, an hour later, 
some one knocked softly, very softly at the 
door. Still Annie did not move, she v^^as 
spell-bound. The door opened; a person 
entered vdih slow, noiseless steps, as if death 
were already know^n to be there. 

" Is she better ?" asked a voice, low and 
tremulous with emotion. Annie started, 
and looked up at the doctor as she supposed, 
for a gentleman in black stood before her. 
" Better ! yes she is better," replied Annie ; 
" the rich man's bond-slave is free ! She is 
gone, sir," she continued solemnl}^, and 
raising her hand appealingly to heaven ; 
" she is gone to bear evidence against him at 
the bar of One w^ho judges the oppressor !' 



310 AXXE SHERWOOD. 

" Gone ! dead ! Grracious Heaven, I come 
too late !" exclaimed the young man. " Poor, 
poor Julie ! I came to save her — to " 

'' She has been long past the reach of art 
or skill !" said Annie. 

" Juhe ! Juhe ! my sweet, innocent Julie !" 
repeated the young man, sinking on his 
knees beside the bed, and reverently clasping 
the marble hand in his. " Oh, to recal the 
past ! to bring thee back for one short hour ! 
Oh, Juhe ! Julie !" 

" Did you try every tiling? Are you sure 
you tried everything?" said Annie. 

" Nothing ! nothing !" he replied. 

" How ! are you not the doctor ?" 

" I am Lady 's son." 

" You are ! Oh, how then could you let 
your mother's dependent die thus 1 alone, 
neglected ! — as in your noble house the very 
hound should not be left to die !" 

'' I knew nothing, absolutely nothing of 
her illness till to-day," exclaimed Mr. Den- 
ham, with a burst of grief, "or I should 
have been here !" 

"I did not know she had one friend in 
this house !" said Annie, sadly. 

" No, she had no friend ! I loved her — 
but " 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 311 

"But you wanted manly courage to de- 
fend her ! You have let her die ! let her be 
slowly murdered by labour and cruelty !'* 
said Annie, Avith indignant energy, which 
even the presence of the holy dead could not 
suppress. 

" I deserve your reproaches, and more !" 
said Mr. Denham. 

" You do ! But for a mother's broken 
heart, I should laud the mercy that has 
liberated her from her hard fate." 

" You are her friend," said the young 
man, quickly ; " take possession of her letters 
and papers, or they will all be " 

" Eead — I know it 1" said Annie. 

" And you will stay by her till " 



" 'No, sir ; I will not stay, but shall have 
this poor empty casket removed. It held a 

bright jewel once — but now Oh, if 

you had heard her last words ; the mournful 
tenderness, the helpless yearning with which 
she called upon her far-off mother's name ; 
but she was in the house of the stranger, 
and she lived and died alone !" 



312 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XXIV. 

"I AM assuredly very mucli surprised that 
you should have taken the liberty of remain- 
ing three days beyond your allotted time, 
Miss Sherwood !" said Lady Adelaide. " A 
person in your position ought to be well 
aware that the nature of her duties will 
not permit such a lengthened absence. Of 
course you will find the children very much 
fallen back in their studies. I must really 
talk to Mr. Curzon about it. We must have 
people upon whom we can depend, in our em- 
ployment." 

" I am extremely sorry to have seemed 
neglectful of my duties," said Annie ; " but 
the delay was quite unavoidable. I only 
remained in London to follow a poor friend 
to her grave, who had none other to perform 
the last sad duties for her." 

" That is no excuse whatever. You told 
me you had only one relation in the world 
(which was one reason of my engaging you, 
supposing that your interest would lie with 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 313 

your pupils, not out of the house). I pre- 
sume that your sister is not dead, as you are 
not in deep mourning, and no other death 
could have excused your conduct." 

Annie made no reply ; but she thought, 
'' It will not be for long. The moment I 
hear anynews of Claude, I will givewarning !" 

Annie had had the remains of the hapless 
Julie removed to her own lodgings, and had 
followed her to her lonely resting-place. 
Eandolph Denham, too, had stood by, evin- 
cing the deepest grief when earth was given 
to earth. Perhaps his grief was not un- 
mingled with remorse, for he had really 
loved Julie, only not well enough to conquer 
his family pride — only not well enough to 
protect her from the insults of his family. 
It w^as well and wisely done when the con- 
soler came, and bore the weary to her rest ! 

Annie had written to the poor mother, 
conveying as gently as she could the heart- 
breaking news of her bereavement — sending 
one of three fair locks she had severed from 
Julie's head ; one she had given to Randolph 
Denham, and as he gazed on it, some of the 
hard dross of his aristocratic nature was 
transmuted. 

Julie's little wardrobe, and few letters and 



314 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

books, had also been sent to ber mother by 
Annie's kind care ; and all the necessary 
arrangements had so taken up her time, that 
she had exceeded her leave of absence almost 
unconsciously. 

Being obliged to leave London without 
seeing Mrs. Harrington or Bertha, Annie 
wrote to both, and heard in return a con- 
firmation of Dr. Sinclair's information. Mrs. 
Harrington's letter breathed a spirit of 
thankfulness to that God who had brought 
— in her case — so much good out of evil. 
Of her husband she spoke mth the utmost 
tenderness and devotion. Bertha's letter 
made Annie smile, even in the midst of sad- 
ness. She wrote to confess that her ajSi- 
anced lover was none other than Annie's 
old fervent admirer, Charles Turner. Bertha 
had met him again and again in her many 
happy holidays, which were all spent at 
Merton with her mother; and somehow — 
she did not quite know how it came about — 
they were engaged. Bertha had written 
very hesitatingly — she felt so sure that 
Annie would ridicule her choice. She had 
good reasons for supposmg that her friend 
undervalued Charles Turner's excellent quali- 
ties of head and heart. 



ANNE SHERV/OOD. 315 

Bertlia was mistaken. Annie did full 
justice to her rustic friend now, and warmly 
applauded Bertlia' s choice. 

The young couple were to he married 
immediately, and Bertha's mother was to 
live with them ever after. 

Day after day went by, and poor Annie 
heard nothing of Claude. He seemed for- 
gotten ; his name was never pronounced. 
Sydney being gone, the other boys appeared 
to have lost all interest in Sydney's friend. 
Everything went on much as usual ; Lady 
Adelaide exerted a petty tyranny ; Mr. 
Curzon was kind in his Avay, only it was 
such a tiresome way; the children were 
tolerably good, provided they were amused, 
and all their selfish whims considered. 

Miss Dobson preserved towards Annie 
Sherwood something which she meant to be 
a dignified reserve ; but it was as little like 
dignity as a red woollen nightcap is like a 
tiara of gems. 

Annie missed Sydney; he was v/anting 
to her daily and hourly ; and he never wrote 
to make up for his absence, or to show 
that he remembered her kindness with 
gratitude. 

Time hung heavily on the governess's 



316 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

hands. She turned to writing with increased 
avidity. In consequence of her sad occupa- 
tion with regard to poor Julie's affairs, Annie 
had been obliged to leave her own business 
in London undone. At the last minute she 
had sent her parcels of MSS. to the good 
Doctor, telling him what had happened, beg- 
ging him to act for her, and to keep her 
secret. She knew he would do all that he 
was asked, and more, and slie could afford to 
await the result. 

But, whatever occupied Annie's mind, it 
always returned to Claude. Was he living ? 
Certainly, or some notice would have ap- 
peared in the papers, which she constantly 
searched for the purpose of ascertaining if 
his name were mentioned. 

Two months after Annie's return to 
Brussels, there came a letter from the Doctor, 
kind and cordial as usual, but of course con- 
taining some teasing. His news was good, 
however ; the old patron had offered sixty- 
five guineas for some small MSS., and, best 
of all, the novel, the long- cherished ambitious 
novel was sold, and that advantageously. 
Its fate with the public had yet to be de- 
cided, and Annie resolved to preserve her 
secret, even from Ellen, till she knew 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 317 

whetlier disappointment or triumph awaited 
lier. She v/rote to her sister, telhng of her 
minor success, and sending her its proceeds 
to be employed for the coming move from 
Bath to Kent. The price of the great MS. 
privately went to swell little Henry's fortune 
in the savings bank. 

On the whole, our heroine felt considerably 
elated ; and had she been sure about Claude, 
quite sure that he was well and happy, she 
would have been so too, especially if the 
Dalrymples were not in Italy! They had 
certainly left Brussels, or Annie must have 
met them in the Park or on the Boulevard. 

Lately, the beautiful Lady Adelaide had 
rather fallen off in her looks ; she had ceased 
to have absolute command over herself. 
She had given way to spleen and ill-humour ; 
and spleen and ill-humour Avill line the 
fairest forehead, and make the brightest 
cheek pallid. The timid literary lady was as 
intimate as ever with Lady Adelaide, and 
much more intimate than ever with Mr. 
Curzon ; indeed, her attentions to him as- 
sumed quite a tender as2:>ect ; and Mr. Curzon 
began to think the literary lady not quite so 
old, not quite so ugly, as he had at first 
thought her. Mr. Curzon never Avent be- 



318 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

yond allowing himself to be admired ; and 
lie certainly was a strikingly handsome man, 
and wonld have been more so, if he had had 
the least change of expression — indeed, if he 
could occasionally have forgotten " who and 
what he was 1" But with all his pride of 
place, Mr. Curzon had hon cceur, only a very, 
very little mind. 

Annie was now totally throw^n on her own 
resources for companionship. The result of 
her solitude was an improvement in her re- 
flective powers, but a prostration of her 
spirits. Frequent letters from Eichard and 
Ellen (who often wrote jointly) came to re- 
mind Annie of her promised return. They 
took it for granted that her intended warn- 
ing had been given and accepted : this mis- 
apprehension both pained and embarrassed 
our heroine. Truly she yearned for ker 
sister's society, and the renewed endearments 
of a real home ; but how could she tear her- 
self from the spot wdiere she had known and 
loved Claude Douglas, wdiile yet uncertain of 
his fate ? On the other hand, she felt grieved 
and ashamed to put off her return to Ellen 
from time to time without having any suffi- 
cient excuse to oifer for disappointing her 
washes. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 319 

While lier mind was most uneasily vacil- 
lating between contradictory wishes and re- 
solutions, an incident occurred which imme- 
diately decided her movements. She wrote 
to her sister, "Don't be grieved with me, 
dearest Ellen, for disappointing your wishes 
— or rather for delaying their accomphsh- 
ment — but I have agreed to remain with 
the CWzons till Walter goes to Harrow. 
Perhaps it will be a year before he is con- 
sidered fit; but that will soon slip away, 
and I shall be of more use to you in a 
twelvemonth's time than I should be now. 
Eemember, dearest, that none of my plans 
are renounced — they are only deferred. I 
fally intend to monopolise Harry's educa- 
tion." 

Annie's decision hinged on a trifle, — a 
seeming accident. She had a very untidy 
work-basket (not a very uncommon thing, 
unhappily, with a literary lady), and she 
had been so engaged with other matters, 
that the untidy basket remained untouched, 
and probably unnoticed, in her bed-room, 
from the time of her leaving for her holiday. 
There it might have remained, had she not 
heard Miss Dobson enlarging to Lady Ade- 
laide on the governess's untidiness, and 



820 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

bringing forward as a proof the disorder of 
her w^ork. 

''How should yon know?" said Lady 
Adelaide, shar23ly. 

"I — I went into her room yesterday/' 
stammered Dobson, who w^as rather afraid 
lest she should have overstepped her orders. 

" And pray, w^hat business had you 
there ?" asked Lady Adelaide, who resented 
mean tricks, unless she had herself devised 
them. 

" I went to — to look for an Encyclopaedia, 
your Ladyship." 

''You wTnt to look for no such thing, 
Dobson ; you w^ent to satisfy your own cu- 
riosity." 

" Dear me, how your Ladyship finds out 
everything !" 

" Yes ; you know^ it is useless to try and 
deceive me," said Lady Adelaide ; adding — 
"And, pray Avliat did you find there to 
satisfy you?" 

" A letter !" said Dobson, who was trem- 
bling. 

" A letter ! Well, go on." 

" At the bottom of the basket " 

" Oh ! then you dived to the bottom ?" 

" Your Ladyship knows everything ! At 



AXNE SHERWOOD. 3i?l 

the bottom of the basket I saw a letter, 
sealed with arms surmounted by a coronet 1" 

If Lady Adelaide or Dobson had been 
acute, they would have noticed that some 
one who had been walking up- stairs with a 
slow, languid step (hearing, inevitably, every 
word of the conversation, yet little caring 
whether she heard it or not), suddenly 
rushed onvv^ard like an arrow from a bow, 
heedless of the conclusion tlie conversation 
might have. 

" She can't have seen it, for the seal is 
unbroken ; some one has put it in there, 
wdiile she was in England." 

" Bring it to me when she is out to-mor- 

J? 
row. 

"Yes, my Lady." 

" Who is it from, Dobson?" 

" Eeally, I can't tell, my Lady." 

" Nonsense, you know well enough !" 

" But, your Ladyship !" 

" I insist upon knowing." 

" Well, then, I did just hold it up to the 
light, and " 

"Wliatthen?" 

" AVell, then, your Ladyship, — but I know 
you'll be very angry vvdth me !" 

" Angry with a thing like you ! Speak V* 

VOL. II. Y 



322 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Well, tlien, my Lady, I think — I believe 
— I'm afraid (oil, liow wicked she is !) — I'm 
afraid it's from Mr. Curzon !" 

" Is that all, you silly fool ? If you are 
quite sure that the letter comes from Mr. 
Curzon, you need not bring it to me ; I never 
meddle in his affairs. But do you know his 
writing' ?" 

" No — yes — that is to say, my Lady — " 

" That is to say, you have been prying 
into Mr. Curzon 's business, as you no doubt 
would into mine, if you dared ! But you 
know me, Dobson — you know me ; beware 
how you go too far !" and Lady Adelaide 
gave her creature a look which made her 
shrink in her poor, wrinkled skin, as if she 
had heard the hiss of a rattlesnake. 

Despite her many little gains, Dobson 
began to hate her bondage, and if she could 
have sold herself for a higher price, she 
w^ould have had no compunction in betraj- 
ing the confidence of her patroness. 

But to return to Annie, as she sat in her 
lonely room, but lonely now no more. She 
held in her trembling hands the precious 
letter, still unopened, while her heart beat 
wdtli tumultuous joy in recognising Claude's 
ivriting, and in reading the post-mark of the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 323 

Eternal City — Eoma ! Eoma ! the goal of all 
her thoughts, hopes, fears, and wishes, 

"I scarcely know how, my dear Miss 
Sherwood, to excuse to you or to myself, the 
liberty which I take in writing to you. But 
why should I talk to you of excuses ? You 
are not of the world, and were you, I should 
need no apology, for then I should have had 
no temptation to transgress those conven- 
tionalities which would have formed your 
law. But why do I thus intrude on you ? 
I scarcely know myself, unless it be that, 
hke ' the man of many friends,' I have 
none, and turn instinctively to the only 
heart wdiich, since my mother's death, seems 
to have understood mine. 

" How often I have wished for your com- 
panionship in my solitary rambles about 
Rome ! — Bome, w^hose very name is poetry ! 
— Rome, which in all my wanderings I had 
never before seen ; for although ' I loved her 
from my boyhood,' I resolved to reserve the 
sight of the world's wonder for a period of 
life when my feelings would be more accor- 
dant with the scenes I should explore. With 
what holy reverence I tread upon the dust 
of ages ! the dust of Earth's masters ! 

The learned and the virtuosi would make 
Y 2 



/ 

324 ANXE SHERWOOD. 

Litter niockeiy of me for walking about 
Eome, as in a dream, Avitli no more erudite 
tome for a guide-book than the sentimental 
production of an impassioned woman ! But 
I could well endure a few sarcasms, Avhile I 
can secure the company of the matchlQss 
' Corinne ;' encore plus heureux si je pouvais 
me defaire dece meprisable Oswald! Oswald, 
who was too contemptibly weak to resolve 
on making his own happiness, in defiance of 
a world which had nothing to offer him in 
exchange for the felicity he sacrificed upon 
her tinselled altars. You, at least, will ap- 
plaud my choice of a cicerone, and I shall 
never converse with ' Corinne' without re- 
membering you. 

" I remember some years since (though 
with a lesser interest), ' Consuelo' and I 
wandered together through Venice. Have 
you ever read ' Consuelo ?' If not, do read 
it ; as a sentimental fiction it is only inferior 
to ' Corinne,' and is full of poetry and fine 
thoughts. 

" But to return to Eome. I shall make no 
fruitless efforts to describe to you my 
thoughts on her, but 

' I would tliat my tongue could utter 
The tlioufrlits tliat arise in me !' 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 325 

The one wliicli always rises to the surface is 
Filicaja's tender lamentation — ■ 

' Deh fossi tu men bell' o almeii piu forte !' 

You know the exquisite opening of the poem, 

'Italia!— oh, Italia!' &c. 

''Get Leopardi, if you have not a copy, but 
only read the first piece ; it begins thus : — 

' Patria mia, vedo le mura e gli archi, 
E le coloimc e i simulacri e I'errae , 

Torri degli avi nostri, 
Ma la gloria uoii vedo !' 

The whole piece is exquisite. 

" No modern Italian poet has equalled 
Leopardi's majestic fragments. 

" Ah, if you were here ! But I dare not, in 
imagination, conjure up a possible vision 
which waking reality must so soon dispel ! 
I talked of not returning to Brussels ; but I 
must, I certainly shall, if you are there, if 
only to talk over Eome with you. 

" I was entreated last night ' d'assister a 
un bal" A ball in Eome ! dan(?ing in Eome ! 
The suggestion is painful. Only imagine 
dancing over the ashes of Caesar ! I marvel 
that they should propose it, even to a 
Frenchman ! They forget that I am also 
Scotch, and, besides, they evidently entertain 
the common, vulgar notion, that a French- 



326 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

man is born to dance ' as the sparks fly 
upwards.' 

*' I know nothing more harassing to the 
spirit, than the tone of English society here. 
A party went to the opening of a tomb the 
other day, and — and carried their luncheon 
with them ! Imagine sandwiches and Avine- 
glasses on the tomb of a Cecilia Metella, 

perhaps ! Lady is here, with a daughter 

who is a beauty and an heiress — she is much 
the fashion, and seen everywhere. Some- 
times I have thought her capable of rather a 
higher destiny than dancing with insipid 
fops all the evening, and evening after even- 
ing ; but on farther acquaintance, I fear she 
is a triiler. 

" I see very little of the gay world ; 
indeed — 

' My (lays among the dead are passed !' 

I believe people think me morbid or affected. 
My best acquaintance, i.e., at once the most 
profitable and agreeable, is a young American 
sculptor, wdiose own head is a model of 
antique beauty, and wdiose genius is as 
plainly delineated in his pure, intellectual 
countenance, as in his works. ^Vlien they 
come to be know^n, they must give him 
a place beside his gifted countryman, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 327 

Hyram Powers, who, from tlie humble em- 
ployment of a journeyman watchmaker, has 
risen to be a poet in enduring marble. Wliat 
a destiny ! I like the idea of a young genius 
in a young country ! How bright and fresh 
must its emanations be ! — somethins: like 
the first young stars that hung over a newly- 
created world ! But to come back to my 
sculptor friend, whom I admire enthusiasti- 
cally. I cannot refrain from giving you a 
description of him. Picture to yourself a 
tall, slight, elegant figure, with just enough 
fragility to occasion a shght stoop, which yet 
takes nothing from his grace. A Grecian 
profile, quite pure ; large, dark, very dark 
eyes, full of tenderness and thought rather 
than of fire ; hair, black, soft, luxuriant, long 
and curling, beautiful enough for a woman's 
head ; and withal, a demeanour so quiet and 
subdued, that it might almost be called sad. 
He speaks little, till the chord is touched 
which awakes his soul's poetry — then the 
beautiful face wakes up, and speaks eloquent 
words before the voice is heard. I should 
Hke you to see Waldo — — ; and yet no ; 
probably no woman would see and not love 
him. 'No, I would rather that you should 
never see him. 



3^28 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" We talk of visiting Athens together — I 
know every inch of the ground, hut never 
tire of Greece. We shall then go I know 
not where, hut at least to some part of the 
* Morgen-lande.' Did the beauty of that 
expression ever strike you ? I am sure it 
must have 1 Before travelling eastw^ard, I 
shall make a rapid descent on Brussels for a 
few days. 

* * * vH 

" After an interval of two months, I have 
taken up the foregoing sheet of random, un- 
connected sentences, and w^ondered at my 
own temerity in writing them. To you, 
Annie Sherwood, they say too much, or too 
little ! How shall I explain myself, to you 
in whom I have found not only that rare 
thing, an intellectual companion, hut also — 
forgive the boldness of the remark — a tender 
friend ! 

''I dreamt of returning to Brussels, and 
seeing you again ; but it must not be, or — I 
should never have the resolution to 

'* Brilliant as a vain world may estimate my 
lot, there is a deep shadow on its sunshine, 
and that shadow must not fall on those I 
love. A skeleton sits down at my banquets, 
which wants even the veil and the crow^n 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 329 

of roses with which the Epicurean voluptu- 
ary was wont to mask the memento of mor- 
tality. I must gaze on the appalling relic 
naked, and I must gaze on it alone ! 

"But I will not, I must not enlarge on my 
sorrows, real or imaginary. You — you have 
enough of your ov/n, more than enough, in 
being placed in a position equally unsuited 
to the elevation of your mind and the tender- 
ness of your heart. I cannot help hoping 
that you may soon exchange the ungenial 
atmosphere in which you live, for your 
sister's pleasant home, which you have so 
often described to me. I ought to say, per- 
haps, that you may soon exchange it for a 
home of your own ; but no, I cannot — I am 
not generous enough to think of you as 
making the happiness of another man. 

"Adieu, malgre moi, je reviens a ma langue 
maternelle, lorsque c'est mon coeur qui parle ! 
Adieu, chere Miss Sherwood. Prenez bon 
courage au milieu des chagrins qui traversent 
votre vie. Souvenez-vous que la Providence 
finit toujours, par jeter un pen de lumiere et 
de paix dans les ames qui ont confiance en 
elle. 

" Priez Dieu pour moi quand mon souvenir 
vous reviendra, je pars pour la Grece avec 

VOL. II. z 



330 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

un lourd fardeau, et je sens saigner tons les 
coups que le sort m'a deja portes. Plus 
j'avance, plus je m'isole, cette pensee est 
affreuse pour moi. Adieu, encore une fois 
adieu 1 Croyez que j'emporte un amer regret, 
c'est celui de n'avoir pas pu vous consoler, 
comme j'aurais voulu le faire, bien souvent, 
je ne vous oublierai jamais ! non jamais ! 
" Je vous embrasse du fond de mon ame 1 

" Claude." 

Adieu, tel est le mot de cette etrange vie, 
Ou uotre main fletrit la fleur qu'elle a ravie, 
Avant qu'a I'oeil epris, n'ait briUe sa coiileur ; 
Ou par iustant I'espoir en un sein se repose, 
AJnsi qu'un vain rayon, et toujours y depose 
Le germe aigri de la douleur. 

Je le sais, non jamais le destin ne repare, 
L'outrage fait aux coeurs, qu'ici-bas il separe, 
De mon front eprouve, ce beau reve est exclu, 
J'ai compris qu'entre miUe, une ame etait fidele, 
Et qu' en son nid la joyeuse liirondeUe, 
Avec I'ete ne revient pas. 

Adieu ! Quand on a dit cette amere parole, 

II n'en faut plus cherclier une autre qui console, 

II faut meler ses pleurs et 



END OF VOL. II. 



p^ 1 



LV 



6 



-& 






: - 




L I B RAHY 

OF THE 
U N I VERS ITY 
Of 1LLI NOIS 




K84<3 






^4yr^J^C^Li^> 



fify**^***^** 




$ 



f\\\ 



6 




ANNE SHERWOOD: 



OB, THE 



SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS OF ENGLAND. 






" II faut 6ter les masques des choses, aussi bien que des personnes!" 

Montaigne. 
" Per me si va nella citti dolente : 
Per me si va nell' eterno dolore : 
Per me si va tra la perduta gente." — Dante. 

" Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at 
ease, and with the contempt of the proud."— Ps. cxxiii., Bible Version. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. I. 



LONDON: 
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1857. 



LOUDON : 

SAVILL AND EDWARDS, PRINTERS, CHANDOS STRELT, 

COVENT GARDEN. 



8S3 
v. 2 



TO 

MES. BEECHES STOWE. 



Madam, 

Though personally unknown to you, 
and consequently deprived of the opportunity of re- 
questing your consent to this dedication, I am induced 
to believe, by the spirit which breathes through your 
own admirable writings, that the cause of the oppressed 
will always find a responsive echo in your heart ; and 
that every attempt to expose a wrong, or to suggest a 
remedy for that wrong, will enlist your sympathies. 
I feel honoured by dedicating the following volumes 
^ to the benefactress of the black slave. 

I am, Madam, 






Your obedient servant, 

BERKELEY-AIKIK 



PREFACE. 



Many novels of a romantic character have 
been written, purporting to portray the 
governess life ; many of them good and ex- 
cellent in design, yet more good and excel- 
lent in execution. The theme has enlisted 
the sympathy, and employed the pen of gifted 
men, and scarcely less gifted women, until a 
subject in itself sufficiently homely and un- 
inviting, has been invested with a poetic 
garb, concealing too frequently its own 
sordid under-garments. 

The graceful and pleasant books alluded 
to, are very charming fancy pieces, in which 
the distressed anS persecuted governess 
heroine goes through unheard-of trials, 
meets with incredible injustice, sometimes 
treads on the verge of mental — if not phy- 
sical — martyrdom, but emerges from the fire 
of unmerited affliction, in every instance, 



VI PREFACE. 

like gold — refined, in proportion to the heat 
of the furnace in which she has been mar- 
tyrising. 

It is said that when General Canrobert 
viewed the fatal but glorious charge, when 

" Into the valley of death rode the six hundred !" 

he exclaimed with the enthusiasm of bravery, 
yet with the critical acumen of a practised 
soldier, "C'est magnifique ! mais ce n'est pas 
la guerre !" So are we sometimes constrained 
to say, when one of these immaculate heroines 
comes forth from the house of bondage " an 
angel still," as she has been an angel all 
through her trials, and meets with the due 
'reward of virtue (an immense rise in the 
social scale, a marriage uniting love and in- 
terest, or a colossal fortune from an old 
Indian uncle, before supposed dead) — " C'est 
magnifique ! mais ce n'est pas la vie" No, 
no, it is not life ! The governess who has 
passed through the usual ordeal in the social 
'institutions of aristocratic England — unless, 
indeed, she have borne with her to the 
Lroverness life, high, exalted principles of reli- 
gion and honour — is more likely to become 
hardened than purified ; more likely to be- 
come morose and ill-tempered than a saint- 



PREFACE. VU 

like, patient martyr ; in many instances, alas ! 
more likely to become cunning and deceitful 
than to continue faithful and upright. " My 
behaviour have I learnt from my entertain- 
ment." In the present generation the 
mothers of England are strangely blind to 
their own interests, and to those of their 
children, strangely blind to the fact that they 
are daily arming their slaves against them- 
selves ! 

In the following volumes an attempt has 
been made (how successfully must be left to 
the impartial reader to decide) to delineate 
neither fictitious scenes nor fictitious cha- 
racters, but individuals, groups, and tableaux 
from real existence. For this purpose ma- 
terials for the work have been carefully col- 
lected during ten years ; evidence has been 
gathered from sources above suspicion, in 
addition to that obtained by personal 
observation. 

Anne Sherwood may be regarded as the 
united testimony of some ninety or a hundred 
professional gentlewomen representing their 
class. Not one solitary record of the gover- 
ness life herein related has been even coloured 
with the pencil of exaggeration ; bare facts 
have been stated, and in many instances 



Vlll PREFACE. 

circumstances have been suppressed which 
were either unfit for the public eye, or of so 
highly improbable an appearance, that, if 
related, they would not have met with 
credence. 

Though anxious to draw exclusively from 
real life, the author of Anne Sherwood has 
been, for obvious reasons, careful to avoid 
whatever might prove painful to individuals, 
and has consequently altered dates, localities, 
and, in many instances, the social position of 
the characters. 

Obliged by the taste of the age to adopt 
the form of the novel, instead of the graver 
style, in which one of the most crying evils of 
our land might perhaps with more propriety 
have been discussed, the author must entreat 
the reader's indulgence for the probable de- 
fects of narrative, &c. None of those defects 
have arisen from wilful carelessness ; and 
whatever the eye of the critic may find to 
condemn (much it will certainly discover), it 
is confidently hoped that the public at large, 
taken in the extended sense, almost always 
a generous public, will at least sympathise 
with an attempt to expose and ameliorate 
the condition of the White Slaves of England. 
" Courage to speak the truth, though it be 



PREFACE. IX 

out of favour and fashion ; to stand by the 
right when it is not the winning side ; to 
give the wrong its true name, no matter 
w^hat my Lord may think or my Lady will 
say — that ip Aie courage most wanted in 
these days !" 

Chelsea, 1857. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE I. 



The latest news in Merton (a village not far 

from L , in Yorkshire) was, that the 

Vicar was dead. There was nothing strange 
in the news, for the Vicar was an old man, 
and had long been an ailing one ; yet it 
created an extraordinary sensation. He had 
spent all his life in the village ; from youth 
to age had walked among his people in 
single-minded integrity and unostentatious 
holiness. He had been poor — literally poor, 
— but of his scant means, oft and again he 
had imparted help to his yet poorer flock ; 
and when he was constrained to say, " Silver 
and gold have I none," his large-hearted 
charity found other issues for its copious 
streams. Mr. Sherwood had been, in truth, 

VOL. I. B 



2 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the father of his flock, and had fallen with 
his armour on, having expired at the altar, 
immediately after the administration of the 
Eucharist. Never, perhaps, had a more 
solemn scene been witnessed than that of 
the white-haired pastor, who had struggled 
bravely with sickness and suffering, finally 
laying down his life at the foot of the very 
altar at which he had ministered; and his 
people felt it as they should. To them his 
death was more a triumphant translation 
than aught else, and for himself gain im- 
measurable, though to others a desolating 
bereavement. 

Mr. Sherwood had left two daughters — 
motherless, friendless, and portionless. Per- 
haps, had not the good old man been caught 
so suddenly from earth to heaven, the 
possible destitution of his children would 
have pressed on his spirit ; but he had been 
spared that pang, and was at rest. 

It was evening — sunset on an autumn 
evening. All was mournful and deatldike 
without, as the wind swept the sered leaves 
from the trees, making sport of their lost 
glories ! Yet more mournful was the scene 
within, where the Vicar's daughters sat on 
the ground, bowed down with sorrow, beside 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 3 

the cold, sad relics of mortality. They sat 
with their arms folded round each other, the 
face of the younger hidden in her sister's 
neck, while the elder bent over her with an 
air of protection almost maternal. Their 
low, stifled sobs alone broke the silence of 
the room. So far they had only felt and 
seen their bereavement ; care for the future 
had not once intruded on the sacredness of 
their sorrow. There they sat — poor, deso- 
late girls ! — with no other light than the 
chilling moonbeams stealing into the cham- 
ber of death, till the solemn midnight hour 
sounded from the old church tower, and then 
Annie Sherwood rose, and led her young 
sister away. 

"Let us stay! we are best here!" said 
Ellen. "Oh, that I had died for him, or 
with him ! Father, father ! my precious 
father !" exclaimed she, with a fresh burst of 
agonised grief. 

" You would have left me alone then, 
Ellen ! — alone to struggle with life !" 

" Oh, no !" said Ellen, fondly ; " I spoke 
foolishly. But what is there to live for, 
Annie? What have we to do in this 
world?" 

" Much," said Annie ; "much more than 

b 2 



4 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

you think of, Ellen ! We have a work to 
perform in the shadowy future that you little 
dream of now ! Come, Ellen, you will 
witli me?" 

There was a degree of volition in Annie 
Sherwood's voice — something unexplained, 
but powerful, which made her younger sister 
instinctively yield her will, and follow where 
she directed. Both sisters bent down reve- 
rently over the marble-cold face of their 
saintly father, and left it wet with tears ; 
but when Annie led her sister away, her step 
was firmer and more composed than that of 
Ellen. As they walked together, hand in 
hand, the sisters formed a strange contrast. 
Ellen was tall, slight, and graceful ; but her 
delicate complexion, her long, bright, fair 
hair and blue eyes — blue as the violets, — 
showed no mental power, no character, but 
gentleness and affection. Annie Sherwood 
was all but short — dark, and with very little 
pretension to beauty, — perhaps, had not one 
correct feature, unless it were the large grey 
eye, that lit up sometimes with a world of 
meaning, *and the broad clear brow, in which 
the intellectual faculty was unusually deve- 
loped. Common observers would have passed 
Annie Shenvood by unnoticed, as the last 



ANNE SHERWOOD. O 

woman in the world formed for admiration ; 
but when she spoke, she had — whether con- 
sciously or not — the art of riveting atten- 
tion, and that exclusively. Every one thought 
Ellen beautiful, and she was so ; no one con- 
sidered Annie even pretty, but yet none 
who had conversed with her, ever forgot her. 
Ellen was not exactly clever, but intelligent 
and accomplished, as far as her limited oppor- 
tunities had gone ; that is, she played the 
piano tolerably well, and with taste ; sang 
sweetly, drew landscapes, and knew some 
French, and a little less Italian. Annie 
knew none of these things. She had had 
the same advantages as Ellen, but had learnt 
nothing of music, had no voice, less ear, 
could not draw a straight line, and knew no 
modern language but her own. Still, Annie 
knew a great deal in her way. She was a 
good Greek and Latin scholar ; she had laid 
up a strange mass of heterogeneous know- 
ledge ; had read every book that came in her 
way, and hunted up those that were out of 
her way. Her poor father, himself a man 
of taste and acquirements, had possessed a 
curious, though not very valuable collection 
of old books, and had felt more secret pride 
and pleasure in seeing his Annie hoarding up 



6 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

treasures of knowledge "in lier own odd 
way," as lie called it, than in watching the 
progress of her fairer sister, in what might 
be considered more feminine accomplish- 
ments. Yet he loved his children equally; 
some even thought that the gentle Ellen had 
the larger share in his heart ; for Annie was 
hasty, and naturally inclined to resentment ; 
but she was noble and generous, and he was 
proud of her, poor, simple man ! and when 
his mind's eye looked forward, he saw Annie 
the firm supporter of her more yielding 
and timid sister — her example in all that was 
good and high-minded. 

The funeral was over. The man of God 
was laid to rest in the churchyard of his 
beloved village, beneath a dark, shadowy 
tree, and the orphan girls had turned away 
from the new-made grave, with feelings of 
almost utter desolation. On re-entering 
their lonely home, Annie involuntarily ex- 
claimed, as her eye rested on the scene 
endeared to her by the tenderest recollec- 
tions, " It will be indeed a trial to leave it." 

" To leave it !" ejaculated Ellen : " why 
should we ?" 

" Why?" repeated Annie, who well knew 
that forethought formed no part of her 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 7 

sister's character. " My poor, dear Ellen, is 
it possible that you have forgotten what 
must be ! that we must yield our places to 
the new Vicar and his family ? Don't you 
know, dear child, that they will perhaps 
soon arrive ?" 

"Yes, yes, I know all about it," said 
Ellen; "but you know Mr. Everard is not 
at all a rich man : he has, besides, a small 
family ; so he and his wife might be glad to 
let us two rooms, and then " 

" Very likely indeed," said Annie. 

" And then you know, Annie," said 
Ellen, " as they say Mrs. Everard is so 
amiable, and has such sweet children, we 
should gain valuable friends, perhaps " 

"All you say is very true," interrupted 
Annie ; "a delightful plan, if it could only 
be accomplished ! But what are we to live 
on, Ellen?" 

" So little would suffice us," said Ellen. 

" Very true ; but if that little be wanting ! 
if we have nothing ?" 

" I suppose we must see about selling the 
books, and the furniture, and the " 

" I think we must summon the auctioneer 
on Monday," said Annie. 

" So soon !" exclaimed Ellen. 



8 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Yes, dear," said Anne, gently ; " what- 
ever has to be done, should be done promptly. 
It would not do to inconvenience Mrs. Eve- 
rard, by allowing her to find us unprepared 
on her arrival. Of course it is a trial even 
to part from the inanimate objects so long 
familiarized by association — the very chairs 
in which our precious father has sat, the 
books he has read ! But, alas ! it must be, 
Ellen — it must be !" 

" Sell a part," suggested Ellen. 

" Do you know about how much the whole 
would produce ?" asked Annie. 

" Perhaps a hundred pounds," said Ellen. 

" Probably forty \" 

" But we could live on that a long time — 
a very long time !" said Ellen. 

" And when the forty was gone, Ellen — 
what then ?" 

" I don't know," said Ellen, dejectedly. 

" I know you don't, poor girl ; but I do, 
Ellen. "We must work for our living." 

" At what?" 

" We must be governesses." 

"Oh, yes, that will be delightful!' 3 said 
Ellen ; only she added, more sadly, " We 
must leave Merton, Annie." 

"Of course we must," replied Annie. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 9 

" For myself, I feel I shall be strong to bear 
whatever may await me in the shape of 
trial; for you only I tremble, dear Ellen ! ,s 

" Nay, you must not be anxious about 
me," said the young girl — for Ellen was but 
eighteen ; Annie had had four more years' 
experience of life; — "I shall do well, I am 
sure ; if anything could soften the blow our 
dear father's loss has given, anything com- 
pensate for parting with you, Annie, and 
parting from this dear place, it would be 
living with sweet children." 

" But you will have others to live with 
besides children : parents — perhaps grand- 
fathers, grandmothers, uncles, aunts, and 
cousins, — and will have to study to please 
them." 

" I shall try very hard to do it, then," 
said Ellen, " and shall like it very much ; 
all but leaving you and Merton ! I have 
but one fear, — that I am not clever enough. 
Now, you, Annie, who know almost as much 
as papa, you will, I dare say, get a very good 
situation — or what shall I call it? rather, 
what does the world call it ?" 

" By the world I suppose you mean the 
ladies who engage governesses : if osten- 
tatious, they call it an appointment, as if 



10 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

you were a military officer ; if proud, a situ- 
ation ; if vulgar parvenus, they will descend 
to the word place." 

"Dear me ! How do you know all this, 
Annie ?" 

" Oh, I have made very minute inquiries 
with regard to governessing," said Annie, 
" two or three years since, that I might be 
armed at all points; for I knew it would be 
our kismet, as Mussulmans say." 

"And you never told me your expectations, 
Annie !" 

" Told you, poor child ! Why should I ? 
Would you have me stop the glorious flight 
of yonder skylark, soaring sunward, with 
the suggestion that he had better moderate 
the merry strain he is pouring forth, as he 
is probably to fall by the sportsman's 



gunr 



P" 



" Is it, then, so dreadful to be a gover- 
ness ! ,; exclaimed Ellen; "are they all un- 
happy?" 

" From what I have heard, I believe them 
to be the most unhappy, ill-treated class in 
the world !" said Annie, with a heightened 
colour and a flashing light in her eye, which 
showed that she felt herself ill-treated by 
anticipation. " Bertha Somerton has writ- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 11 

ten me pages on the subject, though she 
is the most meek-spirited, uncomplaining 
creature living. In the three years she has 
been out, you don't know the strange things 
she has met with — the daily, hourly humi- 
liations that " 

Here Annie stopped short, for Ellen 
looked positively frightened at the prospect 
before her, and she repented her own impe- 
tuosity. 

" But if it is so dreadful, dear Annie, why 
should we try it ? Why not attempt some 
humbler occupation, in which we should be 
less exposed to trial and insult ?" 

" Why, Ellen ! because it is our kismet, 
as I told you before. We were born daugh- 
ters of a scholar and a gentleman ; the 
world would never forgive us should we 
descend in life — they will ascribe our course 
to vulgarity, if not to more perverted prin- 
ciples. We must suffer, to retain the world's 
good opinion. Ellen, dear, you have much 
to learn." 

" I know I have," said Ellen, sighing j 
" but I hope you will find Bertha's account 
exaggerated : perhaps we shall be led by 
a kind Providence to those who will act 
towards us as Christians should. Of one 



12 ANNE SIIEltWOOD. 

thing I am quite sure, your talents must 
command appreciation and respect.' 3 

"My talents!" exclaimed Annie; "my 
talents, Ellen ! Yes, they will be appreciated, 
as your pretty face will be ! You will see 
what both will produce. As I said before, 
dear one, I feel as if I could meet anything, 
like 

1 The erring great ami dimly wise.' 

I can say, * Here's a heart for every fate ;' 
but for you, darling — for you, who are so 
young, so delicate, timid, and inexperienced 
— for you I have a thousand tremblino- 
fears." 

" But I have been thinking," said Ellen, 
musingly, — " I have been thinking how we 
are ever to set about this business. What is 
the first thing to be done ? We have so 
few friends !" 

" Few, indeed," said Annie. " None but 
our rustic neighbours ; but it is better to be 
independent. We must repair to London 
the moment the sale is over, whatever it 
may cost us, Ellen, to leave our long-loved 
home, and our father's grave, — indeed, all 
that is dear to us in life ; the sooner the 
bitter cup is drained the better, the sooner 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 13 

the bitterness will be passed. Cheer up, 
clear Ellen," continued the elder sister, 
bending fondly over and kissing her ; " per- 
haps our prospects are brighter than I have 
anticipated." 

" Yes, very likely we shall be happier than 
you think, Annie," replied Ellen, who was 
easily comforted ; " and, after all, it is not 
wise to meet misfortunes half-way. Per- 
haps Bertha has been singularly unfortunate. 
I remember reading a tale once, in which 
the heroine was a governess, and she " 

" Married a duke, of course ; well, we shall 
see. But now, Ellen, help me to sort these 
books, and make a list of them." 

The sisters then busied themselves in 
arranging their father's modest library. 
While thus occupied, poor Ellen's tears 
flowed incessantly, but gently. Annie, too, 
wept; but she dashed away the drops as 
they gathered in her eyes, with a sort of 
stern stoicism, and resolutely continued her 
work. Annie Sherwood was formed with 
a strong, sinewy mind, but it was rather 
warped by the prejudices natural to one 
whose only acquaintance with the world 
was drawn from books ; her feelings corre- 
sponded with the strength of her intellect, 



14 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

but were liable to misdirection. Her love 
for Ellen was something approaching ado- 
ration — it was tender and protecting. She 
had never known what is called romantic 
passion, had never been ever so slightly 
tinged with love, and all the affections and 
feelings, which in a heart like hers would 
have been poured out as an offering to an 
idol (had she ever known one capable of in- 
spiring her with a real passion), had been 
naturally centred in her lovely sister. But 
Annie wanted to know more of life, to know 
more of, and to distrust, her own strong will 
and masculine energies. Ellen — the gentle, 
yielding, loving Ellen, had the heart of a 
seraph, and looked up to her sister, as 
something more than mortal ; nor had it 
ever occurred to her to contrast her own 
beauty with that sister's plainness. Never 
were sisters more united, heart and soul, but 
in one respect the elder was less happy than 
the other ; she was a learned and skilful 
theologian, knew the Fathers well, and all 
the orthodox divines ; she could have 
silenced a sceptic : Ellen knew nothing of 
the Fathers or theologians — would have 
stammered and become confused in an 
argument, but she was deeply religious. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 15 

The girls worked on in almost silence, 
unless now and then Ellen asked a question 
of her sister, with regard to the new and 
untried world on which they were about to 
enter. Neither of them had ever left York- 
shire in their lives, nor had they ever been in 
any of the large towns of that county ; but 
Ellen took it for granted that Annie must 
know everything, and be able to answer 
satisfactorily whatever questions she might 
propose. 



16 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTER II. 

The auctioneer was an active man of busi- 
ness ; the preparations for the sale w r ere soon 
made, and the hitherto neat and picturesque 
Vicarage in tw T o or three days presented as 
great a scene of desolation and change as an 
auctioneer's clerk could effect. About ten 
in the morning, the few respectable inhabi- 
tants (consisting principally of farmers, with 
a sprinkling of retired tradesmen) had as- 
sembled in the front of the house, on the 
small patch of grass by courtesy called a 
lawn, for the rooms were considered too 
small for the sale. The modest articles of 
furniture w r ere brought out one by one, ex- 
amined, and passed judgment on by the 
bystanders.. The auctioneer read the con- 
ditions of sale, and, after a dry preparatory 
cough, proceeded to business. The sale went 
on pretty briskly, but it was observed that 
nearly all the lots were knocked down to one 
person, who, often bidding beyond the worth 
of his purchases, seemed determined to dis- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 17 

tance all competitors. He had already 
secured the complete furniture of the Vicar's 
little study, that of the parlour in which the 
sisters usually sat, and many other things, 
as well as all the books. Every one looked 
on with surprise, firstly because Mr. Turner 
was a young farmer just beginning life, with 
fair prospects indeed, but not such as to 
warrant any unnecessary expenditure ; then, 
nearly all he had bought would be useless to 
him. What was he to do w T ith a great stuffed 
easy- chair, fit for an invalid ? What could 
he possibly want with a lady's work-table ? 
Beyond all, what use could he make of a 
host of old Greek and Latin books ? for, 
though educated to a certain extent, the 
3'oung man was innocent of all classic attain- 
ment. He overheard some remarks passed 
on him ; beyond all, he observed the satirical 
glances of his neighbours, but he took no 
notice of those glances, and went on bidding, 
only growing a little redder than nature had 
made him. Charles Turner was what is 
called in the world a fine young man, tall 
and well proportioned. His features were 
tolerably regular, his countenance honest and 
animated, but the sun had burnt a deep red 
into his cheeks — deep as the colour of the 
vol. i. c 



18 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

peony ; and though he was very abstemious, 
and fought hard against the ruddy glow, it 
was all in vain, nothing w T ould make him a 
shade paler. He had an excellent heart, 
good sense, and though rustic, was not 
vulgar. Then he had a dash of romance in 
his composition, which wonderfully softens 
down even the rustic, and was, besides, only 
nve-and-twenty, and very much in love. 
The world could never have suspected 
Charles Turner of aspiring to one of the 
Vicar's daughters, but it was even so. The 
Sherwoods never kept themselves aloof from 
their neighbours, even from those who in 
point of education and refinement might 
have been considered their inferiors ; and the 
result w r as, that having been admitted to 
occasional intercourse with the Vicar's little 
circle, the young farmer had unconsciously 
lost his heart. At first he had loved hope- 
lessly, and in something like aw T e of a woman 
whom he felt to be immeasurably his superior; 
then he had not unreasonably argued that 
the devotedness of his attachment might 
well weigh against his seeming presumption; 
finally, hope arose in his bosom, shadowy at 
first, but still it was hope, and that hope had 
grown into a palpable reality, and he was 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 19 

actually making preparations for his unwooed 
bride in his modest dwelling. When the 
day's proceedings had quite closed, and while 
Annie and Ellen were sitting in the disman- 
tled study, they received a visit from Mr. 
Turner. They were neither surprised nor 
offended, conjecturing that he had come with 
some good-natured offer of service; their 
greeting was consequently unusually cordial, 
and Mr. Turner, growing a few shades deeper 
coloured, sat down on one of his own pur- 
chases, but only just on the edge, and as if 
he were on the point momentarily of slip- 
ping off, w T hile he played nervously with his 
hat, and wondered if he ever could summon 
courage to speak out ! There was an 
embarrassed silence. At length Annie, the 
boldest of the party, broke it. " It was very 
kind in you to come and see us, Mr. Turner." 

Mr. Turner still twisted the rim of his hat, 
much to its detriment, but made no other 
reply. " You were a large purchaser, to-day," 
continued Annie ; " I scarcely know why, but 
it is a sort of satisfaction to me to feel that 
nearly all the things will be kept together. 5 ' 

Still the visitor spoke not. Annie made 
several efforts to introduce some subject which 
would set him at his ease, but it w r as ineffec- 

c 2 



20 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

tual. At last she began to fear that her poor 
father had been indebted to him in some way, 
and that the debt had escaped his memory. 
" I fear, Mr. Turner," said Annie, when she 
had fairly arrived at that disagreeable con- 
clusion, " I fear that you have something to 
say that you hesitate to communicate r" 

" Yes, yes, Miss Annie, that — that is it !" 
stammered Mr. Turner. " I — I — that is to 
say — can I speak to } r ou alone, Miss Annie ?" 

" Certainly," said Annie. " Ellen dear, 
leave us." 

Ellen left the room immediatelv, but on 
her exit, the young farmer w r as once more 
struck dumb. Again there was a long 
pause — again it was broken by Annie. 
" I see from your hesitation, Mr. Turner, 
that you fear to distress me by what you 
have to say. I partly guess its nature. 
If my dear father was indebted to you, as I 
strongly suspect, Ellen and I will gladly 
discharge whatever it may be." 

These words had a magical effect on 
Charles Turner ; he started from his chair, 
looked as proudly indignant as if he had 
been lord of the manor, and immediately 
found powers of articulation. " No, Mi>s 
Sherwood !" he exclaimed, " I had no 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 21 

claims on your father, and if I had, how 
can you think I would choose this moment 
to press those claims on his orphan 
daughters ?" 

"Pray forgive me, Mr. Turner," said 
Annie ; " misfortune is naturally timid and 
fearful, meeting difficulties half way ; hut I 
assure you I have heen led into this mistake 
by your seeming reluctance to enter on the 
subject, when I understood you had some- 
thing of importance to communicate." 

" Yes, I have something of importance 
to say," said Mr. Turner, who had almost 
recovered his self-possession ; " but I do not 
well know how to begin. I am grieved to 
see you and your sister leave Merton, after 
having been born in it, and known it as 
your home for so many years." 

" Yes, indeed," said Annie, sighing, " it 
is grievous to part with Merton, and all its 
dear remembrances ; but I do think that 
now we see the clear necessity of our 
leaving, we are prepared to bear the trial 
with becoming fortitude and resignation." 

" But why should you leave, Miss Annie ?" 
said Mr. Turner, drawing his chair a little 
closer to her. 

" We have not the means of living here," 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 



- - 



said Annie, " and must not think of it. To 
remain independent, a life of courageous 
exertion is before us, and we prefer 
entering on it immediately, to putting off 
the evil day, and lingering in these dear 
scenes in useless idleness." 

" Miss Annie !" said the young man, then 
paused, and looked at her very earnestly, as 
if to note how far he might venture to pro- 
ceed : but he seemed to gather encourage- 
ment from her countenance, and continued, 
" I have been thinking of a plan, by which 
you might both remain at Merton." 

"Have you?" said Annie; "you are 
very, very good.'' 

"But will you consent?' 1 he asked, 
eagerly. 

" I should, you may be sure, consent to 
whatever would fulfil so dear a wish," said 
Annie, little suspecting what would follow ; 
" but alas ! I cannot hope for anything so 
happy, Mr. Turner." 

" You must have thought it very strange 
to see me buy so much of your furniture ; 
did you not, Miss Sherwood?" 

" Yes, very strange," said Annie. 

" And you could not guess the reason 
why ?" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 23 

" No, indeed I could not." 

" It was — it was," said the young man, 
" that you might have around you what you 
had been accustomed to — things which I 
knew you would like better than newer, 
finer furniture." 

" But I cannot see," began Annie. 

" Well, I will have them removed in a few 
days to the farm," said Mr. Turner. "Every- 
thing shall be stood as nearly as possible as 
it has been here ; the papering of the rooms 
is the same, and what I cannot do, Miss 
Ellen's taste and yours will." 

" Ellen !" exclaimed Annie, growing alter- 
nately red and pale. " What can you 
mean r 

" I mean, that I hope you never will be 
separated," said the young lover ; " that you 
will both come to the home which awaits 
you ! It is humble, but " 

" Mr. Turner 1" exclaimed Annie, " do — 
do I understand you rightly ? Do you wish 
to marry Ellen?" 

" Ellen ! I never dreamt of her!" exclaimed 
Mr. Turner; "but I " 

"What can you mean, then?" 

"I mean, Miss Sherwood, that I have 
loved you long and well — presumptuously, 



24 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

you may think, still I have loved you, and 
if " 

" You cannot mean this ! M cried Annie, 
retreating a few paces. 

" Why not, Miss Sherwood ?" 

" Because — because," stammered Annie 
Sherwood ; but she could proceed no further. 

" Do you despise me, or my calling ?" 

" Neither," said Annie, t( but " 

" You will think of it, then," he exclaimed; 
"you will not make a hasty decision ; you 
will learn to love me a little — perhaps only 
a little ; but I shall be satisfied with even 
that. I know I am unworthy of you ; but 
you will one day be mine ?" 

" Oh, no ! no ! no ! never — never ! I 
cannot !" 

" Never, Miss Sherwood !" cried the young 
man, changing colour. 

" No, never ! Mr. Turner," repeated 
Annie. " What could have made you con- 
ceive such a thing ?" 

" Love 1" replied he, " love ! — such love 
as you may never know again, however 
much it may offend you now. It is your 
pride refuses me, Annie Sherwood — your 
pride, and not your heart. Mark me, you 
are going forth into the world j its pleasures 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 25 

and flatteries may please you for a while, and 
teach you to think you have done well to 
trample on a heart like mine ; but Annie, 
Annie Sherwood ! the time will come when 
you will regret the humble love you now 
reject!" He turned and left the room. 
Annie gazed after him from the window, 
with mingled feelings of interest and curio- 
sity. Hitherto she had considered Charles 
Turner a mere rustic, rather softened by 
education ; she now saw him in a new light, 
a man of strong feeling, of noble pride and 
energy ; one who, under different auspices, 
might have proved a man with whose 
destinies she need not have blushed to unite 
her own. She regretted that her refusal 
had not been more gently conveyed; she 
felt for her disinterested lover, sympathized 
with him as far as she could, but thought 
not for one moment of changing her mind. 
Busy cares of a very different nature ensued, 
and Annie dismissed her first offer of mar- 
riage from her mind much more readily and 
much sooner than most young ladies similarly 
circumstanced. The rejected swain spent a 
few hours in the depths of a wood, in whose 
shades he yielded alternately to fits of resent- 
ment and despondency. The next few days 



2G ANNE SHERWOOD. 

he shut himself up in complete solitude, and 
neglected all his concerns ; but the ensuing 
market-day he knew the price of wheat and 
barley, like a sensible man as he was, and 
found hay fallen. On the evening of the same 
day, he remembered that in the burst of his 
resentment at Annie's proud rejection, he had 
ungenerously forgotten her position, and that 
of Ellen, and had neglected to make them any 
offers of neighbourly service. He resolved, 
therefore, on once more calling on the sisters, 
though far more with the idea of making up 
for his omission than of renewing his suit. He 
therefore presented himself at the Vicarage, 
but to his great disappointment, found that 
the Sherwoods had set off for London the 
previous day. He had, however, the satis- 
faction of receiving a very kind letter which 
Annie had left for him, softening her proud 
rejection, expressing such warm gratitude 
for his disinterested affection, and breathing 
such gentle wishes for his happiness and 
welfare, that his feelings were much soothed, 
and if his regret was not overcome, it wafl 
at least deprived of its worst bitterness. 
But Annie's letter contained no clue to 
her destination; she merely said that she 
and Ellen were going to London, and that 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 27 

was very vague information. Still, the 
young man could not help cherishing a 
lingering hope that, in some happy hour, he 
and Annie Sherwood would meet again. 
Perhaps meet when she had tried and been 
tried by the world, when she would have 
found its falsehood and vanity, and yearn for 
some really faithful heart on which to rest, 
some unselfish affection on which to repose, 
after having vainly sought for happiness 
among the more refined, but less honest, 
of the greater world. While thus musing 
and consoling himself, Charles Turner ex- 
amined his sheep, and found them in a very 
flourishing condition. 



28 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTER III. 

Poor Annie felt wearied, but she was too full 
of energy to yield to lassitude, and deter- 
mined that what had to be done should be 
done at once. She therefore set off imme- 
diately to see Bertha Somerton, that she 
might learn from her what steps ought to 
be taken to procure " appointments/' " en- 
gagements," or " places," for her sister and 
self. 

Considering her country education, she 
was very little impressed by the princely 
dwellings which met her gaze in the fashion- 
able Belgravia. Her mind was too familiar 
with descriptions of Eastern magnificence to 
be dazzled by the cold splendours before her, 
and she passed on, more intent on business 
than observation, till she reached No. — 
E Place, and inquired for Miss Somer- 
ton. A familiar-mannered footman, who 
probably measured her by her plain dross, 
replied, " I don't know whether you can see 
her. Here, you Charlie," he continued, 
turning his head over his shoulder to a 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 29 

diminutive page, " run and tell Miss Somer- 
ton there's a young woman wants to see her;" 
then to Annie, "you'd better send word 
what your name is." 

" Say that Miss Sherwood is here," said 
Annie, addressing herself to the page, who 
was already half-way up-stairs. 

" A young woman of the name of Sher- 
wood," repeated the footman. 

Annie waited a few minutes in the hall, 
when the page returned with a slip of paper, 
on which was written, in pencil — 

" Don't think me unkind, dear Annie, but 
though we have not met for so long, I dare not 
see you now. We are at lessons, and Mrs. 
Cheshyre is rather particular. I am afraid I 
shall not be free till Saturday afternoon ; then 
I shall have a half-holiday, and will not fail 
to see you ; and yet it seems a long time to 

wait when we But stay, I think we can 

manage the affair ; now I have a charming 
thought. Could you manage to meet me in 

the E Square Gardens to-morrow, very, 

very early ? Do, if you can. 

" Your affectionate Bertha." 

Annie turned away, sad and disappointed, 
but she had a habit of commanding her 



30 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

feelings, as well as her countenance, and 
betrayed little of what she thought. She 
read and re-read the note, reflected on its 
contents till she arrived at the conclusion 
that poor Bertha was, indeed, in bondage. 
Annie did not like the idea of a day spent in 
inactivity, and, consequently, lost. A Virile 
thus ruminating, she wandered into humbler 
districts — one of those streets that grow up 
in fashionable neighbourhoods, as a connect- 
ing link between them and surrounding 
purlieus, like the would-be aristocrats that 
cling so tenaciously to the skirts of fashion, 
hoping to be confounded with it. In the 
street in question were many rather pre- 
tending-looking houses, but one end termi- 
nated in a row of mean shops. Annie's 
attention was attracted to one, in the 
window of which she saw " The Times lent to 
read." She went in, and paying the deposit, 
took the paper home with her. 

" Have you seen Bertha ?" was naturally 
Ellen's question. 

"No," answered Annie, very reluctantly. 

" I suppose she was out ?" 

Annie was strongly tempted to say " }~es," 
but happily overcame the temptation, and 
replied "No, she was engaged." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 31 

"And would not see you?" 

" We must remember her situation, Ellen; 
she could not see me ; she is not her own 
mistress." 

" True," said Ellen, sighing ; " and if we 
should happen to be in the same street, 
I suppose we shall often have to say 'en- 
gaged' to one another." 

"We must first find the engagements," 
said Annie. "Here, I have brought a 
newspaper full of advertisements; I must 
sit down and spell them out immediately, as 
it has to be returned in two hours." 

Annie read through the long columns 
of advertisements, finding very few from 
those requiring governesses. "Here is 
one!" she exclaimed, suddenly, "here is one, 
dear Ellen, that will exactly do for you, 
if we can get it. I like the style, it promises 
well, and it comes between two, in which the 
most exorbitant demands are made." She 
then read aloud, "Wanted, in the family 
of a clergyman, a young lady, to under- 
take the entire care and education of three 
little girls, the eldest ten years of age. 
Music and French required, but the adver- 
tiser is chiefly desirous to obtain an instruc- 
tress whose own early education and training 



32 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

have been those of decided piety. The 
governess will be in every respect treated 
as a member of the family. Salary mode- 
rate. Address, Alpha, Symonds' Theological 
Library, T ." 

" Shall I answer it ?" said Annie. " There 
is nothing for me ; nobody seems to want a 
boys' governess, and I can neither teach 
music nor languages." 

"You know much more useful things, 
Annie." 

" But nothing so ornamental, though," 
said Annie. " I have a great mind to begin ; 
for music, it is too late, but I dare say I 
could master grammar. I was very silly 
not to learn when I could." 

" You never did a silly thing, I am sure, 
Annie/' 

" Yes, indeed, I have done many, my dear 
child ; but shall I write for you to these 
people?" 

"If you please, dear," said Ellen, faintly, 

Annie looked up ; there were tears in 
Ellen's eyes ; her own were growing very 
mist}' ; but the letter must be written. So 
Annie w r rote to the reverend inquirer, set- 
ting forth in earnest, intelligent language, 
ail that was valuable in her dear Ellen, and 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 33 

once more prepared to sally forth, for the 
purpose of posting her epistle. 

" Let me go this time," said Ellen. 

"Oh no," replied Annie, who could not 
bear the thought of sending her young sister 
(whose beauty she perhaps exaggerated) to 
wander forth alone in the streets of London. 

On the following morning, Annie went to 
her appointment with Bertha. She found 
her walking with five children. The greet- 
ing between the friends was cordial, for they 
had been intimate from their childhood, till 
Bertha had left the neighbourhood of Merton 
to undertake the office of governess in the 
family of Colonel Cheshyre. 

" Bertha, you are greatly altered !" was 
Annie's involuntary exclamation on seeing 
her, for she well remembered that three 
years previously, Bertha had been a bright, 
vivacious-looking girl. 

" Am I !" said the governess, faintly 
smiling. " More serious, perhaps, and a 
little grey — that's all, I think ; but, Annie, 
you shall not put me out of conceit with my- 
self ; I have a young and handsome admirer." 

"Have you ?" said Annie, with interest; "I 
am glad to hear it, and hope, in your 
instance, that ' the course of true love' may 

VOL. I. D 



34 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

run smooth, and that your swain may soon 
induce you to leave " 

" Never !" said Bertha, colouring. 

" Why ?" said Annie. 

u Because, Annie, I had the misfortune to 
be born a gentleman's daughter, — because I 
am a woman of education, — and he " 

" Who is he ?" asked Annie, anxiously. 

" Who ?" said the governess, looking 
down; then, after a pause, adding, "I am 
ashamed to tell you ; but the ludicrous and 
humiliating mingle so closely, that w T hile I 
blush at the remembrance, it produces a sort 
of sad meriment." 

"Who can it be? 1 ' said Annie; "some 
bookseller whose shop you frequent, I 
suppose ?" 

" Oh no ; if it had been " 

" If it had been ! Well, what then ?" 

" I should have accepted him." 

"You, Bertha!'' 

"Yes, to escape my present life !" 

"Are you, then, so wretched?" 

Bertha's lips quivered, and her ejes filled 
with tears, as she replied, " I am wrong, 
perhaps, to say so, very wrong, for I am 
better off than many similarly situated. 
Mrs. Cheshyre is amiable, very amiable ; she 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 35 

is particular about the children, anxious they 
should improve ; you would call her fidgety, 
but I don't think her wrong; only she 
is one of a proud family, and often uninten- 
tionally, for I think she would not be wilfully 
unkind, hurts one's feelings. She evidently 
thinks teachers are quite a distinct race, and 
have no sensibility." 

" But who is your lover, Bertha ?" 

" Who ?" repeated Bertha. 

" Why, it must be some one very terrible ; 
I see you are ashamed to tell me, so to 
encourage your confidence, you shall have 
mine. Yes, mine ! for I, too, have just 
received a brilliant offer of marriage. You 
remember Charles Turner, the farmer ?" 

" Yes, perfectly well." 

" You know he is what they term com- 
fortably off, has a well- stocked farm, and 
cultivates peonies in his cheeks and garden ; 
well, it was from him." 

" And you have refused him, Annie ?" 

" Of course. I might barter my in- 
dependence for the heart of a man whose 
mind and breeding were " 

" And you have refused him ! — refused 
Charles Turner !" interrupted Bertha. 

" Certainly ; w T as I wrong ?" 

D 2 



q 



G ANNE SHERWOOD. 



" Yes ; I think it was madness/' 

" In what sense ?" 

" Yes ; madness, dear Annie," repeated 
Bertha; "forgive my saying so, to choose 
a life of dependence and toil, when you 
might have been the happy wife of an honest 
man, against whom you can bring no worse 
reproach than red cheeks." 

"And vulgarity," said Annie. 

" No, pardon me," replied Bertha, " not 
vulgarity, but, if you will, rusticity. Annie, 
Annie, your pride, not your heart, refuses 
him." 

" Strange : that is exactly what he said 
when he left me," said Annie. " But yet it 
not quite true, or at least if it were pride, 
the heart had some share in it. Had he 
been the most polished man in the world, I 
should have done the same, unless I loved 
him. I could not marry merely to be pro- 
vided for. But would you have accepted 
him yourself?" 

"Frankly, yes," answered Bertha, "if he 
had chosen me. But this is foolish talking 
now." 

"But to return to the starting-point; 
who is your Leander? You still hesitate : 
I shall begin to fancy it is the footman !" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 37 

"You have guessed rightly; the foot- 
man who opened the door for you yester- 
day!" 

" What could have induced such imper- 
tinence ?" exclaimed Annie, indignantly. 

"I do not give it that name," said Bertha, 
dejectedly. " I think it was all very 
natural: the man saw me day after day at 
the table with the nurse, in fact, quite on 
the footing of an upper servant: he thought 
me suitable." 

" Why do you stay in such a house, 
Bertha?" 

" To tell you the truth, though I am not 
yet old," said Bertha, " I have survived my 
energies, and feel apprehensive of a change 
bringing with it worse, because unknown 
evils; but, Annie, earthly life is not im- 
mortal!" 

" My poor, dear Bertha!" exclaimed Annie. 
" And you still think the woman who sub- 
jects you to such insults not wilfully un- 
kind!" 

" No, indeed she is not," said Bertha; 
"but she has been taught in that school 
which confines the privileges of society to 
elegant doers of nothing; she belongs to the 
class, in fact, who suppose good breeding 



38 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

and honest industry incompatible ! ! She 
means to he kind, nevertheless, and I am 
sure she thinks she makes me very happ;. 
but were I to complain to any one of the 
thousand and one humiliations each day 
brings me, she would treat the idea as an 
emanation of morbid sensibility." 

" Would she not let you come to meet 
as you proposed?" 

" To speak truly, I did not venture to ask 
permission when the time came; Mi 
Cheshyre would have thought it very im- 
proper, for she has several times refused to 
let me spend an hour or two, when my da\ 
labour was over, with a French girl, who 

lives near us in E Place, though she 

frequently sends me to execute commissions 
for herself quite late in the evening. But 
come and see me on Saturday, Annie, and 
you w T ill judge better of my position, and 
what your ow r n is likely to be." 

Bertha then gave Annie some instructions 
as to the course she was to pursue, and a va- 
riety of addresses of different scholastic agents, 
who found engagements for governor - at 
a certain per-centage. Poor Annie re- 
marked, with a simplicity which would 
have done honour to Ellen herself, that she 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 39 

felt pretty secure, she scarcely knew why, 
but still she did so, that her sister would 
obtain the situation for which she had 
applied. She was considerably mortified on 
hearing that the advertisement in question 
might have produced a hundred applications, 
and hers perchance be overlooked in the 
number; it had never occurred to Annie 
that many others might be entertaining 
equal hopes with herself at the same moment, 
on the very same subject. Bertha smiled 
at her clever friend's naivete, and was about 
to explain some more of the arcana of her 
profession, when a coarse, vulgar-looking 
woman burst on them from the other side 
of the gardens, exclaiming — 

""Well, Miss Somerton! if this don't beat 
all! I'm to toil for ever for the young 
ladies and gentlemen's 'ealth an' comfort, 
while you're letthi them run wild catchin 
their death, untyzV their 'ats an' bonnets an' 
takin' them off, and you tak«V no more no- 
tice than if they was nobody's children. 
But no wonder, you're always pickin' up 
all sorts of acquaintance, instead of keepin' 
yourself respectable!" 

Bertha made no reply, but looked quite 
sick and faint. She was good, but feeble in 



40 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

many ways, having none of what the world 
calls spirit. 

"Bertha! Bertha!" exclaimed Annie, 
" don't give in to that woman's insolence!" 

" What can I do?" said Bertha, dejectedly ; 
" Mrs. Cheshyre values her highly for her ex- 
treme care of the children's health and dress. 
She sends all her directions to me through 
her, and indeed I have been her subordinate 
from the first, nor can anything be done to 
produce a better state of things." 

" Then you should leave," said Annie. 

" Where could I go? I have no one to 
recommend me to another situation, and if 
I gave warning, Mrs. Cheshyre would never 
give me a testimonial!" 

" But still I would leave, if I went to the 
workhouse!" 

" And my mother! what would become of 
her?" 

Bertha's mother entirely depended on her 
for support. 



ANNE SHERWOOD, 41 



CHAPTER IV. 

It was with a heavy heart that poor Annie 
Sherwood returned to her sister, and set out 
with her to call on a scholastic agent, who 
bore a high-sounding French name, which 
induced them to expect something very im- 
posing. On arriving at T Street, they 

found that they must wait some considerable 
time before being admitted to the presence 
of the great man. While they remained 
in an outer room, awaiting his pleasure, 
seven or eight young, and three or four 
elderly women passed out, each of whom had 
probably received the assurance that she 
would be immediately jplacie ; but as some of 
them had heard the same story every day 
for the last four or five months, they were 
strangely incredulous, and wondered at their 
companions' ready trust. At length it was 
Annie's turn to be admitted; she entered, 
followed by Ellen, who was trembling, at 
once with hope and fear. 

Mr. de F was a fat little man, sly 



42 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

and avid in his looks, with a business-lil: 
air, which he mistook for dignity and in- 
telligence. He waved his hand as a sign 
that the sisters were to be seated, then began 
the usual questioning, brief, dry, and sys- 
tematic. Quickly he ran through bis list 
of interrogatories, and as he received each 
answer, entered it in a large book. Annie's 
list of qualifications ran thus — " Age, twenty- 
four; appearance, lady-like. Short! General 
education — History, Geography, Arithmetic 
good, Latin good, Greek good; not out 

before. Salary " " What do you want ?" 

asked the great man. Annie did not know 
what to ask. "Twenty," said the great 
man. " You have no accomplishments; I 
shall put down twenty guineas; I suppose 
you will not refuse eighteen. I have no 
doubt of placing you, Madam, in a week or 
two." 

There was a lie in the man's very smile : 
he turned with a softer air to Ellen. 

Ellen made out a much more brilliant list 
of accomplishments than Annie, being able 
to put in "good Music, good French, rudi- 
ments of Italian, and Tbll" So the great 
man paid her a running compliment on her 
good looks, which brought the blood to her 



AKNE SHERWOOD. 43 

cheeks, and triumphantly put her clown at 
thirty guineas per year, hinting, however, 
that as she was very young, she had better 
enter herself at twenty-one years of age. 
" Oh no!" exclaimed both the girls, who did 
not yet know enough of life to lie with 
effrontery. The great man smiled pityingly 
at their ignorant simplicity, and entered 
Ellen, without further consulting her, at 
three years older than her real age. He 
then asked for references. The candidates 
had none to give. "Awkward business, 
never having been out before," muttered the 
great man, " but you must name some friend." 
Annie could think of no one to whom she 
could apply, or to whom she would like to 
apply, for a reference : at last she fixed on 
an amiable old maid, who lived not very far 
from Merton, and whom she felt sure she 
might take the liberty of naming, without a 
previous and formal application for per- 
mission. Miss Brentford's name was accor- 
dingly entered as a reference ; the great man 
rang the bell to admit fresh applicants, and 
nodding his head, as a sign for the Slier- 
woods to withdraw, assured them again that 
they would immediately find employment, 
and then became suddenly immersed in a pile 



44 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

of letters before him, and apparently quite 
unconscious of their presence. 

"How fortunate that we came here," said 
Ellen, " how very fortunate !" 

" Why, dear?" said Annie, quietly. 

"Why, because Mr. de F promises 

us to be so soon placets." 

"And do you believe him?" 

" Why should we doubt him, Annie ?" 

" Because while his lips made the promise, 
his countenance told another tale. I be- 
lieve his face, not his words." 

Ellen sighed, and looked so disappointed 
that Annie could say no more. The sisters 

next proceeded to Street, in which 

they had been informed that an institution 
of a benevolent character existed, which 
undertook to provide governesses with en- 
gagements, free of all charge ; that of course 
would be a great advantage, and the insti- 
tution bore so high a character, that Anne 
hoped almost as much as Ellen, in crossing 
the threshold of a house dedicated to bene- 
volence and philanthropy. • 

The sisters entered a spacious hall, in 
which stood a page, who directed them to 
enter their mimes in a large office-lookiuof 
registry. He then flung open the door of 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 45 

an apartment, and loudly announced " Miss 
Sherwood; Miss Ellen Sherwood. ,J 

They entered. Seated at a long table, 
something like that in a mess-room, were 
twenty-four or five governesses, or rather 
candidates for the office, bending over some 
written books ; several more were sitting in 
a stiff row against the wall. A grave-looking 
secretary presided at the table, who con- 
versed amiably with each applicant in suc- 
cession, and made notes in an open book 
before him. Annie, who w r as perfectly 
ignorant of the rules of the establishment, 
and unwilling to interrupt the secretary, who 
seemed deeply engaged, ventured to seat 
herself at the table, and inquire of her next 
neighbour, a smiling, vivacious -looking girl 
of seventeen, what the book before her con- 
tained. 

" The addresses of ladies wanting gover- 
nesses," she replied, " with a list of their re- 
quirements. Will you look over me ? Do 
you want a ' daily ?' I am looking out for 
one. But there are so many governesses. 
I think there are thirty-three here to-day : 
sometimes there are many more. I have 
been six months on the books. Can you 
speak German ? It's no use coining here if 



46 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

you can't. People don't care at all whether 
you know history or geography, or anything 
of that sort, but always begin, ' Can you 
speak German?' 'Have you been out before?' 
1 Do you like teaching?' ' 

Thus the young girl ran on, till the 
grave secretary looked up at the unwonted 
interruption, and she bent blu shingly over 
the book. 

The secretary was a mild, benevolent- 
looking man, but he was only the secretary, 
and had nothing to do with the regulations 
of the Society. Annie was looking over 
her young neighbour's shoulder for some 
time, but saw nothing very promising in 
the book. There were several vacancies in 
schools for teachers, but the " principals ' 
generally required everything to be taught for 
nothing ; that is, for board and washing, or 
for a stipend so shamefully low, that it did 
not merit the name of salary. Some en- 
gagements in families, too, were open, but 
the requirements were so numerous, that they 
filled Annie with dismay. One in particular 
struck her eye : " The Countess of D re- 
quires a governess, who must be capable of 
instructing her pupils in all the usual 
branches of education, with music, singing, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 47 

drawing, German, Italian, and French, with- 
out the assistance of masters.' 3 Several 
other particulars of the engagement were 
mentioned, and the notice closed with 
" salary, 30/. 1" 

" What !" thought Annie, " are all these 
accomplishments to be bartered for thirty 
pounds a-year ! What salary can I expect !" 

Just then, the grave secretary dismissed 
the lady with whom he had been conversing, 
and looked inquiringly at Annie. 

" Have you been long on the books ?" 
whispered her talkative neighbour ; " I really 
don't think I have seen you before." 

" I entered my name as I came in, in the 
hall," said Annie. 

"Is that all? oh, that wont do at all; 
there is a great deal more to be done before 
you are privileged to take addresses. You 
must — but the secretary is motioning to 
you : go to him ; he will tell you all about 
it." 

Annie was almost always self-possessed, 
as a gentlewoman should be ; and the secre- 
tary, though he bore a serious, thoughtful 
countenance, looked kind and encouraging. 
She began by apologizing for the liberty 
she had taken in looking over the books 



48 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

without having previously fulfilled the con- 
ditions of entrance. 

" Never mind," said the secretary, " if 
you have not taken any addresses." 

" I have not taken an}'," said Annie, 
quickly. 

"Have you seen nothing which suits you ?" 

"Nothing," said Annie; "to speak frankly, 
I thought the ladies who had made entries 
of their requirements, had been confusing 
the teacher's remuneration with the suitable 
wages of footmen and housemaids." 

The secretary sighed; he seemed to think so 
too : perhaps he had daughters, governesses. 

" Of course you are aware that this is a 
benevolent institution," said he ; " perhaps 
the philanthropic intentions of its supporters 
are not always seconded by those who apply 
here for their — " 

" Their servants," said Annie, bitterly. 

" My good young lady," said the secretaiy, 
in an under tone, " I see you are beginning 
your profession. Take a word of advice 
from one tried in the world's ways : do n 
add a sharper point to life's thorns by always 
contemplating them ; believe me, they mav 
be blunted to a certain extent by reason and 
philosophy.*' 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 49 

He then kindly explained the rules of the 
institution, which were such as Annie could 
not comply with, two recommendatory 
letters being required — one from the family 
with whom she had last resided. She 
thought — indeed, felt sure — that she knew 
no one to whom she could apply, excepting 
Miss Brentford, and her single testimonial 
would not be sufficient ; besides, Miss 
Brentford lived in lodgings, and the secre- 
tary had expressly told her, and showed 
her in the printed prospectus, that the 
referees must be housekeepers. They were 
not to be relations ; they were not to be in 
any way connected with scholastic pursuits ; 
so it was quite useless to apply to an old 
gentleman who was a distant relation of her 
mother's — equally hopeless to think of a lady 
with whom the girls had been at school 
some years previously. Nothing could be 
done ; Annie thanked the secretary for the 
information he had given her, as well as for 
his good advice, and was withdrawing. 

u You will return when you have procured 
testimonials ?" said the secretary. 

" Thank you," said Annie ; "I fear it 
would be useless ; I cannot fulfil the con- 
ditions; besides, I have no accomplishments." 

VOL. I. e 



50 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

As she was leaving the room, the talkative 
girl whispered — 

" Pray wait for me outside ; I won't be 
long ; I have something to tell you." 

Annie complied with her request. When 
she joined them, it was with the familiarity 
of an old acquaintance. 

"Here," said she, pushing a paper into 
Annie's hands ; "I heard all that cross old 
* scaramouch ' said to you, but I was deter- 
mined that you should have some addresses, 
so I've copied out three for you." 

" You are very kind, very kind indeed," 
said Annie, " but I should not like to use 
them." 

" Oh no, it would not be right," interposed 
Ellen. 

"Not right! what wrong could there be 
in it ?" exclaimed their new acquaintance. 
"Dear me, where did you come from ?" 

" From Yorkshire," said Ellen, inno- 
cently. 

" So I should think. Well, really, you had 
better go back there again, for I can tell you 
plainly, you'll never do any good for your- 
selves in this world. Now I, that am 
younger than either of you (I was only 
seventeen last June), know how to a;o to 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 51 

work. You'll never get engagements — I 
know you wont." 

" I would rather go without than do any- 
thing dishonourable/' said Annie. 

" Or wrong," added Ellen ; "we could not 
expect a blessing on our endeavours if we — " 

A ringing laugh from their companion 
interrupted the sentence, though they were 
in the street. Annie began to wish she 
could shake off her companion. She tried 
to effect her object several times, but un- 
successfully. The girl talked on with the 
greatest volubility — one moment inculcating 
worldly maxims which assorted ill with her 
youth and buoyant spirits ; the next, rattling 
on like a wild child, asking their Christian 
names, &c. ; then giving them her own 
family history, that of all her brothers and 
sisters, uncles, aunts, and cousins, of her 
friends and acquaintance in general, her 
flirts and her lovers, her rivals and enemies, 
the persons on whom she doted, those 
whom she hated, &c. When at last the 
flow of words seemed nearly exhausted, she 
informed her hearers that she was just 
going to a Mrs. Piscator, a scholastic agent, 
who was considered one of the best in 
London, and remarkably successful in placing 

e 2 



UNIVERSITY OF 

■ i i ikj/"»iC I I OD A C?V 



52 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

her clients. She advised the sisters to ac- 
company her, which Annie, observing that 
the young lady was considerably sobered, 
agreed to do. The trio proceeded with 
all haste to G Street, where they en- 
tered a rather large and dismal house, and 
were shown into a remarkably dirty room, 
in which, as is usual, sat a number of care- 
worn governesses, wdio were waiting to be 
admitted to Mrs. Piscator's presence. 

A girl of about eighteen, with no manners, 
and evidently as little education, very 
tawdrily dressed, and with her hair curled 
in a crop, was talking very volubly of her 
"Ma, v Mrs. Piscator, and her large connexion 
with the aristocracy, the number of ladies 
who called on her " Ma v in their ow T n car- 
riages, &c. Then Miss Piscator (who, by 
the way, had very weak eyes, with a red 
circle round them) opened a running fire on 
all the rival agents, and gave various anec- 
dotes of governesses who had cheated her 
" Ma," and shown themselves ungrateful for 
all her kindness; of others, who had stolen 
the addresses of families " en recherche? to 
sell them ; winding up everything with her 
"Ma's" wonderful success. Miss Piscator 
was an excellent specimen of talkative vul- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 53 

garity; every unfortunate " h" in her de- 
clamation was " driven from house, from 
home, from hope, from heaven." 

Ellen turned away with disgust and pity, 
thinking it quite useless to attempt seeking 
engagements through such vulgar people. 
Annie, on the contrary, listened with a smile 
which Miss Piscator took for admiration, and 
recommenced her harangue. 

In one corner sat a pale-faced widow, of 
about six-and-thirty. She had vainly tried to 
put in a word. At last she contrived to arrest 
the attention of the loquacious young lady, 
and falteringly inquired whether there was 
any prospect of a daily engagement for her? 

" You've been answered already on that 
subject, Mrs. Stuart," said Miss Piscator, 
with a toss of the head. " There's none to 
be 'ad, and I'm sure Ma 'as business enough 
on 'er 'ands, without undertaking 'opeless 
concerns. You've been very much to blame 
— very much indeed — in not taking the ex- 
cellent situation Ma offered you ; you may 
never 'ave such another chance I" 

" It was so far from London, Miss Pis- 
cator," pleaded the widow. 

"Only in Derby, Mrs. Stuart. What 
'ave you to answer ?" 



54 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" I have three young children entirely de- 
pendent on me for support," said the widow, 
with emotion ; " if I went into a family, 
what would become of them?" 

" You could put them out to nurse/' 

" To nurse ! put them out to nurse witli 
a salary of 30/. a year !" ejaculated the 
widow, in a tone of the utmost agitation. 

Miss Piscator said something about mis- 
management, and asked the widow if she had 
not grown-up sons ? 

" I have two sons, mere youths," she 
replied. 

"And why can't they take charge of 
them ?" 

" Take charge of the little ones !" repeated 
the poor widow ; " the eldest is but seven- 
teen, and both are writers in a commercial 
house." 

" Then why can't they 'elp you out of 
their salary?" 

" One has no salary but his board ; the 
other, 15/. a year !" 

" Well, it's no use talking, Mrs. Stuart," 
said the young lady, in the most shrewish 
voice ; "if you wont 'ave what we can offer, 
you need not come and trouble Ma any 



more." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 55 

The widow murmured something about 
her entrance money. 

"Oh, that paltry five shillings ! Return 
it, indeed ! No ; instead of that, you should 
give another ten, for all the trouble you've 
given us." 

The widow looked up despairingly j there 
was a world of misery in her sunken eye ; 
her pale cheek told a tale of penury and 
privation. Reader ! that five shillings was 
more to her than fifty times the sum might 
be to you or me ! Her thin lips quivered ; 
her attenuated, scantily- clad form trembled; 
but she lowered her rusty crape veil, and, 
with a depressed head and drooping gait, 
slowly left the room. She paused an instant 
in the passage to wipe away her tears, and 
as she there stood, she was conscious that 
some one had followed her with gentle, 
noiseless steps. A hand was laid softly on 
her arm, and a sw r eet voice whispered, 
" Don't be offended, pray don't j I would not 
hurt your feelings for the world; but do 
take this for your little children." 

The widow felt two coins forced into her 
hand. She looked in bewildered surprise at 
the bright yellow sovereigns, then at the 
giver. 



5G ANNE SHERWOOD. 

"Who are you?" she ejaculated. 

11 A poor governess/' replied Amrie Sher- 
wood, " but richer than you ; rich enough," 
she added, " to afford myself this little luxury 
of helping the orphans." 

" God bless and help you in your own 
hour of need," said the widow, grasping 
Annie's hand. " God will reward you, if I 
cannot," she faltered ; but x\.nnie had already 
disappeared. 

On her re-entering the waiting-room, 
Miss Piscator directed the whole of her at- 
tention to her, and, remarking that Mrs. 
Stuart was a poor, weak-minded woman, 
immediately began plying Annie with ques- 
tions as to her own acquirements, and in- 
formed her of the regulations of what she 
was pleased to call her " Ma's institution." 

Annie was informed that she and her 
sister must begin by paying five shillings 
each as entrance fee, and giving severally a 
dozen postage stamps. 

"I have no objections to the latter," said 
Annie; " but with regard to the entrance lee, 
I should prefer giving it when the engage- 
ment is procured, with the usual per cent- 



age." 



" We can't alter our regulations in your 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 57 

favour, Miss Sherwood," said Miss Piscator, 
with dignity, or something meant for it. 

" Dear Annie, let us give it if it is cus- 
tomary," whispered Ellen. 

" ]STo," said Annie, firmly, "it is not fair 
and just." Then turning to Miss Piscator, 
she added, " I am going to enter my name, 
and that of my sister, at a number of agen- 
cies. Should each demand five shillings, the 
entrance fees would amount to a considerable 
sum. No, I cannot pay on an uncertainty ; 
when we have engagements, we shall imme- 
diately discharge our debts to the provider." 

Miss Piscator said no more. She raised her 
eyebrows, bit her lips, and finally left the 
room to consult with her " Ma" on the pro- 
priety of ejecting the contumacious clients, 
for Mrs. Piscator was wont to rule as a 
sovereign in her little court. 

When the young lady had withdrawn, the 
numerous candidates for engagements began 
to talk pretty freely among themselves. If 
any two sets of people resemble each other, 
it is the boarders of a convent, escaped from 
the eye of their superior for a brief space, 
and a number of governesses off' duty ! Some 
of the ladies discussed the Piscator family, 
relating various anecdotes of their exactions 



58 ANNE SHERWOOD; 

and pretensions ; others talked of the nume- 
rous agencies, and their comparative demerits, 
as well as those of " The Union/' as the insti- 
tution in Street is called. 

Some enlarged on the miseries of governess 
life ; a few, whose experience had heen more 
fortunate than that of the others, ventured 
to assert that all governesses were not 
wretched — that some were treated with kind- 
ness and consideration ; but the few who 
made these remarks, were borne down by the 
rest of the sisterhood, who appeared to re- 
gard them as secretly leagued with the op- 
pressors ; and it was finally carried, by a very 
large majority, that the life of a governess 
is the most miserable on earth, after that of 
a slave in a West Indian sugar plantation. 
So the moderate ladies were reduced to 
silence ! 

The greater number of governesses present 
were daughters of London tradesmen, well 
educated, and, in many ways, more efficient 
teachers than the few decayed gentlewomen, 
daughters of officers and clergymen, who 
were mingled with them ; but they were 
usually underbred, and had an air of mauvais 
ton and f/auclteric. There was a fat, red- 
faced little woman, with a very deeided look 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 59 

about her pursed-up mouth, who talked in a 
loud, rough voice, and a vulgar tone, though 
her grammar was irreproachably correct ; her 
conversation was entirely confined to the 
experience of her own life. One lady, in 
whose family she had resided some time, had 
dismissed her from the simple fact of her 
having said one day, " Ma'am, I must have 
(I really require it to support me) — I must 
have a glass of Bass's pale ale at eleven 
every day I" " So she answered," continued 
the little woman, " that if that was the case, 
my health must be delicate, and I must 
leave ; but I have always commanded a good 
salary, and no doubt I always shall !" The 
fat lady (who was the daughter of an Italian 
loareliousemaii) was then summoned to an 
audience with Mrs. Piscator. 

" That woman will be placee before any- 
one in this room !" said a surly voice. It 
came from a crabbed-looking old maid, who 
had been a governess thirty years. She then 
relapsed into silence. Her prophecy came 
true — the fat lady was the first provided for. 
Impudence and confidence go a long way ! 

Annie Sherwood and her sister were com- 
pletely disgusted with their sisterhood, and 
mentally remarked, that if all teachers resem- 



60 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

bled the specimens before them, it was not 
very wonderful that the governess should 
be generally condemned to the solitude of 
the school-room ; for who could associate with 
such companions ? They had yet to learn 
the fact, that ladies prefer as inmates those 
who are mere useful machines for the con- 
veyance of necessary knowledge, and who, 
having no pretensions to elegance or refine- 
ment, are less likely to exercise any un- 
welcome influence in the way of rivalry. 
Besides, ladies argue, and perhaps they are 
right, that it is easier to keep down the 
ambition of a plebeian than to discountenance 
the assumption of equality, in those who feel 
themselves worthy of consideration. The 
plebeians have far less to complain of than 
the more refined. 

Miss Piscator now entered with a very 
bland smile, to say that her "Ma" would be 
glad to see Miss Sherwood and her sister. 
They were accordingly ushered into the 
sanctum of the doubly great woman. There 
was something very maternal and encourag- 
ing in Mrs. Piscator's countenance, Ellen 
thought, and she looked up in her lace with 
her bright eyes and smiled hopefully. There 
was something very hypocritical in her little 



ANNE SHERWOOD. CI 

twinkling grey eye, thought Annie, who 
looked straightforward and piercingly at her, 
till Mrs. Piscator looked the other way, and 
turning to Ellen said, sotto voce, " Sit down, 
love," and began to play with her numerous 
letters. Mrs. Piscator was a short, stout, 
red-faced, vulgar woman, with a countenance 
indicative of cunning, and the grossest sen- 
suality. She was extravagantly dressed — 
satin, blonde, and artificial flowers ; she con- 
sidered herself very imposing. 

For a few moments the searching eye of 
Annie had discomposed Mrs. Piscator, but 
she soon recovered, and opened proceedings 
with a rushing cataract of words, informing 
her hearers, a priori, of her family history, 
that of her "Pa," and of her husband. 
Then came an account of the great and 
noble families who honoured her with their 
patronage — of the immense extent of her 
connexion — of the number of governesses she 
had placed within the year, &c. — of the great 
things she meant to do ; and as Mrs. Piscator 
always said "love," or "dear," or "dearest," 
every five minutes, Ellen thought her very 
kind, and Annie thought her more hypo- 
critical. 

At length she stopped to make inquiries 



62 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

of Annie and Ellen, noted down the in- 
formation they gave her, shaking hands 
very cordially and affectionately with each, 
and adding a few more "loves" and "dears," 
she dismissed them. 

On the whole, Mrs. Piscator did not speak 
so badly as her daughter, and had she con- 
tented herself with fewer words, and not 
over-acted her part, she might have passed 
for a respectable, well-intentioned woman : 
as it was, she made so many demonstrations 
of an impossible degree of disinterestedness, 
of such entire self-renunciation, such perfect 
devotion to the interests of her clients, that 
she clearly showed she thought solely of her 
own, and only succeeded in imposing on the 
inexperienced. 

Mrs. Piscator assured the new candidates 
that they would soon, very soon, find en- 
gagements under her auspices. 

u I am glad we came," said Ellen, looking 
quite bright and joyous. 

" Poor child!" ejaculated Annie; "do you 
know whom you remind me of, Ellen?" 

" No, indeed." 

" The Vicar of Wakefield's wife, when she 
tells him, ' between ourselves, we have made 
an excellent day's work of it !' ' Pretty 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 63 

well,' said the vicar. ' What ! only pretty 
well !' returned she ; ' I think it is very well.' 
Oh, Ellen, Ellen ! as the good vicar said, 
* May we both be the better of it at the end 
of three months !'" 



04 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE V. 

Many a long, weary walk had those two 
poor girls. Frequently were they summoned 
to a distance of several miles twice in one 
day, and those journeys were usually per- 
formed on foot, as with daily diminishing 
means, they were unable to meet the expense 
of coach hire. Sometimes their hopes were 
raised by seeming success, which ended in 
abrupt disappointment. How often they 
were summoned to Mrs. Piscator's, or Mr. 
de F 's, to meet parties who never ar- 
rived, or with whom they found it impossible 
to come to terms, when they did arrive ! 
Mrs. Piscator's notes were always thus 
concluded, "Yours affectionately." Mr. de 

F 's were more business-like. 

A month, a whole month, had slipped away 
in useless researches and fruitless negotia- 
tions. Annie's want of accomplishments 
precluded her finding an engagement, while 
the youth and beauty of Ellen almost inva- 
riably stood in her light ; besides, neither of 






ANNE SHERWOOD. 65 

them had experience. How many hours 
were spent in consultation, what were they 
to do? 

" We must be less particular," said Ellen ; 
" we must take what we can get." 

"But we have refused nothing," said 
Annie ; "it is we who are constantly re- 
fused." 

While they were thus discussing, a letter, 
in an unknown hand, arrived ; it was not from 
an agent ; who else could write to those two 
friendless girls? To their infinite surprise, 
they found it to be a reply to the application 
they had made (in answer to the advertise- 
ment for a governess in a clergyman's family) 
long before, in fact, so long before that they 
had forgotten the circumstances. 

Even Annie was delighted, as she bent 
eagerly over the letter with her sister, and 
perused its pleasing contents. It was from 
the Eev. himself: his wife was an in- 
valid, and had deputed him to write for her. 
Nothing could be more agreeable and amiable 
than the tenor of the epistle ; it consisted of 
three closely-filled sheets, containing not one 
word to which the most fastidious could 
object. " What a nice, kind letter ! How 
glad I am that lie has written," exclaimed 

VOL. I. F 



66 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Ellen ; " this will exactly suit me. I am sure 
I need not seek further. I like what Mr. 
Clifton says about helping in the Sunday- 
school so much, Annie." Then Ellen's ra- 
diant face fell a little as she added, " But 
you, dear, what will you do ? How can I 
bear to leave you alone 1" 

" Oh, I shall do very well," said Annie, 
gaily ; " if this affair is all it promises to be, 
you must certainly accept the comfortable 
home it will give, and if my resources fail 
before I am provided for, you can help me 
out of your salary till I, too, am placee. 
The stipend will most likely be liberal, as 
they seem rich people ; for I observe Mr. 
Clifton keeps a carriage, as he says, in the 
event of your going to them, the servants 
shall meet you with the carriage at the sta- 
tion ; though why he should advert to the 
subject just at the opening of the negotia- 
tion, I cannot think, unless it be to awe you 
with their grandeur." 

" No, I dare say it was not for that," said 
Ellen, " all the rest of his letter is so sensible 
and pious ; I cannot help thinking well of 
Mr. Clifton." 

"Well, perhaps you are right," said Annie; 
" but I must really finish putting your 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 67 

clothes in order, if you are to go to these 
people." 

The sisters began to work with the ala- 
crity which renovated hope inspired, and as 
they worked they talked of their plans and 
prospects ; and despite her habitual mood, 
Annie shared her sister's elation at the idea 
of a happy home in a pleasant vicarage, 
which would remind her perchance of their 
own dear home at Merton. At length Annie 
started up. "I must go and see Bertha, to 
show her this letter." 

" Do," said Ellen ; " I would go too, only 
Bertha says it is not the thing for a go- 
verness to receive two visitors at a time ; 
she has been reprimanded for it. When you 
return, Annie, you will tell me what I had 
better say to Mr. Clifton." 

Annie went out more cheerfully than usual, 

and proceeded at a brisk pace to E Place, 

where she was admitted for the first time to 
see Bertha. She had not previously the least 
idea of her friend's locale in the house. The 
saucy footman (now the object of Annie's 
detestation), who admitted her, directed her 
to walk up -stairs till she reached the top of 
the house, when she could not fail to find 
the governess's rooms. 

i? 2 



68 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Annie accordingly began her ascent, but 
ere she had reached half-way up the stone 
staircase, she had to stop for want of breath, 
and to lean against the wall for rest. At 
length, however, she reached the summit, 
and stood before an open door ; she heard 
Bertha's voice, speaking, as she thought, to 
another person, and she hesitated for a mo- 
ment to advance : but she w r as mistaken ; it 
might have been from want of other com- 
pany, but Bertha w r as talking to herself. 
The words that had reached Annie were 
" Very, very lonely !" And no doubt the 
poor governess was loneLy in that dingy 
back room, at the very top of the house, 
hour after hour, in the dreary evenings, witli 
no companionship but her own sad thoughts 
and memories. " Oh, Bertha, this is killing 
work I" said Annie, sinking into a chair, 
breathless. 

" What is killing work ?" asked Bertha. 
" Do you mean the staircase ? Oh I am so 
sorry you are tired." 

" Tired, no, I am not tired," said Annie ; 
"I was thinking of you, Bertha. It is 
killing work to go up and down that stair- 



's 

case." 



"Not to me," said Bertha; "you feel 



ANNE SHERWOOD. G9 

it, because it is new to you. I have been 
accustomed to it for years ; besides, I don't 
try it often, only twice a day, when I take 
the children for their walks." 

" And the rest of the time ?" 

" I live up here." 

"Always up here? Always alone?" 

" Always up here, but not always alone. 
I wish it were so ! but as it is, I have not- 
only the four children, but the nurse with 
me, till seven o'clock. Then the children 
go to bed, and the nurse repairs to the 
housekeeper's room ; the remaining hours I 
am alone." 

" Do you read much ?" 

" No, I have no time ; I make all the 
children wear, except their hats and shoes." 

" Shameful," said Annie, colouring with 
indignation ; " and oh, to think that such a 
life is before poor Ellen !" 

Bertha sighed, but could say nothing. 
The poor pale-faced governess ! She had 
toiled all day with unruly children, been 
domineered over by the nurse, who had been 
from the first her superior in authority, 
and had treated her with all the insolence 
which a vulgar-minded being, raised above 
herself, could devise. And now the poor 



70 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

girl sat, with weary, throbbing temples, and 
dimmed eyes, making tunics for the little 
boys, who were taught by their ignorant 
guide, to treat her with the most insuffer- 
able disrespect. We have had our Hood 
standing forth (and honour be to his noble 
memory for the deed) as the champion of 
the oppressed sempstress ; yes, we have had 
our " Song of the Shirt," echoing through 
the length and breadth of the land ; shall 
we have no courageous defenders of the 
more oppressed, yes, the more ojjrpressed go- 
verness ? No poet to enlist the sympathies 
of the benevolent in their cause, nor to 
awaken the blush of shame on the cheek 
of their oppressors, " on whose side is 
power !" 

Poor Bertha Somerton ! hers was a sad, 
sad life, but she was very meek and uncom- 
plaining, and always said, with an attempt 
at a smile, that she was more fortunate than 
many: perhaps she was; at least she tried to 
think so. 

Annie unfolded her pocket-book, and read 
the letter she had received from the clergy- 
man who seemed desirous of securing the 
services of Ellen as a governess. Bertha 
read it slowly after Annie had finished, then 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 71 

shook her head. " You don't like it, Bertha?" 
said Annie, looking sadly disappointed. 

" No, dear, not quite," said Bertha ; " but 
don't look so sad about it." 

u I can't help it !" said Annie. " You 
know I have usually plenty of courage, but 
I shall droop if this good situation is lost to 
poor Ellen. What do you dislike in the 
letter ?" 

" It promises too much," said Bertha. 

"Is that all?" 

" Yes ; but that is enough ; depend upon 
it, whenever you hear that you are to be 
treated as one of the family, you will find 
yourself rather worse off than the housemaid. 
"Whenever you are told of tractable, amiable 
children, you may be sure that they are as 
unmanageable as " 

" As the tigers of a menagerie, I suppose," 
said Annie. " Yes, I can understand all 
that." 

" And besides," said Bertha, " you will 
always find you are engaged for a less num- 
ber of children than you have really to teach. 
In every way, the description of the coming 
engagement always reads better in a letter, 
than it looks in reality." 

Annie returned to her sister, unwilling 



72 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

to damp her hopes, yet feeling her own 
considerably depressed by her extended 
knowledge of the world. The following 
morning there came a letter from dear Mrs. 
Piscator, requesting Annie and Ellen to call 
on her at eleven that day, as she had met 
with an engagement exactly suited to Ellen ; 
a most excellent " appointment, " only one 
pupil, few requirements, and a salary of 
seventy guineas ! Unheard-of liberality ! 
" Oh, this is too good to be true!" exclaimed 
both the candidates. "Nevertheless, we 
must go and see about it," said Annie. 

Another of those killing, long w r alks, and 
the poor girls found themselves, worn and 
weary, seated in Mrs. Piscator' s waiting- 
room, where they remained, till two hours 
later than the time which she had appointed 
for their reception. Meanwhile they had to 
listen, or seem to listen, to the oft-repeated 
and inflated accounts given by Miss Piscator 
of her " Mas 11 extensive connexion w T ith the 
nobility, &c. At length the lad} r made her 
appearance, very elaborately dressed in taw- 
dry finery. Instead of having been closeted 
with her clients as she professed, she had 
evidently only just breakfasted, as some 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 73 

crumbs of buttered toast adhering to her 
lips and chin plainly testified. Opening 
her harangue with the usual amount of 
" loves" and " dears," the lady set forth in 
bold alto-relievo the service she was about to 
render her dear young friend, by placing her 
in such a distinguished family, for Mr. St. 
John was not only a Member of Parliament, 
but also of noble, very noble family, being 

the third cousin of the Viscount L , so 

very well known in the sporting world, &c. 
Her oration finished, Mrs. Piscator handed 
her clients the address of the St. John 
family, and dismissed them with as many 
protestations of sympathy and affection as 
she could crowd into a limited space of time. 
The Sherwoods were astonished that no fur- 
ther reference had been made to the entrance- 
fee ; but their surprise ceased when they 
heard the dulcet tones of Mrs. Piscator's 
voice pursuing them — "Miss Sherwood! 
Miss Sherwood ! you ve forgotten your en- 
trance-fee, love ! It's a mere matter of form, 
you know ; but I must not make a difference 
in your favour, or my other young friends 
might feel hurt, love !" 

" You shall have our entrance-fees with 



74 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the per-centage when we are provided with 
engagements, Mrs. Piscator," said Annie, 
resolutely. 

" Ah, that's very naughty, love ! very 
naughty indeed !" said Mrs. Piscator, with 
a slight change of voice. " You really must 
not take advantage of my indulgent kindness, 
dear." 

" I cannot afford to j)ay anything on an 
uncertainty," said Annie, quite decidedly; 
" but you may rely on my honourably dis- 
charging your demands the moment the 
fitting time arrives." 

" But you forget, love," said Mrs. Piscator, 
" that all this time you are taking the 
chances which I ought to give to m} r regular 
young friends !" 

" I wish to do nothing unfair," said Annie, 
" but on this subject I am quite decided." 

Mrs. Piscator made no reply, but shut the 
door in a way which denoted that her feel- 
ings were deeply wounded. How much ex- 
pression is there in shutting a door ! almost 
as much as in the curl of a lip, or the dila- 
ting of an eye ! Yes, the closing of that 
door had a world of concentrated meaning in 
it. 

Ellen shook with nervous apprehension, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 75 



and entreated her sister to pay the demand 
made on tliem. 

" Dear Ellen," exclaimed Annie, " were I 
to listen to all your suggestions of this nature, 
do you know what the result would be ?" 

" No, indeed." 

" Simply this, that at the end of a few 
weeks we should be quite bankrupts ! Now, 
Ellen, don't look so distressed ; I don't mean 
to follow your advice, and no doubt our 
loaves and bottles of wine will last till we 
are provided for." 

" Yes," said Ellen, "with the blessing of 
our Father in heaven, they will be like the 
Widow's cruse ;" and the young creature 
looked with such an expression of holy trust, 
that Annie sighed for the same child-like 
faith. 

When the sisters arrived at Mr. St. John's, 

in Square, they w^ere surprised at the 

magnificence of the mansion. The door was 
opened by a superior-looking footman in 
superb livery, and three more were crossing 
the marble hall, which was elaborately orna- 
mented and adorned with graceful statues 
of Venus and Cupid, repeated in various 
attitudes, but not altogether so well draped 
as they might have been. 



7G ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Annie requested to see Mrs. St. John. 
The servant appeared embarrassed ; he opened 
successively a number of doors round the 
hall, and as he did so, several ladies were 
seen sitting in each apartment. " I am 
afraid there is not a vacant room into which 
I can show you, ladies," said the man, with 
sucli a perfectly well-bred intonation that 
the sisters were astonished. They would 
have been less so, had they known his master, 
who prided himself on being a man of taste, 
and having everything and everybody sur- 
sounding him, to correspond with his reputa- 
tion for refined elegance. 

" Ah, I perceive there is only one lady in 
the library, how very fortunate !" said the 
polished footman. " Will you walk in there, 
ladies ?" 

"Are all these governesses?" whispered 
Ellen to Annie. 

" They are, madam," said the man. 

" Then we have no chance !" involuntarily 
exclaimed Ellen. 

" Pardon me, madam," said the footman, 
with a bland smile, " if you are the candi- 
date, you have the best chance of any." As 
he spoke, he placed a chair for Annie and 
Ellen, and left them. Both instinctively 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 77 

glanced at their companion . She was young, 
apparently about two-ancl-twenty, rather in- 
teresting than pretty, and seemed very timid, 
in fact, trembling with nervousness. Ellen 
looked her sympathy, and Annie was about 
to address her, when the door opened, and 
Mr. and Mrs. St. John entered. The three 
girls rose, and remained standing, nor were 
they requested to be seated. Mr. St. John 
might have been about fifty, or less ; he was 
rather stout, very tall, and had a great air 
of fashion. He was not handsome, but his 
style was indisputably aristocratic, and his 
manner imposing. Without either in words 
or in tone expressing anything rude, there was 
something in him which spoke a conscious- 
ness of superior standing, and of the inferior 
social position of those he was addressing. 
Mrs. St. John was a gentlewoman, had little 
style, less beauty, and was several years her 
husband's senior. She had moreover a par- 
ticularly suspicious and peevish expression, 
and looked very scrutinizingly at all three 
of the young women. She seemed very cross 
till her eye rested on Annie, with whom she 
appeared pleased, she best knew why j but 
perhaps it was that she was, to common 
observers, the plainest ! Mr. St. John 



78 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

glanced approvingly at Miss Jones, ^ap- 
provingly at Annie; lie had not yet observed 
Ellen, she stood more in the shade. But 
Mr. and Mrs. St. John did not content them- 
selves with looking; their questions were 
many and searching. Mr. St. John catechised 
with the clear, cold enunciation of a man 
of the world ; his wife, on the contrary, 
with a hurried restlessness of manner pecu- 
liarly her own. Her first exclamation on 
entering the room had been, "What, more 
governesses ! Surely, Fitz, we have seen 
enough." Mr. St. John had immediately 
begun to question the applicants, without 
seeming to notice his wife's remarks. He 
was soon very busy with Miss Jones, who 
answered his questions with downcast eyes 
and a heightened colour. Mr. St. John was 
pleased ; he seemed forgetful of all present 
but Miss Jones ; he admired her extremely, 
but he was too aristocratic to offer a gover- 
ness a chair. 

Mrs. St. John looked uneasy, " Fitz ! 
Fitz I" said she, sharply, " I think this young 
person will suit us exactly, she is the n 

" Excuse me, we differ," toad Mr. St. 
John, with perfect good humour ; " Miss 
Sherwood will pardon the remark, but I 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 79 

think height essential in a governess, it 
commands respect." 

" I did not propose offering myself, I am 
quite sure it would be useless/' said Annie, 
with a meaning smile ; " my younger sister 
is the applicant," and she turned towards 
Ellen, whose lovely face was now more com- 
pletely revealed, allowing Mr. St. John to 
observe her for the first time. " But I 
think," continued Annie, addressing herself 
to the lady, "we had better not trespass 
longer on your time and attention ; my sister 
is obviously too young." 

" Yes, yes, you are quite right, w r e need 
not trouble you any further j too young, a 
great deal too young. Good morning," said 
Mrs. St. John, hurriedly. 

" Excuse me, my dear," said Mr. St. John, 
with very marked emphasis, an emphasis 
which showed that he was lord paramount, 
and that though his wife might keep up a 
vexatious warfare, she would never come off 
conqueror in the strife, " wisdom does not 
always accompany grey hairs." 

Mrs. St. John coloured a little, and turned 
away to conceal her vexation. 

" I shall be glad to speak with you in the 
next room," said Mr. St. John to Ellen ; then 



80 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

turning to Miss Jones, " You would have 
suited us admirably if — if you had known 
anything- of Spanish." 

The poor girl blushed deeply, but slunk 
away, as if half glad to be dismissed. 

" But I know nothing of Spanish, either !" 
said Ellen, shrinking back involuntarily. 

" Don't } r ou?" said Mr. St. John, smiling. 
" Perhaps you have other accomplishments 
which may compensate for the absence of 
that one ; and after all, I do not particularly 
value it." 

Mr. St. John then led the way into the 
next room, intending to have a private con- 
versation with Ellen, but Annie pertina- 
ciously followed. 

" I should wish, in a transaction of this 
kind, to speak alone with the person with 
whom I negotiate," said Mr. St. John, in a 
tone of hauteur and ill-concealed annoyance. 

" My sister is young and inexperienced," 
replied Annie, coolly, and meeting the eye 
of the great man with an unflinching look. 
" She cannot, nor would she if she could, 
form any engagement, or negotiate for one, 
without my presence and sanction." 

" Indeed !" said Mr. St. John, raising his 
eyebrows : he then began to converse with 



ANNE SHERWOOD. SI 

Ellen in the most gently-modulated voice, 
rather describing to her the position she 
would hold in his family, the agremens of his 
seat in Lancashire, the delight he took in 
assisting in his little girl's studies, &c, than 
questioning her of her acquirements. Ellen 
listened, or seemed to listen. Annie tried 
several times to speak, but could not without 
actually interrupting Mr. St. John. He 
spoke neither loudly nor volubly, but his 
well-formed periods flowed so smoothly one 
into the other, that no pause occurred. 

Mrs. St. John, who had been detained by 
the arrival of a note, now entered. " I come 
to remind you, Fitz, that you have an en- 
gagement at three." 

"Thank you; I was about to ring, and 
send to remind you that Lady Emmeline 
expects you to call for her at a quarter past 
two. I hope the carriage is at the door. 
Pray be punctual ; you have not more than 
five minutes in which to prepare." So saying, 
Mr. St. John rang the bell to give orders, 
and politely opening the door for his wife, 
bowed her out. He then told Ellen that 
her salary would be seventy guineas; in 
fact, he was not particular — she might say 
eighty if she liked. He did not wish his 

VOL. 1. G 



82 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

daughter to be over-educated ; provided she 
was musical, spoke French, and knew suffi- 
cient of Italian to understand the poets, he 
would be satisfied. At this juncture Mrs. 
St. John put her head round the door in a 
bonnet of white satin, blonde and feathers, — 
" French and Italian, of course, Fitz, but you 
know we must have German too ; and ask 
Miss Sherwood if she undertakes to teach 
thoroughly, Ancient and Modern History, 
the Celestial and Terrestrial Globes, Arith- 
metic in its advanced stages, Natural His- 
tory, Botany, Chemistry, Con ' 

Mrs. St. John spoke as rapidly as she 
could enunciate — so rapidly, that it was 
difficult to follow her meaning. It was long 
ere Mr. St. John succeeded in interrupting 
the torrent, though he held up both his hands 
in mock supplication. "Excuse me, my dear," 
said he, with his accustomed urbanity; "but 
Lady Emmeline waits : and, besides, I detest 
all these things too heartily myself, to impose 
such severe studies on my daughter." He took 
his wife's hand, and led her courteously to 
the carriage, she talking to him all the time 
in earnest, angry tones of expostulation, and 
once Annie thought she distinguished the 
word " minx ;" but Mr. St. John was smiling 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 83 

and bowing, as if in reply to the most 
agreeable compliments. When he returned 
to the room, it was to request that Ellen 
would call in a day or two; he then dis- 
missed her with evident reluctance, though 
all the time he had kept her standing like 
a waiting-maid. 

" I wonder," said Ellen, when the sisters 
had left the house, — " I wonder whether they 
will grant me the use of a chair if I go there 1" 

" Should you like to go to them?" asked 
Annie, anxiously. 

" Oh, no ; I don't think I should like it 
at all," said Ellen. 

" Has Mrs. St. John's cross face frightened 
you?" 

" No ; but I don't like him, though I could 
not give any particular reason for my dis- 
like." 

"But I can," said Annie; "you are be- 
ginning to read countenances. No; you 
must not go there." 

" I would much rather go to the Cliftons, 
with half the salary," said Ellen. 

The girls were both wearied; an omnibus 
passed invitingly at the moment, and they en- 
tered it. At the further end sat a middle-aged 
woman, whom they recognised immediately 

g 2^ 



84 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

as some one they had seen before. Annie 
looked at her very earnestly; there was a 
great deal of shrewdness and determination 
in her countenance. She, too, looked atten- 
tively at the sisters. At last she bent 
forward, and said to Annie, " I saw you at 
Mrs. Piscator's this morning. You have been 
to offer at Mr. St. John's j so have I. The 
place is a good one. Do either of you mean 
to take it?" 

" No," said Annie ; "it is open for any 
other person, as far as we are concerned." 

" Eight," said their new acquaintance ; 
" you are both too young, and one of you 
too pretty, for that house!" 

"Do you mean to go there?" asked Ellen, 
innocently. 

" I, my dear ? Yes, if they would have 
me, but they wont. I am too old, and too 
ugly. Madame (who has a particular dislike 
to ornamental pieces of furniture) would 
have engaged me, but the husband quickly 
negatived the business, and showed me how 
to turn the handle of the door. I'll tell you 
what, — that man wants no governess for his 
daughter, but some one to flirt with and 
amuse him; and whoever w r ent there (who 
had youth or good looks) would be insulted 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 85 

by his impudence on the one hand, and tor- 
mented by the old wife's jealousy on the 
other." The lady spoke energetically, and, as 
she spoke, thrust her umbrella into the side 
of the unfortunate conductor: — " Piccadilly! 
why didn't you put me down at Kegent's 
Circus ?" 

" Put you down directly, Mem; wish I'd 
done it before!' said the conductor, leaping 
from his perch like a squirrel. 

" Is every undertaking thus to be over- 
thrown?" murmured Annie, as they entered 
their humble dwelling. 

" No," said Ellen (eagerly seizing a letter 
that lay on the table) ; " here is a letter from 
Mr. Clifton; I shall do better with the 
Cliftons at thirty or forty pounds a year, 
than with the St. Johns at the highest 
salary." 

Annie and Ellen read the letter together. 
Mrs. Clifton would be glad to receive Ellen 
at her earliest convenience; they had heard 
all that was satisfactory from Miss Brentford, 
and felt assured that they were securing at 
once a valuable instructress for their chil- 
dren, and a friend for themselves. The 
carriage and man-servant should meet Miss 
Sherwood at any hour she liked to appoint. 



S6 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

The salary (as tlieir income was limited) 
would be necessarily moderate, — that is, 
twelve pounds a year, — and their governess 
paid her own laundress! 

To accept such terms was impossible, and 
poor Ellen saw her fabric of hope overthrown. 
She said nothing, but the tears flowed freely 
down her cheeks. Annie, who was less 
passive, sat down to write and decline the 
offer, plainly stating the reason, and ani- 
madverting, more than prudence warranted, 
on the inadequacy of the terms proposed, for 
the amount of labour demanded in return. 
Annie found relief and consolation in thus 
boldly expressing her feelings of indignation; 
she was becoming quite resolute in her 
assurance that she must expect nothing but 
injustice and oppression, and seemed to feel 
that the prophecy with regard to Ishmael 
would be fulfilled in her case, — " Every 
man's hand shall be against him," cvc. 

Several days passed without bringing any 
brighter prospects to the Sherwoods. They 
were then summoned to wait on several 
" distinguished ladies" (as the agents called 
them), who examined their persons with 
supercilious curiosity, and catechised them 
with all the arrogant authority of wealth. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 87 

All these negotiations ended in disappoint- 
ment. Ellen was too pretty ; Annie did not 
know enough ; and yet her real amount of 
knowledge would have made those who 
affected to despise her attainments, blush at 
their own ignorance. 

Weeks went by, and still the sisters lin- 
gered on in their humble lodgings, hoping 
against hope, and daily contriving some 
further retrenchment to eke out their little 
remaining store, which, nevertheless, rapidly 
diminished. In vain Annie searched day 
after day in the columns of the Times ; she 
rarely met with any advertisement at all 
suitable to Ellen or herself, or, if she did, 
and applied for the engagement, her letter 
seldom produced a reply. 

On one occasion, however, her hopes were 
momentarily raised by the reception of a 
very pleasing note, requesting her to call in 

Street at any hour that would be most 

convenient to herself. " Most wonderful 
condescension, Annie!" exclaimed Ellen, 
looking up, as though she had made some 
strange discovery. " Annie, do you know — 
I think — that is to say, I'm afraid that this 
lady will offer you nothing a year!" 
"What makes you think so?" 



83 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" The note is so polite," said Ellen, " so 
very polite ; and you know that clergyman's 
was so too, and he offered me 12/. a year !" 

" "We shall see !" said Annie, with a lan- 
guid smile, for her hopes were not very 
bright. She found little to reply to Ellen's 
doubts and fears. Mrs. Weldon was a plain, 
unostentatious person, the wife of a mer- 
chant, apparently able and willing to offer a 
liberal salary. She demanded nothing un- 
reasonable, unless it were that the governess 
should spend thirteen hours daily in the 
charge of her pupils, Mrs. Weldon ingenuously 
remarking that her own temper w r as pecu- 
liarly irritable ; consequently the children 
could not spend any time with her, lest her 
example should prove injurious to their 
moral training, and she could not, of course, 
allow them to be under the care of servants. 
One more drawback there was to this very 
eligible appointment — the governess was ex- 
pected to wasli and dress her Sieves; in fact, 
to perform all the duties of a bonne. And }-et 
there was no haughty assumption on the 
part of Mrs. Weldon — nothing to indicate 
that she would regard her children's instruc- 
tress in the light of a menial, though she 
required her to fulfil a menial's duties. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. S9 

In vain Annie Sherwood opposed argu- 
ment to the last demand. Mrs. Weldon 
was not offended at her reluctance to under- 
take the w T ork of a nurse, but continued to 
insist on its necessity. Annie's proud spirit 
revolted at the thought of such imposed 
menial labour; she rose, and asked leave to 
have time for consideration. Mrs. Weldon 
acceded to the latter wish, and further in- 
formed her that they lived quite alone ; 
never visited nor received visitors ; and being 
averse to all sorts of light recreations, were 
anxious that every member of their family 
should conform to their rules, confining their 
attention to religious works. 

Annie had said she would consider, and 
she had said so with the half-formed resolu- 
tion of rejecting the engagement ; but when 
she had really reflected — really compared 
Mrs.JVVeldon with the other parties who 
had honoured her with their notice, she de- 
cided that even with nurserymaid's duties to 
perform, and the prospect of a life equally 
fatiguing and monotonous, the engagement 
in question was infinitely preferable to any 
other which had as yet offered. She there- 
fore wrote to Mrs. Weldon, and accepted 
her terms. Mrs. Weldon wished to secure 



90 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Annie's services, knew something of her 
connexions, and consequently (being rather 
averse to any avoidable exertion) dispensed 
with some of the usual formalities. The 
engagement was concluded. Annie was to 
enter on her new and untried duties, the 
moment her sister was provided with a 
home. A brilliant offer came for Ellen — came 
just at the moment it was most desired. 

Sir James and Lady Mildred were desirous 
of procuring a governess for their two 
younger daughters, sufficiently accomplished 
to instruct them in French, Italian, and 
music, and sufficiently young, not to alarm 
them by any austerity. In fact, she w r as to 
unite, as far as possible, the character of a 
playmate and that of an instructress. Ellen 
answered exactly to the description. Sir 
James and Lady Mildred were no longer 
young. Sir James was immersed in Parlia- 
mentary affairs, and was of a serious cha- 
racter ; her ladyship was of " no character at 
all." There was no fear of finding a Mr. 
and Mrs. St. John in Sir .Tames and Lady 
Mildred. 

Ellen had been instructed by the agent 
who negotiated the business to call on him 
for instructions before presenting herself at 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 91 

the Baronet's. She therefore went to his 
office, accompanied by Annie. 

The agent strenuously endeavoured to 
impress on Ellen's mind the importance 
and aristocratic pretensions of the Mildred 
family. " It was an honour to serve them 
in an}' capacity; such families were not to 
be met with every day, he could tell her." 
Mr. de F then ran over the list of re- 
quirements. 

"I am afraid," stammered Ellen, who 
was frightened rather than charmed with 
the brilliant description of the Mildred 
family, — "I am afraid, very much afraid, that 

it is far beyond me 1" but Mr. de F 

showed such evident signs of displeasure 
that she was reduced to silence, especially 
after he had resolutely stamped his foot, and 
declared that she must, and should, call on 
Lady Mildred. What was a timid girl to 
that petty tyrant? Ellen withdrew sub- 
missively, and immediately proceeded to 
Place, where, as she had been in- 
structed, she inquired, not for Lady Mildred, 
but for Mrs. Stokes-Delville, formerly a 
governess in her ladyship's family, now her 
confidential employee. 

Mrs. Stokes -Delville entered the drawing- 



92 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

room, into which the sisters had been shown, 
with that sort of half-patronising air so fre- 
quently seen in those, who from very sub- 
ordinate positions, have become confidential 
friends of the great. She was affable and 
condescending, and after a half-hour's con- 
versation, left the room to inform Lady 
Mildred of the result of her examination of 
the governess candidate. After a short 
lapse of time, Mrs. Stokes-Delville re-entered, 
and obsequiously held the door open till a 
lady followed, who looked old, very mentally 
and physically weak, and very, very aristo- 
cratic. Lady Mildred advanced, seated her- 
self in a chaise-longue, and took a survey of 
the sisters in perfect silence. Her examination 
might have lasted about two minutes, cer- 
tainly not longer. She rose, and murmuring 
" I am very much prepossessed," slowly 
left the room as she had entered, followed 
by Mrs. Stokes-Delville. 

Mrs. Stokes-Delville (there is a pleasure 
in repeating that name) was absent some 
time, and then returned to renew the con- 
versation. She repeated what Lad)* Mildred 
had said, at least taking her short sentence 
of approbation, as a text for a lengthened 
discourse. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 93 

So far the negotiation had proceeded 
favourably ; a liberal salary was offered, and 
many advantages loomed in the distance. 
As she and Ellen were withdrawing, Annie 
ventured to inquire what holidays Ellen 
would have ; for she had laid, as she thought, 
a charming little plan, which would enable 
them to meet and spend a few weeks to- 
gether once a year. 

" Holidays I" repeated Mrs. Stokes-Del- 
ville; "I had the honour of spending 
twelve years in the family of Lady Mildred, 
and never thought of asking for holidays ; 
and when the advantages are so mani- 
fest, I cannot think what more can be re- 
quired/' 

"It is painful to break near and dear ties, 
and to part from those with whom we have 
been accustomed to the daily and hourly 
interchange of thought through life," said 
Annie : " without the consolatory hope of 
occasionally renewed intercourse, it would 
be unbearable/' 

" Pardon me, Miss Sherwood," said Mrs. 
Stokes-Delville ; " but, from our previous 
conversation, I had supposed you stronger- 
minded ! Surely you w T ould not put these 
petty considerations, these sentimental pue- 



94 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

rilities, in competition with the duty an 
instructress owes her pupils':" 

"You have been a governess yourself, 
Mrs. Stokes/' said Annie. 

" Stokes-Delville, if you please, Miss Sher- 
wood ! Yes, I have had the honour of 
residing in Sir James Mildred's family for 
twelve years, and well know the advantage 
of such a position. I never had any holidays ; 
I never wanted any; and I was amply re- 
compensed for the self-denial I exercised by 
the generosity and condescension of my 
patrons. Indeed, when I left the house (I 
am now merely on a visit, for I have retired 
on funded property), Sir James himself did 
me the honour to shake hands toith me ; her 
ladyship presented me with a valuable work- 
box, inlaid, and beautifully fitted up, and 
assured me she should always feel the live- 
liest interest in my welfare. I think that 
quite enough to reconcile one to a little 
restraint." 

Annie's face expressed plainly that neither 
the handsomest workbox ever made, nor 
shaking hands with a duke, would reconcile 
her to imprisonment ; but she tried to repress 
her feelings, and inquired how many hours 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 95 

her sister would be required to devote daily 
to her pupils. " From seven in the morning 
till nine in the evening," was the reply. 
She was about to remark thereon, when 
Ellen hastily interrupted her, and expressed 
her willingness to comply with Lady Mil- 
dred's conditions. 

Mrs. Stokes -Delville then graciously dis- 
missed the Sherwoods with a bow, practised 
on the model of Lady Mildred's for many a 
long year. 

" Ellen !" exclaimed Annie, when the pon- 
derous hall-door closed behind them, " I can- 
not bear that you should sell yourself to such 
bondage ! Let us take the little money we 
have left, and go to Australia !" 

" We have not enough," said Ellen, de- 
jectedly; "7/. 10s. is all that remains. I 
counted it this morning. I must go to Lady 
Mildred's!' 3 she added, sighing. But Ellen 
had only her own consent thereto ; the same 
evenino: a note arrived from Mrs. Stokes- 
Delville, declining Miss Sherwood's services, 
as she (Mrs. Stokes-Delville) feared, from 

the morning's conversation, that Miss S 

would not be as devoted to the charming 
Miss Mildreds as she could wish, who had 



96 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

had the honour of instructing their elder 
sisters twelve years, and who now enjoyed 
the friendship of their parents. 

The same post brought a letter from Mr. 
Weldon, regretting (in his wife's name) that 
they must be deprived of the services of their 
young Christian friend. They had met 
with a lady in some respects more suitable, 
but still regretted, &c. 

Once more, then, the sisters were tlirown 
on the wide world, to concert new plans, 
raise fresh hopes (if they could), and recom- 
mence researches which had no longer the 
charm of novelty to recommend them ! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 97 



CHAPTEE VI. 

"Annie dear, let us try another agency," 
said Ellen ; " perhaps we shall be more for- 
tunate in our next attempt." 

"Yes, let us try another," said Annie; 
" let us go directly." 

" Wont to-morrow do ?" 

" No, darling, there is no time like the 
present," said Annie, gently. 

Ellen yielded, as was her wont, but with- 
out alacrity ; she was beginning to feel 
very, very weary of those long walks, that 
brought with them delusive hopes, to be 
immediately overthrown by bitter disap- 
pointment. 

The new agent to whom they applied was 
one of extensive connexion, and real respec- 
tability. He w r as a clerical as well as a 
scholastic agent, and apparently transacted 
his business without extravagant professions 
of zeal in the service of his clients, but 
with regard to their interests as well as his 

VOL. I. H 



98 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

own. The curates, tutors, and governesses 
applying to him for engagements were con- 
sequently so numerous, that he found it im- 
possible to meet all their demands. He had 
therefore adopted the equitable plan of only 
receiving fees from those whom he actually 
succeeded in placing, and whoever applied 
to him was sure of meeting with civility, if 
not success. 

Annie and Ellen Sherwood were received 
by Mr. Major with courtesy, but requested 
to wait a short time, till he had finished a 
conversation with a gentleman with whom 
he had been conversing on their entrance. 
The sisters sat down to await the agent's 
leisure. 

Nearly opposite to them was seated a 
young man in shabby black, very sallow and 
unhealthy, but he had a pleasing counte- 
nance, lit by luminous dark eyes, and an 
expression of thought and earnest feeling. 
He was not handsome, still, it was a beau- 
tiful countenance, a spiritual, chastened- 
looking face, which the eye would seek again 
and again, and never weary in perusing. In 
one hand the poor curate held a shabby 
pocket-book, the other was industriously en- 
deavouring to conceal the torn cuff of his 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 99 

coat, while his hat, which lay on a chair 
beside him, though smoothly brushed, was 
almost guiltless of nap. 

At length the person with whom Mr. 
Major had been conversing was dismissed. 
He then turned to the threadbare curate. 
" I am sorry to keep you waiting, Mr. Stan- 
cliff/' said he, courteously. 

" Thank you, I have no other engage- 
ment," said he, with a low sigh ; " I can wait 
without inconvenience." 

Then the agent would like to know Annie's 
business. Annie briefly, but clearly ex- 
plained what she and her sister wanted, and 
stated how little they undertook. 

"Do you think we have any chance of 
employment ?" asked Ellen, with a tremulous 
voice. 

" We have a great many applicants," said 
Mr. Major, "but I will do all I can." 

" Thank you," said Annie, gratefully. She 
believed the promise, and to see that she 
believed it, raised Ellen's spirits. The Sher- 
woocls rose to depart, the shabby curate rose 
too ; he opened the door for them, and in so 
doing displayed his torn cuff, then coloured 
with confusion. 

Before the door closed they heard Mr. 

h 2 



100 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Major say, "I am sorry to tell you, Mr, 
Stancliff, that the curacy is gone." 

" Gone !" repeated the young man, in great 
agitation, "gone, did you say?" 

" Oh, Annie I" exclaimed Ellen, "he is in 
distress. I thought he was !" 

"Who is in distress?" said Annie, ab- 
stractedly. 

" That amiable-looking — that poor young 
man, I mean," said Ellen, blushing. 

" Yes, I dare say he is," said Annie ; 
"but one's own anxieties make the heart 
selfish. You have observed him more closely 
than I." 

" I could not help noticing him," rejoined 
Ellen ; " he was directly opposite to me, and 
besides, being a clergyman, and " 

" And having very fine eyes !" interrupted 
Annie. 

" I don't know, I — I did not notice," said 
Ellen. 

" Nonsense, Ellen, you know you did ! 
Is he not something like our rustic friend, 
Charles Turner?" 

" Oh, no !" cried Ellen, warmly, " not the 
least ; he has a pale, melancholy lace, what 
Lavater calls ' a spiritually beautiful coun- 
tenance !' " 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 101 

" Indeed !" said Annie. " Ellen ! Ellen ! 
this looks very like what romancers call 
' love at first sight IV 

" Pray do not talk so," said Ellen ; "I am 
not quite so silly as you think, only I 
thought him very amiable and " 

"What proof did he give of being 
amiable ?" 

" He opened the door for us." 

" Did he ! Dear child, don't you know 
that any man of the world would have done 
the same?" 

" Yes, but not in the same manner," per- 
sisted Ellen. 

" I grant you that some people might per- 
form the same action less graciously, but 
still they would do it. What shall we do, 
Ellen ?" 

" What about, dear ?" 

" If you grow romantic ! Don't you know, 
child, no one would put up with a romantic 
governess. How will }^ou ever " 

" I shall try to put our father's precepts 
in practice," said Ellen, seriously. " I shall 
do my duty, and leave all the consequences 
to God." There was an earnestness and 
clinging faith in Ellen's religious feelings 
which gave an air of dignity to their expres- 



102 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

sion, ancl inspired respect. Annie was silent 
and thoughtful ; she was brooding over her 
young sister's words, and wishing she could 
more fully enter into her feelings. Happy 
had it been for her could her wish have been 
accomplished. As it was, with a host of 
fine qualities and generous passions, Annie 
Sherwood was about to enter the " battle of 
life ' aided by no stronger weapons of de- 
fence, girt with no other armour, than that 
of her own strong will and unbending spirit. 

Another fortnight of patient waiting. A 
note came from Mr. Major, requesting Ellen 

to call at No. , Street, upon a lady 

who required a governess for two little girls. 

Mrs. Harrington was not in the drawing- 
room on the Sherwoods' arrival, but soon 
after entered. She was rather faded, and 
wore a look of fatigue and sorrow on her 
gentle countenance, but was still a lovely 
woman. She led in with her two beautiful 
children. 

" Which is the Miss Sherwood recom- 
mended by Mr. Major?" asked Mrs. Har- 
rington, after she had courteously greeted 
both the sisters. When Ellen was desig- 
nated, a shade of disappointment crossed the 
lady's face. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 103 

" I am afraid — that is, I think I need not 
trouble you by inquiries. I fear you will 
not suit me ;" but she spoke almost apolo- 
getically, as if she were saying something 
very unkind. 

" I shall not suit you 1" repeated Ellen ; 
" oh, I am so sorry, so very sorry I" 

" Why?" asked Mrs. Harrington, in a yet 
softer tone of voice. 

"Because — because — ! faltered Ellen, 
" of all the ladies I have seen, you are the 
first, the very first, that has spoken kindly 
to me." 

" Poor girl !" said Mrs. Harrington, seat- 
ing herself beside Ellen, while she took one 
of her hands in hers ; " no, I cannot have 
you, but " 

"My sister knows much more than her 
youthful appearance would lead you to sup- 
pose," said Annie, who felt that if they must 
part she would give worlds to leave Ellen in 
such gentle hands. 

" I dare say she does," replied Mrs. Har- 
rington. " I am not very anxious, at least, 
I trust not over-anxious, for my children to 
be accomplished. I would rather that they 
should be trained to shine in heaven than to 
glitter in the world." 



104 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Ellen is a Christian in heart and life," 
said Annie, warmly. 

" I have not one doubt of that," said Mrs. 
Harrington, "but I will tell you frankly 
why I cannot engage your sister. I have 
known much sorrow, as I think my counte- 
nance must show you, sorrow that has taught 
me caution ; your sister is too young and 
beautiful for me." 

" Too beautiful !" exclaimed the astonished 
EUen. 

" Yes, too beautiful," repeated Mrs. Har- 
rington, slowly. " There are reasons (apart, 
I trust, from any unworthy or ungenerous 
feelings in me,) which would render you a 
dangerous inmate. Stay a few minutes," she 
added, seeing that the disappointed girls rose 
to depart ; " you must need refreshment after 
your long walk." 

Mrs. Harrington constrained the Sher- 
woods to remain, and ordered luncheon. 

There was something so sweet, so loveable, 
in the very sound of Mrs. Harrington's 
tunable voice, something so charming in 

"The music breathing from her face," 

that Annie was as much pleased with her as 
the confiding Ellen. Her manner was more 
than courteous, it w T as friendly; and she 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 105 

seemed as much interested in lier new ac- 
quaintance, as they were fascinated by her. 
Without any appearance of indelicate curio- 
sity, she succeeded in drawing forth their 
history. Ere they departed she said to Ellen, 
"Though I must not have you myself, I 
may perhaps be enabled to recommend you." 

Ellen's face beamed with gratitude which 
she could not express. " I will make every 
inquiry among my friends, and — but you 
will call again," added Mrs. Harrington, 
hastily. " Yet no, I had better call on you ;" 
and in completing her sentence, Mrs. Har- 
rington's face flushed with extraordinary 
emotion. There was a mystery attending 
her which Ellen's simplicit}^ could not un- 
ravel ; to Annie it was no mystery at all. 

" Mamma ! mamma !" said one of the chil- 
dren, as the Sherwoods were about to with- 
draw ; "I don't think Miss Sherwood beau- 
tiful at all! Do let her come to teach me. 
I should love her so much ! and I'm quite 
sure she is not beautiful at all!" 

" You are very complimentary, Harry," 
said Mrs. Harrington. "What will Miss 
Sherwood think of my spoilt boy ?" 

" I love him for his truthfulness," said 
EUen. 



106 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" But you don't understand him," said the 
lady ; "he thinks that to be beautiful is very 
wicked." 

"Yes, it is wicked!" exclaimed the boy, 
vehemently, "very wicked. I hate beauti- 
ful people, ever since Miss Germains was 
here. She w T as beautiful — and you cried all 
day and papa scolded you, and " 

" Hush, hush ! dear Harry ! you are talk- 
ing of what you do not understand; run away 
now, and play." 

" But I do understand, mamma ; I un- 
derstand very, very well. Miss Germains 
was beautiful and — I hate all beautiful peo- 
ple, and I want Miss Sherwood to come and 
teach me. She wouldn't make you cry !" 

"No one makes me cry, love," said the 
mother, clasping the boy in her arms, though 
her eyes filled with tears at the time. Mrs. 
Harrington shook hands warmly with Annie 
and Ellen, and promising that they should 
hear from her directly she had anything 
good to communicate, she took their address, 
looked at her watch anxiously, and then out 
of the window, as if she did not wish to 
detain them longer. 

" How very strange," said Ellen, when 
they had left the door ; " Mrs. Harrington 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 107 

seemed to take an extraordinary and sudden 
interest in us, and yet towards the close of 
our visit she was evidently anxious to see 
us away !" 

" Not at all strange," said Annie, " she 
expected him home." 

" Expected whom ?" ' 

" Her husband, to be sure; she is an angel, 
but mated with one of earth's grossest sons. 
I am not surprised that she could not ven- 
ture to take you, Ellen. Did I not tell you 
that your pretty face would mar your 
prospects ?" 

" But what is a mere pretty face, beside 
one so incomparably lovely as Mrs. Harring- 
ton's?" said Ellen. 

" Novelty, of course," said Annie. " Mr. 
Harrington has read every line in his wife's 
face, till he is wearied of it, and can no longer 
discover any beauty there." 

" How can he be so heartless !" said Ellen. 

" He is a man!" replied Annie. 

" My dear Annie ! a stranger who heard 
you talk thus, would think some one had 
deceived you, and left a bitter impression of 
the whole sex !" 

" No, no, I have never been deceived," 
said Annie, quickly, "nor shall I be. No 



10S ANNE SHERWOOD. 

man shall ever have it in his power to say 
he has deceived Annie Sherwood ! I was not 
made for the puerilities of commonplace love 
affairs." 

"But apart from all that sort of thing, 
you must believe in love I" 

" Yes, yes, in love," said Annie ; " but my 
ideas on the subject are exaltees\ I have 
dreamt of unrealized perfection. Had I 
lived in the days of the young Earth, I 
should have been one of the daughters of 
men who sang — 

1 Come pray with me, my seraph love ! 
My augel lord, come pray with me !' 

I should have had no charms to cause an 
angel's fall, but I should have had the soul 
to turn from earth's earthly sons to the 
worship of some glorious seraph. Ellen ! 
Ellen ! I forget myself ! I am asleep, and 
you are asleep ; I am visioning a fallen 
Raphael; you, dreaming of the shabby curate 
we saw the other day. But, Ellen dear, we 
must wake — wake and remember I am not at 
the gates of a lost Eden; you, not in the plea- 
sant parlour of a pretty curacy ! No, we are 
volunteer governesses, ready to give up our 
lives and liberty to the highest bidder, and 
moreover w T e have just 6/. 1 3*. in our pockets." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 109 

But though Annie Sherwood spoke thus, 
and tried hard to chase away her own dreamy 
visions with a scornful laugh, she still 
dreamt on. 

Long days and longer weeks went by. 
The Sherwoods had spent their last guinea. 
Again they talked of economizing : they had 
nothing wherewith to economize. Want, 
actual want, stared them in the face. Which 
way were they to turn ? to whom could they 
apply for assistance? To Bertha? What 
could she do for them ? Lend them a portion 
of her hardly-earned stipend? No, that 
they could not ask ; all she had for her 
labour (and that was little enough) went to 
supplv the necessities of a widowed mother. 

The Sherwoods' last shilling had been 
given to their landlady, the morrow would 
find them without a meal. "I will do it !" 
exclaimed Annie, starting from a reverie in 
which she had long been plunged, with her 
hands tightly clasped on her forehead, — " I 
will do it !" 

" What are you going to do ?" cried Ellen, 
in alarm at her sister's agitation. 

" Provide for you and myself!" said Annie, 
as she seated herself and seized a pen. 

" How, dearest ?" 



110 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" You will see." Annie wrote a few hurried 
lines ; they were these : — 

" If Charles Turner is still desirous of 
marrying Annie Sherwood, she will grate- 
fully accept his offer." 

" For me 1" exclaimed Ellen, who had 
looked over her sister's shoulder, "for me, 
Annie ! No, you shall never sacrifice your- 
self for me !" and speaking with unwonted 
resolution, she snatched the letter, and tore 
it up. 

" What are you doing?" cried Annie. 

" Saving you. You must not marry your 
inferior. Were it I, the disproportion would 
not be so great, but you — it would make 
your misery for life." 

" What is to become of us ?" said Annie. 

" Annie, Annie ! Have you never read in 
the Word of God, 'Yet saw I never the 
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging 
their bread'? It is impossible for the children 
of our Father to starve j it is sinful in them 
to despair! Come, Annie, let us try ^Irs. 
Piscator once more." 

For a brief space the sisters had changed 
characters ; it was Ellen who led, and Annie 
who followed. They proceeded to Mrs. 
Piscator's, but not being rich enough to 



ANNE SHERWOOD. Ill 

possess a watch between them, they were so 
unfortunate as to arrive after the hours 
usually allotted to business, and that was a 
great crime. The Slier woods were admitted, 
however, by a servant, who was forgetful of 
the hour, or else had forgotten the rules of 
the Establishment, or " Institution," as its 
proprietor called it. The two girls remained 
some time in the dingy waiting-room. At 
length a head of curls and a pair of naked 
shoulders were thrust in the door- way, which 
w r ere unmistakeably appertaining to Miss 
Piscator. " Dear me ! Miss Sherwood, I 
declare ! Well, I never ! but ma can't see you ; 
I'm sure she can't ; why, it's long past time !" 

"I am sorry to break your mamma's 
rules," said Annie, "but I really had no 
idea of the time. We have come from a 
considerable distance, so I hope Mrs. Piscator 
can see us ; we shall not detain her five 
minutes." 

"I shall do nothing of the kind!" ex- 
claimed a very wrathful voice, and a full, red 
face, still more inflamed by passion, showed 
itself. " See you, indeed ! Pray what do 
you mean by coming here at this hour of the 
day ! half-past four ! What do you mean 
by it, I say ?" 



112 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

"Ma," interposed Miss Piscator, "nia, 
Miss Sherwood didn't know it was so late." 

" Don't tell me, she knew well enough," 
vociferated the energetic lady. " Base in- 
gratitude, after all I have done for you !" 

" I know of nothing you have done for 
me which merits particular gratitude, Mrs. 
Piscator," said Annie, resolutely ; " or if any 
obligation exists, I believe it must be 
mutual. You have acted, I suppose, pro- 
fessionally ; had you placed me, you no doubt 
fully intended receiving the customary fee." 

" Gret out of my house ! Never dare to 
enter these doors again !" cried the infuriated 
Mrs. Piscator. 

" I have no intention of doing so," said 
Annie, " it would be useless in any sense ;" 
and as she spoke, she and Ellen walked to- 
wards the door, but not quickly enough to 
effect a safe retreat, for Mrs. Piscator 's rage 
triumphing over her corpulent frame, she 
rushed on Annie like a tigress on its prey, 
and while pouring forth a torrent of 
reproaches, shook her violently by the 
shoulders, and then pushed her over the 
threshold with such force that she stag- 
gered, and would have fallen on the pave- 
ment had not her terrified sister caught her 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 113 

in her arras. " Are you hurt, dearest ?" 
faltered the agitated Ellen. 

" No, dear Ellen," replied Annie, com- 
pressing her white lips, while her livid 
countenance betrayed the truth that she had 
really suffered. 

" No, not hurt, Ellen ; but that woman 
has taught me another lesson. Come, let us 
go home." 

" Oh, that we were both going home I" 
ejaculated Ellen ; " home to our Father in 
Heaven ! home to the peaceful rest of the 
grave ! Annie, this business has quite over- 
whelmed my little courage." 

" And your faith ?" asked Annie. 

" Not dead — not quite dead !" said Ellen, 
colouring deeply. " Who knows what Provi- 
dence has in store for us !" 

"Who, indeed!" said Annie, with a sigh. 
" That woman's insolence has had a strange 
effect on me, Ellen ; it has hardened me. 
Each fresh insult that the world heaps on 
me seems to give me stronger powers of 
resistance — a more iron will to struggle 
against oppression." 

However Annie might express herself, she 
felt, at least physically, the effects of the 
rough treatment she had received ; and on 

VOL. I. I 



114 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

entering tlieir little room she was obliged 
to lie down, faint and exhausted, while Ellen 
busied herself in preparing their scanty tea. 
While thus occupied, the question arose in 
her mind — " How will another meal be se- 
cured ?" An involuntary ejaculation, " What 
shall we do ?" roused Annie. " I'll tell you," 
said she. " Our money has gone, and we 
are unprovided for ; we must get more 
money 1" 

" How can we ?" 

" By borrowing." 

" And how are we to borrow in this 
strange place ? Poor Bertha, to my certain 
knowledge, sent all her last quarter to her 
mother, excepting a few shillings. 

" And if she had not, we must not borrow 
from her," said Annie, quickly ; " still, I 
think we could get a little." 

"From where? Do explain, dear Annie." 

"From a pawnbroker. Do you not know 
what that means ?" 

"Yes, I think so," said Ellen, faintly 
smiling ; " but what could we take him ?" 

"The six old silver tea-spoons," said 
Annie, " which I put in my desk before the 
sale at Merton." 

" How are we to find a pawnbroker's ?" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 115 

asked Ellen, after weighing the new ideas 
presented to her mind. 

" They have three golden balls hung out 
in front of their houses," said Annie. 
4e The arms of Lombardy ; you know the 
Lombards were in olden times the money- 
lenders." 

" I can't think how you find out all these 
things," said Ellen. 

"I have read about the pawnbrokers' 
signs somewhere," said Annie ; " besides, as 
I foresaw to-day's necessities, I took occasion 
to make inquiries a week ago. But don't 
trouble your mind about it, Ellen ; it is not 
fitting work for you. I shall be up early 
to-morrow, and go about it before breakfast. 
We have tea and bread enough for the 
morning, I think?" 

" Yes, I think so ! ' said Ellen, slowly 
putting back the crust she had just taken on 
her plate. 

" Ellen ! Ellen ! you will break my heart !" 
exclaimed Annie, with tears. " Did you not 
tell me not to doubt Providence, darlino"? 
Let us, then, take what God sends us to-day, 
and trust to Him for to-morrow's provision. 
My mind is darkened, and full of bitterness 
and doubt ; but yours, darling, was made for 

i 2 



116 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

looking up, and confiding trust. You must 
not doubt !" 

" I know I am wrong to doubt a gracious 
Providence," said Ellen. "I will try and 
hope more ; but now, my Annie, take this cup 
of tea I have poured out for you, and lie 
down again." 

Annie did as she was desired, and soon 
fell into a deep sleep. Ellen covered her 
sister up carefully, screened her eyes from 
the light, and then taking the old silver tea- 
spoons from their resting-place, she sallied 
forth she knew not well whither. 

It was dusk, and the lamps were being 
lit; it was Saturday evening, too, which 
Annie had forgotten, and Ellen had only 

just remembered. E Street was a 

crowded thoroughfare; for at one end a 
number of itinerant vendors of vegetables, 
fruit, fish, penny toys, &c, had congregated, 
and with stentorian lungs were calling on 
the bystanders to make purchases. Here, 
a ballad-singer, accompanied by three or 
four children, hired for the occasion, was 
endeavouring to extort money from the 
passers-by, by sounds, not such as drew back 
Eurydice from the infernal regions, but dis- 
mal cries, something between the groans of 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 117 

despair from a rack, and the noise from a 
broken-winded pair of bellows. There, an 
itinerant dealer in penny pies boasted the 
excellence of his merchandise in a cracked 
voice, momentarily drowned by the stronger 
lungs of an umbrella mender, who in his 
turn was forced to succumb to the rival 
cries of a grinder of scissors and penknives. 
Ellen had never witnessed such a scene be- 
fore ; she walked through it stunned and 
confused ; but in the midst of her confusion 
she contrived to find the three golden balls, 
though she was sadly at a loss by which 
door to enter the premises, as two stood 
open. For awhile she hesitated, and remained 
looking in at the window, in which were 
displayed an immense number of forfeited 
pledges — watches, brooches, rings and other 
trinkets; and, sadder still, miniatures of 
perhaps idolized features, crosses, stars and 
medals, once the pride and honour of the 
wearers. 

While Ellen Sherwood stood undecided, a 
woman approached with a bundle under her 
arm, and she, too, passed in front of the win- 
dow, — not, like Ellen, in ignorance of the 
path ; she knew it too well ; she crossed that 
sad threshold every Saturday night ! 



IIS ANNE SHERWOOD. 

At the same moment a tall young man in 
black came up. " Can you tell me," said 
lie, to the woman with the bundle — " can you 
tell me which is the door ?'' and he spoke in 
a low voice, as if he were ashamed. 

"Not the shop way," said the woman. 
" There, that door down the dark passage." 

The young man shot into a long, dark 
passage, with a hurried " Thank you ;" but 
his voice left an echo in Ellen's ear, if not 
in her heart ; she had heard it before some- 
where — it was a sw r eet, gentle voice. 

Ellen walked slowly down the dark, long 
passage — very dark, very long. Accidentally 
her hand came in contact with the handle of 
a door ; she seized it at hazard. The door 
opened with a spring, and showed a little 
box against the counter ; therein stood the 
young man who had just entered, a jet of 
gas from the well-lighted shop revealing him 
fully. The door quickly slid from Ellen's 
hand, and shut with a loud noise. On she 
groped her way ; tried another door ; within 
was the woman with her bundle. On a 
third trial, Ellen found the little box to con- 
tain three or four ragged children, with a 
pair of flat irons. In her fourth attempt 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 119 

she was more successful; she found the little 
box vacant, and entered. The people of the 
shop were too busy to notice her, and she 
had time to observe not only her next door 
neighbour's flat irons pledged for twopence 
a piece, but the poor woman's bundle opened, 
and a quantity of wearing apparel which it 
contained, surrendered for the trifling con- 
sideration of three shillings and sixpence. 
The poor woman sighed piteously as she 
took what might be her last look of a little 
frock worn by a dead child, that misery and 
starvation had consigned to an untimely 
grave. There was her own Sunday gown 
too, but she did not think of that; her moist 
eyes were fixed on the little braided frock, 
and she stretched out her hand to touch it 
once more, while the pawnbroker's man was 
rolling up the bundle. " Please take care of 
it, sir!" said the woman, timidly. "You've 
got a penny, m'em, for the ticket, 'aven't 
you?' 7 asked the man, without noticing her 
request. 

" No, sir," she answered, sighing. So 
the poor woman received 3s. 5d., with a 
diminutive bit of pasteboard; and with a 
piteous look at the bundle which contained 



120 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the dead child's frock, she made way for 
another woman, almost as dejected looking 
as herself. 

Ellen could not help looking beyond, to 
see what the next applicant would bring. 
He had laid three books on the counter. 
" We can't take them," said the man, deli- 
berately. " They ain't at all in our way." 

" They are valuable old books," said the 
gentleman, " and worth several pounds." 

" Can't help it ; in books we go mostly by 
the outside," said the clerk ; " we could 
make nothing at all of such shabby-bound 
things. Who'd buy them ?" 

" But there is no danger of their beinir 
sold ; I shall return for them in a lew 
weeks." 

" So all the folks say that bring their 
things to pledge, from a flat iron up to a 
thirty guinea watch," said the man, with a 
vulgar chuckle ; " I dare say they think it, 
poor ; but if you'll look round the pre- 
mises, sir, 'specially at the window, you'll 
see what stuff their hopes are made of." 

The applicant did not reply, but he took 
up his precious books fondly, for he was a 
true student, and in silence placed an old- 
fashioned silver watch on the counter. " How 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 121 

much?" said the pawnbroker. "3/. 10s.," said 
the student. " 11. 10s.," replied the pawn- 
broker; so the business was settled, the 
ticket written, and Ellen heard the same 
sweet voice that she had before noticed give 
the name of Richard Stancliff. She was so 
lost in sympathy and pity that she had for- 
gotten her own errand, and was only roused 
from a deep reverie, by hearing the shopman 
say, "Well, miss, what's your pleasure?" 
Ellen started. " My pleasure," she repeated; 
" it is no pleasure I" " Well, then, your 
business, miss?"- "This," said Ellen, slowly 
recovering her recollection ; "I want to 
borrow some money." " On what ?" Ellen 
handed the spoons. " Thin and light," said 
the man, poising one of the tea-spoons on 
his finger; " how much?" " Two pounds," 
said Ellen. " Make it eighteen shillings to 
oblige you, miss." " That must suffice, then, 
I suppose," said Ellen. She received the 
money with a sinking heart, after giving her 
name and address. As she bent forward to 
take the money, she perceived that Mr. 
Stancliff had not left the counter. She 
fancied he was listening to her ; it was not 
very well-bred, but she could not be angry 
with him for listening, as her conscience told 



122 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

her she had been doing the same thing ; in 
fact, if her conscience had not reproved her, 
she could not be angry at all. She secured 
her little ticket (which the pawnbroker, 
perceiving her to be a novice, had cau- 
tioned her to preserve very carefully), and 
went out. 

Ellen neither looked behind her nor yet 
to the right or left ; but still she was con- 
scious that some one was walking her road, 
and conscious, too, that that some one was 
the shabby curate with the torn cuff. She 
was conscious, moreover, of a strange flut- 
tering at her heart. What could that be ? 
She quickened her pace ; the steps behind 
came quicker. Ellen reached her abode, and 
entered, without once turning her head 
round to ascertain whether her impressions 
were correct. She found Annie awake, and 
uneasy at her absence ; but she easily ex- 
plained the cause of her late ramble, and 
found, to her mortification, that she had 
accepted a sum very much beneath the real 
value of the spoons. 

Ellen was in very low spirits the next 
day ; but about five o'clock in the evening 
the shabby curate passed by their little win- 
dow, and the next day, and the next to that, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 123 

and it gave Ellen something to think about, 
and diverted her mind from the constant 
contemplation of the rapidly-diminishing 
eighteen shillings. 



124 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE VII. 

The eighteen shillings were not immortal, as 
Annie and Ellen Sherwood found to their 
sorrow. Their prospects with regard to 
employment had not yet brightened, and at 
length they grew so familiar with the road 
to the three golden balls, that their already 
scanty wardrobes became more and more 
slender. In vain had they besieged agency 
offices, and answered advertisements. None 
of the countless applications produced any 
other result than disappointment. At length, 
in trembling anticipation of a yet darker 
future, Annie resolved to take in needle- 
work (provided she could obtain any), while 
she prosecuted her researches for a governess 
engagement. But to resolve on humble 
industry was one thing ; to obtain means of 
exercising that industry, quite another. She 
had no one to whom she could apply for 
assistance, or even advice, and actual desti- 
tution threatened them. Which way could 
she turn in her difficulties ? 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 125 

Pull of perplexing thoughts, she one day 
sallied forth, and wandered into a part of 
the town, in which she had observed several 
ready-made clothes shops. She entered five 
successively; in four, her offers of service were 
rejected: in the fifth she might have had 
employment, but the people required a deposit 
for the materials entrusted to her care, and 
of course Annie had not that to give. 

Weary, faint, and hungry, poor Annie 
leaned for support on the counter, and tears 
filled her eyes ; but they that looked on were 
hard people of business. They noted not the 
pale cheek, the quivering lip, the tearful eye 
of the young woman that leaned on their shop- 
board ; how should they note these things? 
Annie went out of the shop with a dizzy 
brain, and a sense of hunger and weariness 
such as she had never felt before, and she 
passed on slowly through the lines of bril- 
liantly-lit shops, and saw the tide of human 
beings busy, striving, jostling one another, 
and her heart grew sadder and her step 
fainter as she whispered, " Room for all but 
us ! 

Just as she was debating in her mind 
whether she should apply at another shop or 
not, a little child ran out of an open door in 



126 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

pursuit of a rolling marble, and heedlessly 
rushed after it into the throng of coaches 
and other vehicles. The sight of the child's 
danger restored Annie Sherwood to herself. 
Unmindful of her own peril, she darted after 
the little one, and succeeded in rescuing him 
from impending destruction at the moment 
when the father, who had not been imme- 
diately aware of his child's situation, arrived 
in search of him. 

The man overwhelmed Annie with grate- 
ful thanks, and entreated her to go in and 
refresh herself after her great exertions. Glad, 
indeed, was she to accept the offer, and thank- 
ful was she for the cup of tea which the 
mother of the rescued child gave her. Only 
then did Annie look round and perceive 
that she was in a ready-made clothes shop. 
As the happy parents continued to reiterate 
their gratitude, it occurred to her that from 
them she might obtain employment ; so 
when the first emotions of joy had subsided, 
and they asked if they could be of any u 
to her, she answered quickly, " Will }'ou 
give me work? I can do it neatly. But I 
have no money to leave as a deposit ; I am 
very, very poor I" 

" Money!" repeated the man. " Surely, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 127 

Miss, we can trust you ! If we can't, who 
can we trust ?" 

Annie left her new acquaintance with a 
lightened heart, for she carried away with 
her a bundle of shirts, which she was to 
make for a small sum indeed — only eight- 
pence a piece; but she had heard some- 
where of shirts made at three half-pence 
each, and was therefore inclined to think 
she had made a very good bargain. Every- 
thing in this world must be valued by com- 
parison. 

When Annie returned home, her face spoke 
volumes of joyful intelligence. " Some one 
has engaged you !" said Ellen. 

" No, indeed !" said Annie, but still look- 
ing bright. 

" You have met some of our dear old peo- 
ple from Merton !" 

" No, not that." 

" Well, what is it then ? for I know some- 
thing very good has happened." 

" Look 1" said Annie, triumphantly dis- 
playing her bundle. 

" What a merciful Providence !" exclaimed 
Ellen. " I w T ill begin directly." 

The sisters were now becoming familiar 
with privations. Anxious not to exchange 



12S ANNE SHERWOOD. 

their lodgings for those that were less 
respectable, they determined to make their 
other expenses as small as possible j but 
they found that the most rigid economy 
•would not enable them long to subsist, on the 
produce of their labours as needlewomen. 
Again and again the question arose, what 
was to become of them ? Ellen was ever 
ready to suggest, trust in God ; but Annie, 
though a firm believer, was not a trusting 
Christian, and Ellen, though the weakest in 
all things, w r as yet the happiest. 

One Saturday afternoon Bertha came in 
to see her friends ; till then she had had no 
idea that they were distressed. She entreated 
them to take the few shillings her purse 
contained, but both steadily refused. Bertha 
then begged Annie to meet her in the Square 
Gardens the following Monday morning, as 
she designed introducing her to a governess 
friend or acquaintance who was remarkably 
clever, had been eminently successful her- 
self, and, having a very large connexion 
among the nobility and gentry, was often 
enabled to recommend governesses to very 
distinguished families. Of course, Annie 
testified her glad acquiescence in any plan 
which would bring her acquainted with 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 129 

so influential a person as Miss Hortensia 
Maynard, and ere Bertha departed, the meet- 
ing for Monday morning was agreed on. 

Accordingly, Annie rose early on the ap- 
pointed day, and repaired by seven o'clock 
to the place of rendezvous. She had been 
walking some time with Bertha, when a 
strange-looking little woman entered, attired 
in a deeply -flounced blue dress, with an air 
of importance, as if she knew herself to be 
somebody, and at the same time displaying 
an affectation of girlish sprightliness. Her 
countenance was only remarkable for a cer- 
tain vivacity and quickness in the eyes. Her 
age was about thirty-seven or eight. 

Miss Hortensia Maynard advanced hastily 
to Bertha, cordially shook her by both hands, 
and exclaimed — " My dear creature, I am so 
afflicted to have kept you waiting, so sincerely 
afflicted, but I am so driven ! You can 
scarcely imagine the business I have on 
hand ; the secretaryship of two societies, you 
know, and as large a correspondence as the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer, besides my 
duties. The last post brought me a charm- 
ing letter of four sheets from the dear 
Countess. You know I made her acquain- 
tance at Dover, last year. I had been there 

VOL. I. K 



130 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

some weeks before I had the least conception 
that she was in the neighbourhood. We 
were at church one day, when I happened to 
observe a lady in the adjoining pew without 
a hymn-book. I offered her one, little 
imagining that that trifling circumstance 
would lay the foundation of an eternal friend- 
ship ; such, however, has been the case. 
The Countess called on me, an intimacy 
sprang up between us. Our minds are so 
congenial, the Countess has a very cultivated 
mind — but what was I saying ? Oh ! speak- 
ing of my numerous correspondents. I have 
so many applications from families requiring 
governesses, and who beg me to interest my- 
self in their researches ; so many from gover- 
nesses begging me to recomend them. Then 
the friends of orphans who w r ant to get them 
into asylums, call on me to use my influence, 
so that I have scarcely a minute to call my 
own. Then, in our numerous parties at 

home, Sir William and Lady S always 

depute me to do the greater part of the 
honours. I ask whoever I choose, and it 
often happens that they are uncertain as to 
the names of the guests assembled in their 
drawing-room s. " 

Here the little lady thought proper to 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 131 

take breath, and Bertha seized on the oppor- 
tunity, lest another should not occur of doing- 
so, of introducing Annie Sherwood. Miss 
Hortensia warmly protested that she was 
delighted to make Miss Sherwood's acquain- 
tance, and would be charmed to be of any 
assistance to her. She had no doubt of 
being enabled to procure her an engagement, 
so many friends applied to her, &c. ; in fact, 
she was " so driven," that she could scarcely 
breathe. The above is a very brief summary 
of a very lengthened exordium with which 
Miss Hortensia favoured her friends, before 
withdrawing from their company. 

"It is very strange," said Bertha, sighing. 

"The S s must be very extraordinary 

people; Hortensia is entirely her own mistress, 
disposes of her time as she pleases, and may 
order the carriage at any time in the day ! 
Is it not strange ?" 

" Passing strange, if it be true," said 
Annie. 

" Certainly it is true." 

"Then you don't suspect your friend of 
any exaggeration ?" 

" Oh, certainly not," said Bertha. " I have 

seen her with Lady S , a quiet, meek, 

silent woman, who lets Hortensia do all the 

k 2 



13.2 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

talking, and seems to acknowledge her supe- 
riority. She is certainly very clever, don't 
yon think so?" 

"She talks a great deal," said Annie. 

"And talks so well," said Bertha. "Don't 
you think her clever?" 

" Frankly, no !" replied Annie ; "judging 
by the slight specimen I have just had, I 
think she is one of those people in whom 
immense self-reliance passes for talent, and 
(forgive me, Bertha) consummate impudence 
for genius ! But she is " 

" She is very good-hearted," said the crest- 
fallen Bertha, 

" Of that I have no doubt," said Annie, 
" and I am really obliged to her for her kind 
promises of assistance to me, as a stranger, 
not that I have much faith in them." 

" I really am surprised!" exclaimed Bertha. 
" You are the first person I have met with, 
the very first, who has made the acquaintance 
of Hortensia, without being fascinated by 
her. I must acknowledge that she has exer- 
cised an immense influence over me." 

" Shall I tell you why ?" asked Annie. "It 
is because you have a modest estimate of 
yourself; such people are always apt to exag- 
gerate the merits and talents of their neigh- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 133 

bour. Now, I dare say you never caught 
yourself admiring one of your own sayings 
in your life; and consequently, those of your 
friends, if confidently uttered, appear to you 
chefs-cVceiivre of genius and eloquence ! But 
it is time, dear Bertha, for you to go in, if 
St. Peter's clock speaks the hour faithfully." 

" Oh dear, Annie, I should have been in 
ten minutes ago ! what shall I do ?" 

"It is accidental, pray don't agitate your- 
self thus," said Annie, seeing Bertha look 
quite pale and frightened. 

" I can't help it," said she, " indeed I can't. 
I know it is weak and silly; but if I see a 
cloud on Mrs. Cheshyre's face, my heart beats 
violently, like that of a frightened bird." 

" I think I should never have such a feel- 
ing," said Annie, " if I should ever obtain 
ingress to one of these e very distinguished 

families,' as Mr. de F calls them. It 

is very strange that all my plans have mis- 
carried." 

"You must not despair of success, never- 
theless," said Bertha. " I have frequently 
known governesses a year, or even longer, 
looking out." The friends then parted. 

Annie's adventures for the day were not 
completed. Having occasion to go into the 



134 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

City to carry home some finished work, she 
passed through Piccadilly on her return, and 
was overtaken by her new acquaintance of 
the morning. Miss Hortensia was lounging 
in her employer's carriage, and attended by 
two very amiable, dull-looking youths, her 
pupils. Miss Hortensia was a learned lady, 
and taught the embryo lords of creation. 
The fortunate governess pulled the check- 
string with an air which implied habitual 
practice, and when the carriage stopped, in- 
sisted on Annie's entering. 

From that moment Miss Hortensia opened 
her fire, and rapidly threw off anecdotes 
of illustrious and well-known personages, 
always intermingling some personal adven- 
ture, to form a thread on which to string 
her scattered gems of narrative. 

Miss Hortensia suddenly recollected that 

her friend Lady Mary L was in want of 

a governess ; her engagement would do for 
Miss Sherwood. Yet stay ! her ladyship 
required music. No, that would not do. A 
charming acquaintance of Miss Hortensia's, 
well known in the literary and religious 
world, was just going to bring out a work 
on education, a work worthy of Locke ! she 
was in want of a companion and amanuensis, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 135 

the office was exactly the thing for Miss 
Sherwood. Yet no ! the person required 
must be able to write the Grerman character. 
At length a more feasible plan suggested 
itself to Miss Hortensia. Her friend (she 
had so many friends !) the Hon. Mrs. Erns- 
cliff, wanted a boys' governess ; she was sure 
Miss Sherwood would suit her precisely. 
Annie smiled. Miss Hortensia translated 
the smile into intense admiration, surprise, 
and gratitude, and ere they parted she in- 
structed her new protegee (Miss Hortensia 
did so love to have & protegee) to call as early 
as possible the next morning on the Hon. 

Mrs. Ernscliff, No. — , Place, 

Square, and use her name ! that would be a 
sufficient introduction and recommendation. 
Annie Sherwood accordingly called on 
Mrs. Ernscliff. She found her haughty and 
assuming. She had indeed some recollection 
of a person called Mallerd or Manning, or 
something of the kind, whom she had seen 
at luncheon at Sir William S 's, bat as- 
suredly she had never commissioned her to 
look out for a governess for her. This was 
an age of general assumption, an age in which 
people seldom knew their own station, but 
were constantly stepping out of it, and med- 



136 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

dling with matters which did not concern 
them. Annie Sherwood thought she had 
heard enough, and withdrew silently, leav- 
ing Mrs. Ernscliff in a fit of aristocratic 
surprise and high-bred disdain at the im- 
pertinent intrusion. 

" You have seen my friend Mrs. Erns- 
cliff ?" said Miss Hortensia, when next they 
met. 

" I have seen Mrs. Ernscliff," said Annie, 
significantly. 

" Is she not charming ?' 
"Very! 3 

" And you have agreed with her ?' 
" No, we did not enter on the business. 55 
" Dear me ! Did you tell her that I 
recommended you ?" 

" Yes, but she did not recollect your name. 55 
Miss Hortensia coloured, and changed the 
conversation. 



lot cnarmmg r' 5 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 137 



CHAPTER VIII. 

" Annie ! Annie ! liow the professions of 
that Mrs. Harrington deceived me !" ex- 
claimed Ellen, one day. " Do yon know I 
quite relied on her promises. I really did 
expect she would recommend us, or at least 
let us know that opportunity rather than 
inclination had failed her." 

It must be remarked that Ellen was un- 
usually depressed; perhaps some connexion 
might be traced between her depression, and 
the fact that for the last six weeks, a parti- 
cularly rusty hat had ceased to pass by the 
dim little window just as the clock struck 
five. 

" And for once I, too, believed and 
trusted," said Annie, with a sigh ; "I have 
learnt to distrust every one on earth, I am 
afraid!" 

" She had such a sweet, ingenuous coun- 
tenance," said Ellen ; " after all, perhaps she 
has not forgotten us wilfully. She did not 
seem happy, she may have been distracted 



138 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

with a thousand cares, been ill, or even may 
be dead !" 

"No, no," said Annie, "she is neither ill 
nor dead, but her momentary sympathy did 
not survive our visit. Eich people are too 
much immersed in their pleasures to throw 
aw r ay time or thought on the necessitous. 
How pale and thin you are growing, 
darling !" she continued, in a tone of the 
utmost tenderness, to Ellen; "I scarcely 
know whether it is with constantly bending 
over this work, or with insufficient food. 
Put on your bonnet, and come with me. I 
must carry these shirts home. Let me see ; 
seven eights are fifty-six ; fifty-six pence, 
four and eightpence ! Come, we can afford a 
mutton-chop for dinner to-morrow ; you have 
not had meat for three days !" 

" You have not had any for a week !" 

"But I am stronger than you," said 
Annie, quickly. "Make haste, dear, or 
Wilson's will be shut." 

The two girls set oft' with their little 
bundle of work. Ellen's steps were slow 
and faint, so were those of Annie, though 
not so much so, for her will was strong in 
the midst of disappointment and privation ; 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 139 

still, a life of hardship had begun to tell on 
the physical strength of both. 

Any one might have recognised those two 
pale girls as the children of sorrow, even 
without a glance at their shabby clothing ; 
for as they passed along the gay streets, 
neither of them gave a single glance at those 
they met, nor at the gaudy display of fashion 
and luxury so alluringly spread forth to 
attract the feminine gaze — the glittering 
jewels, the silken robes, the gossamer laces, 
the flowers so bright and artistic that they 
might vie with nature ; none of these could 
attract the eyes of the tired seamstresses, 
the governess candidates. Their path was 
labour, their goal labour; labour was the 
echo of their thoughts — their words ; the 
only thing to which they dared aspire was 
labour : and yet nature had destined them 
for better things. Keep on with lowly faith, 
pale sisters ; there are better days in store, a 
brighter dawn to rise for her who endures, 
unhardened by the fire of affliction. The 
road you travel is thorny, but its thorns 
will not be eternal to her who meekly 
bears the wounds they make, and looks 
upward for a healing balm. 



140 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Annie's employer and patron, Mr. Wilson, 
was putting up the shutters of his shop, 
though it was two hours before the regular 
hour of closing. 

" You are very early to-day, Mr. Wilson !" 
said Annie, as they came up to him. The 
man made no reply, but looked round with 
such a ghastly countenance, that it w r as 
evident some dreadful misfortune had hap- 
pened to himself or his family. The Sher- 
woods passed into the house, then into the 
back parlour, where the wife was wringing 
her hands, and the children sat crying on the 
floor ; they did not know why, but they saw 
their mother cry, so they cried too. 

" We are undone ! ruined ! completely 
ruined !" was all the poor woman could 
ejaculate. Annie put down her bundle and 
sank on a chair, while Ellen, struck dumb 
with consternation, continued standing. 

The scene told its own story — bankruptcy, 
and one more distressed, despairing family 
thrown on the world, destitute ! Perhaps 
it was their own fault, perhaps their mis- 
management ; but Annie and Ellen were not 
hardened enough in the world's ways to 
form such reflections, and only saw before 
them so many objects of sympathy and com- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 141 

miseration, entirely forgetting that the ruin 
they witnessed, involved the annihilation of 
their own scanty means of subsistence. 

It was only when they had left the un- 
fortunate family, that the poor girls remem- 
bered they were penniless, that the coming 
day was Sunday, and that they had not even 
a loaf of bread in their possession : besides, 
they owed a fortnight's rent. Again the 
oft-repeated question, " What was to be 
done ?" Bertha was in the country. " Let 
us go to the * Grand Lombard V " said Annie, 
trying to smile. 

" Impossible, they close at eight," replied 
Ellen, who had become quite learned in such 
matters ; then she added, quickly, " Annie, 
there can be nothing wrong in it ; there will 
be no one to recognise us in this crowded 
city — -I will sing some ballads, and " 

"Ellen, Ellen, you are mad! A crowd 
would gather round us, and you would be 
insulted 1" 

" No, no, I should not ; come, let us walk 
quickly towards home ; there are quiet streets 
about there, — Sloane Street, for instance, or 
Hans Place, where we wandered to look at 
the outside of poor L. E. L.'s house." 

" Oh, no, I could never consent to such a 



142 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

thing," cried Annie, in the utmost agitation. 
" Your head is wandering, Ellen, or you 
would not make such a proposition. We 
must try and find a ' Lombard' still open." 

" And if we do, what have we to take 
there ?" said Ellen. 

That was indeed putting things in a new 
light. " We have nothing left !" murmured 
she ; then suddenly Annie said, " My black 
satin cape." 

"It is quite rusty, Annie." 

" Your fine cotton stockings !" 

" They are covered with darns !" 

" Pope's Homer, Ellen." 

" No, no," said Ellen; " they don't take 
books, or if they do, only well-bound ones. 
Come, Annie, consent, let me have an ad- 
venture for once. I will just sing three 
little songs under L. E. L.'s old balcony ; if 
her musical spirit hovers near, it may in- 
spire some generous heart to drop us a 
shilling." 

Full of new-born determination, Ellen 
hurried on so quickly, that by the time th< 
reached Hans Place she was completely out 
of breath, and stood still, quite still, pressing 
her little hands on her heart, which beat at 
once with fatigue and a wild, startled fear of 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 143 

her own temerity. Poor Ellen, she was still 
a child. 

The moon had risen high, and cast a 
melancholy light on that quiet, secluded 
spot ; it shone full into the windows of the 
house where the maiden poet used to sit in 
her old high-backed chair, weaving her 
golden dream of romance, and her wild, fan- 
tastic fancies into verse, which had more 
sweetness than immortality perchance ; but 
yet, though heart-stricken with sorrow and 
disappointment, she went on singing — 

" How many share such destiny ! 

How many, lured by fancy's beam, 
Ask the impossible to be, 

And pine, the victims of a dream !" 

And while Ellen tried very hard to gather 
up the courage necessary for the bold task 
she had undertaken, and ransacked her brain 
for scraps of old song, there came a strange 
thought into Annie's mind — a sudden light 
flashed upon her, a joyous gladness thrilled 
through her frame, so exquisite, it seemed as 
though it came from an angel's whisper, and 
she knew that she was destined for higher 
things than she had contemplated — knew 
that she was a poet 1 And with that reve- 
lation came the wild-fire ambition too, and 



144 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

she dared to dream that she would win fame, 
that she would snatch at the stars, and 
weave them into a crown for her head, 
though that crown should turn to thorns 
and pierce her brow. 

Nothing in life, from the cradle to the 
grave, nothing save the first rosy dawn of 
love in the heart, is, or can be so entrancing, 
as the first consciousness of genius. No, Earth 
has nothing like it — it is worth an Eternity 
of meaner joys. Perhaps love itself — di- 
vine as is its first throb, perhaps love itself 
cannot equal it ! So thought, or rather so 
felt, Annie Sherwood, and she stood still, 
quite still, beneath the window of the de- 
parted minstrel, so rapt that she quite 
forgot all that had happened to her the last 
dreary months, — all the painful privations, 
the midnight work and weariness, the us 
less efforts, the disappointed hopes, and the 
world's harsh stings ; forgot too, what had 
brought her to that spot, till a few broken, 
struggling, half-choked notes of " Annie 
Laurie," from Ellen, roused her to the stern 
realities of life. 

Instinctively Annie snatched Ellen's arm 
to lead her away, but it was useless, the faint 
attempt at a song had broken down of itself. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 145 

The window of a house near which the two 

girls stood was open. The light of a chan- 
delier streamed through the transparent 
curtains ; a young girl with a profusion of 
ringlets flitted past the window ; she laughed 
aloud, and her laugh was not the most mu- 
sical ; then she struck two or three notes of 
the air which Ellen had attempted, on the 
piano, exclaiming, in a loud tone, " How 
ridiculously false her voice is I" 

" And she sings through her nose ; her 
voice is cracked, like that of all street musi- 
cians," answered a gentleman ; and then he 
laughed, and the young girl laughed too — 
but poor Ellen did not laugh, she — she cried ! 

A young man passed by Ellen in the 
street ; he looked like a linendraper's as- 
sistant. He paused and looked at her, which 
made her draw back, but he only wanted to 
put some halfpence in her hand, and then 
he went on his way. Meanwhile, Annie 
walked up to the door of the mockers, and 
noted the number ; she would never forget 
it ; Ellen would. 

The song was effectually over ; Ellen 
would have fainted had she yielded to her 
weakness. A white-haired, benevolent look- 
ing old man came up quite close to her. 

VOL. I. L 



14G ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Ellen thought that he, like the young man, 
was going to offer her a few pence for her 
broken song. Hesitatingly she stretched 
forth her hand ; but wdiat was her surprise 
and terror when the benevolent white-haired 
old man drew that trembling hand in his 
arm, and was hurrying her away, she knew 
not whither, calling her " my dear" and 
" my love," and talking to her of the beau- 
tiful moonlight, and how fair her fair face 
looked in it ! 

" I do not know you, sir !" gasped Ellen; 
" you mistake me for some other person. 
Pray, pray let me go !" 

" Release my sister this instant, sir !" ex- 
claimed Annie, darting after him, " or I will 
call a policeman and give you in charge." 

" And if you commit such an absurdity 
said the old man, coolly, " I shall merely tell 
him that you are an impostor, and that this 
young person belongs to me. You had better 
go away quietly," he added, " or you will 
tempt me to give you in charge as a trouble- 
some vagrant. If you want money, take 
that" — flinging down a piece of gold — " and 
begone. Your sister, if she be such, will 
come to no harm ; she could not be safer 
than under my protection." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 147 

So speaking lie hurried away, dragging 
Ellen with him 5 she had grown speechless 
from fear, and Annie in vain appealed to the 
few straggling passers-by. They entered 
Sloane Street. A private cabriolet, with 
arms emblazoned, and a fashionable tiger, 
stood in waiting. The old man would have 
forced Ellen in, when poor Annie made a 
desperate appeal for help to a strong-looking 
man who was passing by. He laughed 
coarsely, and said something about " spend- 
ing one's strength on one's own business," 
then passed on. A slight boyish-looking 
figure sprang forward, and hastily dropping 
a parcel of books which he held by a leather 
strap, collared the benevolent white-haired 
individual resolutely, and forced him to 
release Ellen. The old man would have 
struggled to regain his prize, but his young 
antagonist was too much for him, and after 
inflicting several well- aimed blows on the 
delinquent, succeeded in tripping him up. 
" I would advise you to walk on quickly, 
ladies," said the youth ; " this may prove a 
very unpleasant affair, and it would be 
painful for you to be brought forward as 
witnesses." 

It seemed that the benevolent old gentle- 

l 2 



148 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

man was somewhat stunned by his fall. 
The tiger, who had kept aloof while the 
combat lasted, despite his master's calls for 
assistance, now came to help him to rise, while 
the young knight-errant stood still, with his 
arms folded composedly, and his lips curled 
into a scornful smile. When the benevo- 
lent old gentleman was fairly on his feet 
again, his chastiser handed him a card, say- 
ing, " If you wish to hear more from me, 
there is my name and address." Then, with 
a bow of mock ceremony, he turned away, 
while his adversary struck the air in a vain 
attempt to reach him with a whip which he 
had snatched from the tiger's hand. 

The youth stooped, picked up his books 
with a great deal of sang-froid, and whist- 
ling 11 segreto per esser felice, passed on. 
Designedly or otherwise, he soon overtook 
the sisters. Annie immediately recognised 
him, and though anxious to lead the trem- 
bling Ellen home as speedily as possible, 
she could not resist stopping to offer a word 
of gratitude to their youthful preserver. 

" Do not mention the trifling service I 
have rendered you," replied the boy. " I 
assure you that your satisfaction at your 
escape from impertinence, cannot equal mine 



ANNE SHERWOOD., 149 

at having been privileged to rescue you. I 
have just been reading Froissart's Chro- 
nicles. The tales of chivalry inspire me 
with emulation. Have you read Froissart? 
If not, pray do. Grood night ; I am so 
very glad to have rescued you ! Pray 
read Froissart." So saying, the chivalrous 
youth raised his hat, and bowing with a 
grace that might have done honour to Sir 
Walter Manny, turned down a street and 
was lost to sight. 

At any other moment, the ludicrous part 
of the foregoing scene would have so far pre- 
vailed as to draw from both sisters uncon- 
trollable fits of laughter ; but as it was, both 
were too painfully pre-occupied to admit of 
merriment. In silent sorrow they pursued 
their way with slow uncertain steps, and 
when they entered their humble dwelling 
both sank faint and exhausted, on the first 
chairs they found. " Shall I bring in tea 
and a candle, ma'am ?" asked the landlady. 
" No, thank you," replied Annie, " we have 
had — I mean we do not want tea. We have 
nothing to do ; the moon will light us to 
bed." " Yes, let us go to bed !" said Ellen : 
so they went, with their arms laced round 
each other, those two pale sisters, up to their 



150 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

little chamber, faint from want of food, yet 
more faint from weariness of heart. 

Pause, reader ! luxurious reader, whose 
eye perchance idly skims these pages, while 
your form reposes on the couch of ease and 
luxury, and think — ay, take the thought to 
your heart, and ponder it there — think that 
there is hunger, yes, actual starvation, if you 
could, nay, if you icould, hunt it out, un- 
heralded by the beggar's garb, unproclaimed 
by his whining plaint. 

Annie Sherwood was going to throw her- 
self on her bed, but Ellen fondly, gently 
drew her on her knees, whispering " God is 
a very present help in time of trouble ; He 
feedeththe young ravens that call upon Him !" 

Happy, Annie, had that guileless, child- 
like monitor always been near to whisper of 
heaven ! — the weak to speak wisdom to the 
strong ! the humble spirit to counsel the 
proud-hearted ! — but thus it might not be. 

The sisters were silently kneeling in prayer, 
hand clasped in hand, when they were sud- 
denly startled by a loud, thundering knock 
at the door. Neither stirred, though each 
fluttering heart whispered " It may be for 
us ! it may be help !" Yet, humanly speak- 
ing, they had no foundation for such a sup- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 151 

position: whom had they in the whole world 
to meet them with the succour they had 
never solicited? 

"A letter for Miss Sherwood, an unstamped 
letter — two-pence to pay/' said the landlady. 

" I have no money — no change, I mean," 
said Annie, quickly. 

"Never mind, ma'am, I can pay him," said 
the civil landlady. 

Annie seized the letter, and darting to the 
window, hastily broke the seal. " Gracious 
Heaven ! from whom can this come ?" she 
exclaimed, as a bank-note fell in her lap. 
" From our Heavenly Father," said Ellen, 
reverently ; " an answer, oh, how speedy an 
answer, to the prayer, ' Give us this day 
our daily bread !' " 

" But some one must have sent it," per- 
sisted Annie ; "we are past the age of 
miracles." " Here is a solution," said Ellen, 
picking up the fallen envelope, on the edge 
of which she read by the aid of the moon- 
light, "He feedeth the young ravens that 
call upon him." " Your own favourite text!" 
exclaimed Annie ; " most wonderful !" 

The note was only one for 5/., but that 
seemed to the sisters, in their present circum- 
stances, an inexhaustible mine of wealth. 



152 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

It was long ere the poor girls remembered 
again that they were hungry ; when they did 
so, it was too late to procure anything, and 
the morrow was Sunday. " I will tell Mrs. 
Stevens that we have no change, only a bank- 
note, (oh, sound of unaccustomed splendour !) 
and ask her to spare us some bread and tea, 
for to-morrow's use," said Annie, sighing, 
not with sorrow, but an oppression of hap- 
piness. 

The landlady not only granted their 
request, but also pressingly invited them 
to join her at supper, which they did gladly 
enough; and while Ellen exerted herself with 
her usual amiability to return the kindness 
of their humble hostess by endeavouring to 
entertain her, Annie went on with a dream 
that had been rudely interrupted : sometimes 
the vision was dark as the thundercloud, but 
sometimes the bright gleam of ambitious 
thought flashed through, and lit her face 
with such a sudden glow of inspiration and 
happiness, that her sister gazed on her with 
fond exultation, and wondered that every one 
did not think Annie beautiful ! And then 
Ellen answered her own wonder by, " It i< 
because they don't know what the beautiful 
means ! the fault is in their own souls ! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 153 

some mirrors are so coarse and dim that 
they reflect nothing truly !" 

Annie was in that moment stringing 
together her first random gems of song; 
unpolished indeed they were, but their 
freshness and native glory dazzled herself, 
and filled her with proud joy. Yet she said 
nothing of what was passing in her mind or 
heart ; if she had, Ellen would have marvelled 
much — would have been, if possible, yet 
prouder of her than she was at present, but 
she would not quite have understood her. 

The disagreeable adventure with the 
benevolent old gentleman had ceased to 
ruffle the girls, and they couldnow thoroughly 
enjoy the remembrance of " Sir Walter 
Manny," as they called their young cham- 
pion. They had both already made acquain- 
tance with Froissart, but each promised 
another reading in remembrance of the 
hero, who only seemed fit to assume the 
black-patch and to figure in the court of 
Queen Philippa, or " to strike a sparkle of 
fine love" in the snowy bosom of one of her 
maidens. 

" What have you done with the envelope 
of this mysterious letter ?" said Annie, 
when they had retired to their own precincts. 



154 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Here it is," said Ellen ; and added, hesita- 
tingly, " if you don't mind, dear, I should 
so like to keep it !" 

" Oh no, I don't mind it at all," said 
Annie, smiling* ; " I see you set a high value 
on the precious document. My only fear is 
that you should apply it to superstitious pur- 
poses, wear it as a charm, or " 

" Not as a charm," said Ellen, " but as a 
token, to call to remembrance that He who 
clothes the grass of the field, will watch over 
His children for ever. Oh, Annie, let us 
never forget this night !" and Ellen sank to 
rest murmuring, " He feedeth the young 
ravens when they call upon him." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 155 



CHAPTEE IX. 

The following day, Sunday, was indeed one 
of deep, heartfelt thankfulness ! Annie and 
Ellen were frequently lost in conjecturing 
who their unknown friend and benefactor 
might be, but the manner in which the gift 
was conveyed, the few solemn words which 
accompanied it, directing the recipient's 
thanks to the gracious Providence which 
orders all things, precluded any hesitation 
as to the propriety of employing it in the 
way the generous donor had intended. No, 
there could be no shame in accepting such 
an offering, so made, and both Annie and 
Ellen registered a promise, that if ever the 
day of prosperity came, the heaven-directed 
bounty they had just received should be 
returned sevenfold to the suffering children 
of earth. 

Monday brought with it another surprise : 
surprises, like trials, seldom come alone. 
About mid-day, a plain, neat carriage drove 
up to the door, and a soft, gentle voice was 



156 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

heard inquiring for Ellen ; and while the 
two girls wondered where they had heard 
that voice before, Mrs. Harrington entered, 
looking very pale, and clad in deep mourn- 
ing ; one of her fair children she held by her 
hand, the other, the fairest, brightest, and 
best, was sleeping in the graveyard. The 
Reaper had passed by, and had been con- 
tent to take none but the scarce opened 
bud. Poor mother ! her grief was desola- 
ting, but not loud; deep, not wild; the 
stream that flows on silently and for ever, 
not the thundershower which exhausts itself. 

In the midst of her bereavement, Mrs. 
Harrington had remembered the trials and 
wants of others, and reproached herself for 
not remembering them earlier. She spoke not 
much of her own loss, only mentioning it as 
a reason for her seeming negligence, but 
inquired kindly if Ellen had met with an 
engagement, or if she had anything in pros- 
pect ; "for if you have," added she, hastily, 
" I shall not propose to you what otherwise 
might be acceptable. 

On Ellen's telling her that she had not at 
present the most distant prospect of employ- 
ment, Mrs. Harrington resumed, but with- 
out the alacrity of a person who feels that 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 157 

they are conferring a real benefit. " A rela- 
tive of mine, indeed a half-sister, has com- 
missioned me to procure a governess for her 
two little girls, and I thought that unless 
something better offered, you would perhaps 
like to try Elmgrove. Mind, I only say to 
try, for it might prove altogether distasteful 
to you." 

" I am sure, quite sure, that I must be 
happy with a relation of yours," said Ellen ; 
" a sister, too !" 

" But I am not quite so sure," said Mrs. 
Harrington, with a sad but sweet smile ; 
"every situation in life has its trials, as 
every heart has its sorrows. I must tell 
you, however, something of my sister's 
family. Mr. Ferrers is many years her 
senior ; taciturn and reserved, you might 
consider him haughty, but on the whole 
he is well-intentioned and kind-hearted. 
He has three grown-up daughters (two of 
whom must be several years older than you,) 
by his first wife. Perhaps you would find 
your position with regard to them rather 
trying. I am not sure. They are con- 
sidered amiable and agreeable ; one is pious, 
and I believe they are all clever and accom- 
plished. Your two little charges that are 



158 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

to be, have never been broken in, and are 
consequently rather wild. I am afraid they 
come under the class of spoilt children ; but 
if they should be troublesome at first, you 
will bring them round no doubt by kind- 
ness. I must tell you beforehand that you 
must not expect much assistance in the wa}- 
of training from their mamma, who is a sort 
of nervous invalid, and almost whollv con- 
fined to the sofa. The remuneration offered 
will not, I fear, be adequate to the amount of 
labour required, but my sister promises that 
the stipend shall be increased the second 

year." 

Ellen, all beaming gratitude and delight, 
never once thought of inquiring what salary 
might be given by Mrs. Ferrers ; she was 
ready to accept anything, to promise anything, 
to do anything. Annie, however, ventured to 
inquire what sum Ellen would receive yearly. 
Mrs. Harrington coloured as she replied, 
"Twenty pounds;" she was ashamed of the 
sum offered to an educated gentlewoman. 
The smallness of the salary did not shock 
either Annie or Ellen ; they remembered an 
offer of twelve! but Mrs. Harrington, who 
knew her brother-in-law's income was above 
7000/. per annum, was ashamed of what her 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 159 

own generous spirit taught her to consider a 
mean transaction. 

Ellen would be required to go to her new 
home and her untried duties immediately, at 
least, within a week. " But my poor dear 
Annie !" exclaimed Ellen ; " she will be left 
quite alone ! What can she do ?" And she 
spoke in a tone of the utmost dismay. " We 
have never before been separated for a 
single day 1" said Annie, while she tenderly 
wiped her sister's tears. And though Mrs. 
Harrington had been brought up in the 
world's ways, and knew well the world's 
thoughts, she had not enough of that world 
in her own heart to sneer or mock at the 
feelings of the unsophisticated. 

Before leaving the Sher woods, Mrs. Har- 
rington gave Ellen an advance of her first 
quarter's salary, ostensibly to meet her tra- 
velling expenses, but in reality she saw how 
much the rusty black of her protegee needed 
renewing, and how little chance there would 
be of her meeting with any consideration, 
should she present herself at Elmgrove as 
she then was, wearing the certain insignia 
of a decayed gentlewoman ! 

Ellen would fain have deferred the hour 
of departure, not from any dread of coming 



100 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

hardships — for it seemed to her an utter im- 
possibility that she could meet with anything 
painful among those so nearly connected 
with Mrs. Harrington — but she dreaded 
leaving Annie in her solitude ; yet more 
she would have feared the coming separation 
could she have foreseen that her departure 
would be to her sister like the last sad fare- 
well of a holy spirit that had formed a link 
between her and Heaven. True it was of 
those sisters, that the strong intellect, the 
resolved will of the one, learned all they ever 
knew of high and holy things from the 
weaker, frailer one, ignorant of the world's 
ways, but full of divine thoughts and 
feelings. Yes, when Ellen went forth, it 
appeared that poor Annie's good angel went 
forth too, and left her generous but erring 
heart to struggle on in darkness with the 
iron world and its oppressions ! 

But yet a few days remained to the sisters, 
ere the younger and the well loved should 
take on her the yoke of bondage in the 
house of the stranger. Yes, bondage it is, 
however much we may disguise it to our- 
selves, when we barter, not our talents and 
attainments, not our intellectual strength 
alone, but our thoughts, words, looks, our 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 161 

very gestures, for the bitter bread of depen- 
dence ; for, do thoughts, words, looks, or 
gestures remain free ? No ; they must be 
shaped to please our patrons. 

Talk not of the pale seamstress in the 
close, unwholesome garret, toiling far into 
the night for her wretched pittance ! True, 
she struggles, struggles piteously, till the 
heart groans over the contemplation ; but 
she has one happiness. She may labour 
sometimes unobserved — univatched! She is 
alone — alone with Him that made her ; and 
the full heart, full even to bursting, 
may spread out its griefs before His 
eye, unmarked — pour forth the passionate 
complaint unchecked and unreproved. Or, 
she labours among her equals : all suffer, all 
fare alike, all bear the same burden ; there is 
no startling contrast near, to make her 
compare her lot with others. 

But go to that luxurious mansion, that 
rears its palatial front like the dwelling of 
a king. Let the polished door be thrown 
back on its hinges. Tread through yon costly 
marble hall, with its statues and busts, its 
gilded doors, its crimson draperies — tread 
up that noble staircase, whereon the foot 
sinks, noiseless as a snow-flake, in the soft 

VOL. I. M 



1G2 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

pile of the velvet-like carpets. Stop before 
that gorgeous window, catch through its open 
valves the breath of the rare flowers, chil- 
dren of the south, transplanted hither as 
much for the rich man's pride as for his 
pleasure. See. the doors are half unclosed : 
as you go up the staircase you can catch 
a glimpse of the luxurious suite of drawing- 
rooms, — the gilded, satin-covered couches and 
chairs, — the chandeliers, glittering like the 
spray falling from a sunny fountain, — the 
rich inlaid cabinets, — the books, so encased 
that they seem only fit for royal hands, — 
the musical instruments, whose tones thrill 
through the soul like enchantment ! Pass 
on upwards. Those are the sleeping 
chambers of the rich, with their downy 
beds, their sheets fine as if from fairy looms, 
their velvet hangings, their toilets covered 
with lace, and adorned with mirrors that 
would make deformity itself look beautiful. 
Pass on ; you have gazed enough on the 
cushions, on which men forget their mor- 
tality. Up, higher still. The next suite of 
rooms will dazzle your eye much less ; but 
onward, onward. Are you wearied now? 
Do the steep stairs (they are only just be- 
ginning to be steep), — do they tire you? 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 1C3 

Are they slippery, now that the costly 
carpet no longer hushes your foot-fall ? Do 
you shiver coming from the warm atmo- 
sphere below ? Do those dingy walls, with 
their dark, mouldy papers, chill you, after 
the warm life-glow you have just left ? 
But pass on, there is more to see. There, 
enter that prison-like chamber. You see 
that dirty bed, with the soiled, rusty, torn 
hangings — that dingy window, foul with the 
accumulated dust of months, and the soot 
of the neighbouring chimneys? You see 
that table, with its dim, cracked looking- 
glass ? Ah ! you are looking at the toilet 
cover ! You are wrong ; that is not one, it 
is only a discoloured piece of calico, the 
remnant of some garment, spread, in a vain 
attempt, to hide the unsightly article it but 
partially covers. You noted the marble 
bath-room as you came up-stairs? Now, 
look at that old wash-hand stand, with its 
worn-ofF paint, its cracked potter}- of odd, 
discordant patterns. Have you seen enough ? 
Must you tread on that narrow strip of 
threadbare carpet beside the bed ? — it will not 
cheat you into the belief of comfort. 

Ah ! you need not look round in the cold 
evening for a little friendly blaze to throw 

M 2 



1C4 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

its ruddy glow of cheerfulness around and 
teach desolation to smile. There is no fire- 
place ; but why should there be one to mock 
the sight ? Fuel for that chamber would be 
too expensive ; the owners of the mansion 
have a limited income — only 12,000/. a-year ! 

I w T ill not tell you who sleeps in that 
chamber at the top of the house ; who 
kneels there at midnight, and cries in a 
voice of choking agony, 'Eli, Eli, lama 
sabacthani !" from the heart, if not from the 
lips. No, I will not tell you who sleeps 
there ; you know it — of course you know it ! 

A crucifix hangs on the walls, but the 
governess is not a Roman Catholic ; no, nor 
is she a Puseyite ; only she hangs up the 
symbol of the intensest suffering, that she 
may look on the climax of agony, realize it, 
and learn to bear — her own ! That desolate 
chamber is the faint picture of her life ! 

Is this picture the creation of fancy? 
Forbid it, just Heaven, that the mind 
should be morbid enough to create such 
images ! No, no! I thai write these pictures 
have seen with my own eyes what I de- 
scribe. Shall I say more ? have felt it — all — 
all ; have sat in such a room, cold, very cold, 
and lonely ; while ever and anon the sound 



ANNE SHERWOOD. J 65 

of music, and mirth, and revelry came 
echoing up from the halls beneath, and 
smote on the solitary heart sadder than the 
funeral bell at midnight, tolling for a de- 
parting soul. 

It was while sitting thus, listening to 
revelry in which I had no share, that a 
thought came into my mind that there were 
great, noble souls in the world, that knew 
nothing of governess life among the rich 
and great — souls too noble to conceive the 
image of wrongs that they would never, 
never inflict; and then the thought came, 
too, that I would tell them, in plain, simple 
words, straight from my heart to theirs, a 
story of wrong that would thrill them ! 

So it was, reader, that I seized a pen, and 
sat down to my task, and, to speak truth, 
that pen was dipped in gall, and the tale it 
traced was bitter — oh, so bitter, that I turned 
from it myself in shuddering horror. Then 
something said to me, — "Not yet, not yet! 
Patience ! it is not yet time ; wait a few more 
winters; a very few, for with such as you, a 
few years do the work of many ; wait till 
thy heart is older, thy fancy grown more 
chilly, — then shalt thou be listened to, and 
thy sober words believed. Eeader, I have 



166 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

waited, and now I speak to the noble hearts 
that will understand me, (why should I speak 
to others?) of the realities of governess life, 
the nude realities, softened as the remem- 
brance is by speaking of the past, that can 
never more return. 

Annie Sherwood was alone ; alone to begin 
a death struggle. Mrs. Harrington had said 
kindly, even warmly, " Come and see me, 
I am much alone, for ' I have not loved the 
world, nor the world me/ You saw my 
precious angel boy, though but for a mo- 
ment : I feel as if I could talk to you of him. 
Do come, Miss Sherwood." 

And Annie, who believed so few people, 
did believe Mrs. Harrington, and answered, 
with grateful smiles, that she would come. 

Mrs. Harrington had the misfortune to 
be united to a man whose gross nature knew 
no other law than his own will, and whose 
habitual fickleness of temper perpetually led 
him in pursuit of fresh objects of guilty 
passion. Virtuous ladies and worldly-wise 
friends had coldly lectured the unhappy 
wife on the necessity of a legal separation 
from her unprincipled husband ; but she had 
always answered, " He is the father of my 
children; I loved him, and he loved me, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 167 

when his soul was pure. Who knows but 
that Heaven will give me back his heart some 
blessed day ! I will abide the time, and 
pray — loving him still, for the past !" 

So had she gone on, hoping against hope, 
with meek endurance and never-ending 
patience ; but the happy day she had spoken 
of came not, and the clouds gathered darker 
and darker in her gloomy sky, till she began 
to murmur, "How long!" but she checked 
the impatient thought almost as soon as it 
rose, and went on her path with even more 
saintly patience than before. 

Mrs. Harrington was not naturally what 
we call a jealous wife, but she could not be 
expected voluntarily to draw persons round 
her, whose charms might serve as a ready 
lure to her wandering lord ; but looking on 
Annie Sherwood as people generally looked, 
and seeing nothing beneath the surface of 
an ordinary set of features, she mentally de- 
cided that there could be no danger to be 
apprehended in such a person. 

It did not occur to Mrs. Harrington, good 
and amiable as she was herself, to weigh 
whether Annie Sherwood had principle and 
virtue to withstand the seductive fascination 
which she was accustomed to attribute to 



1G8 ANNE SHERWOOD; 

her husband. She only thought, "She 
is plain ; Charles will never notice her !" 
and she had so lone: denied herself the solace 
of female society, from the fear of meeting 
rivals in women whose beauty she was 
accustomed to exaggerate, that she gladly 
seized on the occasion of procuring an occa- 
sional interchange of thought with an agree- 
able and cultivated person, whose society she 
might enjoy, without the attendance of dis- 
quieting apprehensions as to the result. 

Thus invited, and even pressed, poor 
Annie went forth from her solitude to spend 
an evening in the house of her opulent 
friend, in whom she gladly acknowledged 
her sister's benefactress. Annie was attired 
with neat simplicity — in fact, with the best 
her impoverished wardrobe afforded ; a plain 
white muslin skirt, and a close-fitting black 
silk jacket, surmounted by a lace ruff, which 
was becoming, though not quite a la mode 
— L. E. L. wore such a ruff. 

Mrs. Harrington received her guest with 
gentle cordiality. She was alone, but in a 
few minutes the children came in, and, 
gathering round Annie, soon grew friendly 
and communicative. In Mrs. Harrington 
there was not a shade of haughtiness — no 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 169 

pride of birth, fortune, or position ; still 
better, there was none of that vulgar conde- 
scension which is more intolerable than 
oppression itself: she made her guest her 
equal, and made her happy. 

And then, she had good accounts to give 
of Ellen (who had as yet only been able to 
write briefly of her safe arrival at Elmgrove) ; 
she could say that the young governess had 
made a most favourable impression on Mrs. 
Harrington's sister, — indeed, on the whole 
family; that she was well, and certainly 
very happy. 

So the delight of her kind reception, and 
the much greater delight of such good news, 
filled Annie Sherwood's heart with a joy that 
coloured her cheeks brilliantly, and her eyes 
became radiant as they were wont to do, 
when she experienced sudden emotion. Her 
hostess looked as if she could not recognise 
her; started, and wondered how she could 
ever have thought her plain ; and then the 
door opened, and Mr. Harrington walked in, 
yawning. He was going to spend an evening 
at home, a very rare occurrence ; but even 
the novelty of the circumstance could not 
preserve him from ennui, and he was tired 
by anticipation. 



170 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Mrs. Harrington went through the form 
of introduction. Annie's momentary bright- 
ness had passed away — she was again the plain 
Annie Sherwood. Mr. Harrington glanced 
at her, and slightly bowed. He seemed to 
divine that she was an insignificant person ; 
once more he yawned : he sat down to read 
Bentleg's Miscellany. 

Mr. Harrington was tall; he had been 
handsome, but his countenance was dis- 
figured by an expression of disgust and 
premature satiety. He seemed to have ex- 
hausted pleasure, without having attained 
philosophy, and to be dying for want 
of a new sensation. He was reclining 
in an easy chair, and soon dropped asleep 
over his book. Mrs. Harrington looked 
very much ashamed, but wisely said nothing. 
If she could not speak approvingly of her 
husband, she would not have uttered a cen- 
sure on him, even to her own mother. 

Mrs. Harrington and Annie continued 
conversing, but in a lower tone. " My hus- 
band is very tired," said the former, at length; 
" he has been riding some distance," — for she 
had observed Annie glance at the sleeper. 
A few minutes later a peculiar tone of 
Annie's musical voice roused Mr. Harrington 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 171 

momentarily; he opened his eyes, glanced at 
her, then turned away, and composed him- 
self again to sleep, as if regardless of her 
existence. Soon after, a thunder-storm came 
on ; the rain beat fearfully against the win- 
dows, defying even the closed shutters and 
the thick draperies to exclude the threatening 
sound. Annie listened in dismay. " Don't 
be alarmed," said Mrs. Harrington, who was 
herself extremely nervous. " Thank you, I 
am not at all so," said Annie, quietly ; "I 
was only thinking of my walk home." 

" You must not attempt it ; you must stay 
all night," said Mrs. Harrington. Her hus- 
band said nothing (he was awake, because it 
thundered) : he was never commonly civil to 
a woman, unless he thought her handsome. 

Constrained by her kind hostess, Annie 
consented to remain. She w r as disgusted by 
Mr. Harrington's ill-breeding, but it was of 
too negative a kind to call forth strong re- 
sentment, and perhaps rather amused her 
fancy than touched her pride. She was 
speculating on how she would have been 
entertained had she been a beauty ! Perhaps 
had Mr. Harrington been worth the trouble 
— had his wife been less an angel, Annie 
Sherwood would have exerted her conscious 



172 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

powers, and proved to him that she could be 
charming, for the mere triumph of deriding 
the attentions paid to the enchantress, though 
politeness was denied to the woman. 

The room which Annie occupied was next 
to that of her host and hostess. She did 
not listen ; she was too proud to commit 
such a mean action ; but she could not avoid 
overhearing their conversation, — at least, all 
that Mr. Harrington said, for his wife always 
spoke in subdued tones. 

The first words Annie heard were these, 
— "A governess ! pray where did you pick 
up such an elegant acquaintance?" The 
answer was not audible. Mr. Harrington 
went on : "A complete dowdy ; ugly as my 
grandmother in her best tabinet. I tell you 
what, Carry, if you think of engaging her, 
you'll give her a hint to keep her ugly face 
within her own precincts : never to put it in 
my way !" 

Annie laughed ; she was not angry. The 
coarse rudeness of Mr. Harrington had no 
barb; it might tease and scratch the sur- 
face, but it could not reach the quick. It 
required a more subtle spirit than his 
to make Annie Sherwood writhe. Annie 
went to bed, and slept; moreover, she dreamt 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 173 

pleasantly. She saw her best-loved Ellen 
happy under the protecting care of a loving 
and loved husband; and, behold, when she 
saw the face of her new brother-in-law, it 
wore the aspect of the young clergyman 
she had met at the agent's, and he bent an 
earnest gaze of reproof upon her; but he 
looked upon Ellen with such tenderness, 
with such an air of protecting solicitude, 
that Annie felt inexpressibly happy. And 
it appeared to her that for long she watched 
the beautiful pair wandering through a fair 
garden, that might have been Paradise, and 
they seemed like the first created, and from 
Ellen's gentle eyes was spoken — 

" God is tliv law, thou mine !" 

Just then Annie woke, and behold it 
was but a dream, though passing pleasant, 
and her sister Ellen was the poor governess, 
not the cherished bride ! 

Annie breakfasted with Mrs. Harrington 
in her dressing-room. In the course of con- 
versation she mentioned Bertha Somerton, 
and her unfortunate position at Mrs. 
Cheshyre's. " Would she do for me ?" said 
Mrs. Harrington, quickly ; then as quickly 
she asked a number of questions, more 
tending to elicit a personal description of 



174 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Bertha, than any account of her accomplish- 
ments or acquirements. It was finally re- 
solved that Annie should bring Bertha to 
Mrs. Harrington's on her next half* holiday, 
and that if the interview should prove satis- 
factory, she should give Mrs. Cheshyre 
notice to provide herself with a successor, 
for Annie felt quite sure that Bertha would 
o-ladly exchange her present bondage, for an 
engagement with such a patroness as Mrs. 
Harrington. 

While Annie was putting on her bonnet 
to depart, Mrs. Harrington went down stairs 
to speak to her husband before he went out 
for the day. A portrait-painter had just 
sent home a likeness of their beautiful, 
lost boy. Mrs. Harrington held up the 
picture to his gaze ; her soft eyes were veiled 
with tears, but they looked up to his with 
such pleading tenderness, that he had been 
less than man could he have withstood that 
look. He could not; he w T as evidently 
moved, though perhaps his emotion was 
only for the moment. He drew his wife 
towards him, and kissed her cheek. She 
threw her arms around his neck, and wept 
happy tears upon his bosom ; but he still 
held his hat and gloves, and glancing 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 175 

towards the window, lie perceived a pretty, 
coquettish milliner pass by. He disen- 
gaged himself from his wife's arms, and, 
with a half-muttered excuse, walked out. 
Mrs. Harrington sank on a chair, covering 
her face with her hands ; the momentary 
gleam of joy had been rudely dispersed, but 
she complained not. 

She had no reproaches to utter; she 
would meet him again with gentle pa- 
tience when he returned ; but her heart was 
broken. 

Annie had unavoidably witnessed the 
scene, and she hesitated to advance and take 
leave of her hostess, who sat with her fair 
face bowed down upon her hands. 

At last Annie thought she must withdraw 
or make herself heard ; she touched the 
handle of the door. Mrs. Harrington started 
up ; her cheeks were wet, her lips quivering. 
She looked up at Annie, — she read her face, 
speaking the sympathy which respect and 
delicacy forbade her to utter. Mrs. Har- 
rington had many acquaintances ; she had 
few friends ; she wanted friendship in her 
lonely sorrow. Instinctively she hastened to 
Annie, and throwing herself into her arms, 
wept unrestrainedly. Annie said nothing 



176 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

(what could she say ?), but she returned that 
mute caress with all her heart. 

" When shall I tell Miss Somerton that 
you would be likely to want her ?" at length 
Annie asked. 

" Who ? What did you say ?" asked 
Mrs. Harrington, abstractedly ; then con- 
tinued, " Oh, yes ; Miss Somerton — I re- 
member. I should want her directly, — that 
is to say, as soon as she can honourably 
leave. If she is all you describe, she will 
be a m'eat comfort to me. But how foolish 
I must seem to you, Miss Sherwood — how 
excessively childish ! I am afraid I shall 
never lose this nervousness — it is consti- 
tutional." 

Annie made no remark ; she saw that 
Mrs. Harrington wished to attribute her 
recent agitation to any other cause than the 
real one, and she could not condemn her for 
seeking to veil the errors of her still-beloved, 
though unworthy husband. 

Annie hastened to Bertha, to convey to 
her the gladtidings of her probable engage- 
ment in Mrs. Harrington's family. Bertha 
could not venture on so bold a step as in- 
viting Annie upstairs, as Mrs. Cheshyre 
happened to be in the way ; so the pleasant 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 177 

communication must be deferred till the 

friends could meet in the E Square 

Gardens the following morning. 

As impatient to tell her news as Bertha 
would have been to receive it, could she 
have divined all there was to tell, Annie 
found herself at the place of rendezvous half 
an hour before the various parties of gover- 
nesses and nurses would appear with their 
keys and their charges. 

Impatiently enough Annie walked up and 
down ; and the only thing that could recon- 
cile her to the delay, was the triumphant 
thought of the ill-used governess being able 
to give notice to the haughty and over- 
bearing Mrs. Cheshyre. " She will not find 
another meek- spirited Bertha Somerton to 
toil so patiently in her service !" she ex- 
claimed. But Annie Sherwood knew little 
of such labourers, after all ! She did not 
know that there were hundreds — yes, many 
hundreds — who would seize with avidity on 
the hard terms Mrs. Cheshyre would offer, and 
feel themselves very, very fortunate in obtain- 
ing even such a home, — humbly, even grate- 
fully, receiving the pittance of their bondage. 
" Poor-spirited, mean wretches, who deserve 
their fate !" Annie would have exclaimed. 

VOL. I. N 



178 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

And so they would be, did they work for 
themselves ; but, reader ! they labour — ay, 
that is the word that speaks their calling 
— they labour, it may be, for a white- 
headed, widowed mother, for a paralytic 
father, a brother or sister worn by lin- 
gering disease, or perhaps for all these ! 
and to those loved ones their slender 
pittance is existence — I will not say life I 
I have known one who toiled for an old, 
blind mother ; another, for a widoioed sister 
with five helpless children; another, for a 
young sister, too young, too delicate to brave 
the storms of the world ; another, to support 
a sister too — a sister whose only refuge front 
governess life had been a lunatic asylum! another 
— but need I add more ? — and these bore in- 
dignities from which flesh and blood shrink, 
beneath which the soul writhes, but they 
remembered for whom they bore them, and, 
with woman's tender heroism, bowed down 
beneath the cross, which woman's strong 
love had made them take up. Yes, Mrs. 
Cheshyre's engagement would soon be tilled, 
and joyfully perhaps. 

" Can it be ? oh, no, this is too good to 
be true !" ejaculated Bertha, when she heard 
the news which Annie brought her. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 179 

" Yes, 'tis all true ; but pray don't look so 
beamingly happy, Bertha," said Annie, — 
"pray don't, or Mrs. Harrington will be 
afraid of you, thinking you too good-looking. 
Remember, your business there will be to 
be as ugly as possible : however, to make 
up for that, you will have sixty guineas 
a-year, and, better still, Mrs. Harrington 
will place you on such a footing in her house, 
that the footman will not dare to make love 
to you !" 

" Sixty guineas a-year 1" ejaculated Bertha, 
as if in a dream ; " sixty guineas a-year, 
Annie ! You surely cannot mean that !" 
And when she had realised the truth, her 
first exclamation was, " Oh, how happy 
mamma will be !" 

At the thought of the added comforts she 
could give her mother, Bertha sobbed like a 
child. 

" Come, come, Bertha," said Annie Sher- 
wood, " no sentiment." And yet she was 
almost as much moved as Bertha herself. 
" Tell me, who is that common-looking girl 
with deep-red hair — do you know her ?" 

" Know her ! I might as well boast an 
acquaintance with her Majesty. 
" But who is she, then?" 



j> 



N * 



.v 



180 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" A governess. But here is some one 
who will tell you all about her." 

Just then a remarkably pretty young 
Frenchwoman came up, with a group of 
children. " Emilie Tourville," said Bertha, 
by way of introduction. 

" Emilie, I want you to tell my friend, 
Miss Sherwood, who that rousse Anylaise 

55 

IS. 

"Not more rousse Anglaise than rousse 
Francaise" said the French girl, in perfect 
English, or so slightly tinged with a foreign 
accent that it was only more charming. 
" She is of both nations, and an old school- 
fellow of mine. Her mother is an English 
lady's-maid, her father a French groom. 
Her parents, at once thrifty and ambitious, 
have succeeded in placing her in a little 
higher position than their own, and one in 
which she can gain nearly as much money as 
if she ic ere a lady s-nf aid — of course, not quite 
so much. She is well-educated, though not 

lady-like, and lives with Lady A . I 

do not know her now, for she dislikes in- 
timacy with any one who does not live in a 
nobleman's family ; besides which, she has 
probably other reasons for declining to re- 
cognise me." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 181 

"Have you seen anything of Hortensia 
Maynard ?" said Bertha to Annie. 

" Not since she gave me an introduction 
to her friend, the Hon. Mrs. Ernscliff," said 
Annie, unable to repress a smile. 

" Ah, you would not laugh at Hortensia 
if you knew her as well as I !" said Bertha, 
gravely. 

" Possibly not ; but you must admit she 
is ridiculously pretending." 

" She is odd," replied Bertha, " but that is 
because she is so clever. Clever people are 
always odd." 

" Not always," said Annie. " My father 
was not at all odd, and had as much common 
sense as talent and learning. But in what 
way do you consider Miss Maynard so 
clever ?" 

" She knows Greek and Latin," said Ber- 
tha, " and knows them so well." 

" Excuse my asking, Bertha, how do you 
know she is such a good classic ?" 

" I will tell you. The s used to keep 

a tutor conjointly with a governess ; he never 
could succeed in making Beginald con- 
strue. Hortensia, in the presence of Sir 

William and Lady , took the work out 

of the tutor's hands, and succeeded admira- 



182 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

bly. The sad part of the story is though, 
that the poor tutor stood by, quite mortified, 
and finally lost his engagement." 

"And who told you the story, Bertha?" 

" Hortensia told me." 

" And what said the poor tutor ? he must 
have felt very indignant." 

"Oh, no, he did not, I assure you; far 
from it !" 

" How can you tell ?" 

" For the best of reasons, Annie. So far 
from resenting Hortensia' s rivalry, he was 
very much attached to her, and made her an 
offer, dictated as much by admiration as 
affection." 

"And she told you?" 

" Yes. He carried one of her slippers in 
his pocket for a fortnight." 

" An excellent proof of affection, cer- 
tainly!" said Annie, laughing. " How old 
was this Strephon, Bertha ?" 

" One-and-twenty." 

" That accounts for his folly, if the tale 
be genuine. Miss Maynard is nearly old 
enough to be his mother. But why did she 
not accept him ?" 

"He has not mind enough for Hortensia/' 
said Bertha. "Then only think, Annie, of 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 183 

the influence, the strong influence she pos- 
sesses over Lady ." 

" If the influence you ascribe to her really 
exists, it certainly goes farther to prove her 
cleverness than all her Greek and Latin, her 
scholastic triumph over the boy-tutor's head, 
or her conquest of his heart. It really gives 
one the conception of l the magic which the 
strong mind always exercises over the weak 
one.' But I am very much inclined to think 
that poor Miss Maynard's reign is imagi- 
nary, and that the apparent obsequiousness 
of the servants is obtained by heavy fees." 

" I am so sorry, so disappointed, that you 
don't like her !" said Bertha. 

" I don't dislike her ! indeed I don't," 
said Annie ; " on the contrary, she strikes 
me as a particularly good-natured person, 
who, if she would give up conquests when 
she is past the age of being charming, and 
consequence, when she is placed in a position 
which renders it pitiable, might be very 
pleasant — at least, would not be ridiculous." 



1S4 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE X. 

" My own, dear, kind Sister, — Oh, Annie, 
how dearly I love yon ! How this separa- 
tion shows me all that I have lost in 
leaving yon! Sister! mother! friend! all, 
all in one ! But I have no right to murmur. 
My last was so hurried, that I could not tell 
you of more than my safe arrival at this 
delightful place. If you were but with me, 
I should be so very happy ! Now, however, 
I must comply with your request, and tell 
}'ou all. 

" To begin at the beginning. Listen ! 
but I know you wilL I thought my journey 
long and tedious, and felt as if I had left 
half of myself behind ; and so 1 had, and the 
very best half too, Annie ! At the station 
Mrs. Ferrers' footman met me with a hired 
conveyance. I liked their not Bending their 
own carriage for me : I should have thought 
it like the clergyman who offered me twelve 
pounds a-year, if they had. I fancied the 
footman rather familiar, and T began to think 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 1S5 

uneasily of Bertha's humble admirer (but you 
say he is not humble). When I reached the 
house, he offered me his hand to get out of 
the carriage : and I have since noticed that 
he assists his mistress and her daughters, 
in quite a different style. I tried very 
hard to get up a little dignity, but I felt 
myself too insignificant for the attempt to 
succeed. 

" Elmgrove is a sweet place. I don't ad- 
mire the house, which is modern, and not in 
good taste ; but the small park in which it 
stands is beautiful, and I expect a great 
many pleasant hours in rambling about it. 
I felt very nervous indeed, as we drove up 
to the door ; I can't tell you how I trembled. 
I am sure I w r as ghostly white. A gentle- 
man, w r ho was standing on the steps, stared 
veiy hard at me, but he did not offer me 
any assistance. Perhaps he saw how 
frightened I looked, and thought he should 
frighten me still more if he spoke to me ; 
thus good-nature may sometimes give a 
person even a rude appearance. Three or 
four vouns: ladies were looking at me from 
the windows, but none of them came out. 
I thought they were perhaps as timid as 
I was, and afraid of a stranger ; but I am 



186 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

sure there is nothing in me to frighten any 
one. Do you think there is, Annie ? 

" How I got through the hall, and reached 
the drawing-room, I don't know. There I 
found Mrs. Ferrers lying on a sofa, with a 
novel in her hand. I noticed that it was 
Corinna. I was glad to see her reading 
your favourite book, and she must have a 
great deal of sensibility, for I saw she had 
been crying over it ; as I went towards her, 
she was wiping her e}^es. She shook hands 
with me very kindly, and made several in- 
quiries about my journey. Her voice is 
very sweet, and she is like Mrs. Harrington 
in the face, but of course a great deal older. 
After talking to me very kindly for some 
time, she said that no doubt I should be 
glad to go and rest; rang, and desired a 
servant who came, to show me my rooms. 
First of all I must tell you that Mrs. Ferrers 
had very considerately said that, at my age, 
it was desirable that I should continue to 
improve myself, so she thought it best that 
for that purpose, I should have the evening 
to myself in the school-room. Of course I 
thought so too. 

" A school-room and abed-room adjoining 
were, I found, allotted to me. The rooms 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 187 

were not in any order — indeed, were untidy ; 
but then there is such a large family, I dare 
say the poor servants have a great deal to 
do. There was no blind at my bed-room 
window, and as I did not like to give trouble 
directly in a strange house, I hung my 
shawl up for that night, and the next day I 
ventured to ask Mrs. Ferrers about it. She 
was very sorry, and said she would give 
strict orders to have it attended to; but 
either she has forgotten it, or the servants 
have been very busy, for I have to hang up 
my shawl every night; perhaps they will 
think of it presently. — But to return to my 
first night. I dare say — indeed, I feel sure 
— they forgot I had been travelling all day, 
and must want something, but they gave 
me neither tea nor supper ; and I was going 
to bed really hungry, when I heard a loud 
bell ringing, and some one say on the stair- 
case, ' Shall I tell Miss Ellen it is supper- 
time ? perhaps she is busy, and wont notice 
the bell/ I quite forgot that at Elmgrove 
I should not be called Miss Ellen, as at dear 
old Merton, and walked down stairs. I saw 
the door of a dining-room standing open, 
and within, an elegant table was laid for 
supper. I was just going in, when the foot- 



188 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

man who had met me at the station stopped 
me. * Your supper will be taken up stairs, 
Miss,' he said, smiling oddly at another 
man, who was putting wine on the table. 
Then his face changed, and he looked sorry, 
as if he thought he had hurt my feelings, 
and said, ' I am afraid you have not had 
anything, Miss ; I'll just run and tell the 
school-room maid.' I ran up stairs as fast 
as I could, relieved to think I should sup 
alone, and not have to face so many 
strangers. A maid brought me up a tray, 
with bread, cold mutton, and a jug of beer ; 
there was no napkin on the tray. I took 
some supper, and rang for the remains to be 
taken away ; but as they did not hear me, I 
went into my bed-room. I looked round that 
lonely room, and, oh, Annie ! dearest, best of 
sisters, how I missed you ! I am ashamed 
to tell you how many tears I shed ; I tried 
to keep them down, but they would spring 
up. I felt so very, very lonely ! I sat 
down to read the Bible ; but my door closed 
badly, and the sound of merry voices and 
laughter came echoing up the stairs, and I 
was so silly that I cried again, and felt still 
more lonely. 

" The next morning I began my work, and 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 189 

found my little pupils clear children ; but I 
fear it will be difficult to teach them, they 
are so wild. I must try to remember that 
high spirits are natural to their age. I 
breakfasted with them in the school-room ; 
we did the lessons ; then I took them out ; 
but as they ran away from me, I had great 
difficulty to get them home in time for 
luncheon — that is, the family's luncheon and 
our dinner. 

" There I saw the three Miss Ferrers for 
the first time. Miss Ferrers seems about 
thirty, but is extremely handsome and aris- 
tocratic : very fashionably dressed too. Miss 
Ellen looks older, but is in reality four or 
five }^ears younger : she has a thoughtful, 
care-worn face; is not pretty; dresses plainly, 
in a very high gown, and is neat and precise 
in the extreme. Her sister Sophia is two- 
and-twenty ; and oh, so pretty, Annie — such 
a sweet, good-tempered looking girl, with 
lovely eyes, and hair like Marmions Con- 
stance, threads of living gold ! I so wish 
you could see her. When I went in, Miss 
Ellen shook hands with me very kindly ; 
Miss Ferrers examined me through a glass, 
till my cheeks grew like crimson; and Sophia 
laughed, but I think not in ill-nature. 



190 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Mr. Ferrers is old, deaf, and notices no 
one but his wife, to whom he is very atten- 
tive. When luncheon was half over, the 
gentleman I had seen on the steps came in ; 
he did not once look towards me, or seem to 
know that there was a stranger present, of 
which I was very glad, for his staring so 
much the day before had made me quite 
nervous. The Ferrers call him ' Francis/ 
but the servants speak of him as Mr. Vincent. 
I suppose he is some relation of the family, 
but I have not heard them say that he is. 
Miss Ferrers evidently admires and likes him, 
but he is more attentive to Miss Sophia. He 
is not nice-looking, and his manners are far 
from agreeable. He dresses in rough, shaggy 
clothes, with immense pockets, and, in my 
mind, there is some connexion between his 
voice and his coat. Indeed, he is an illustra- 
tion of the ' ruffian style,' and uses a great 
deal of slang. Miss Ferrers remarks ' How 
very clever Francis is 1' but I have never 
heard him talk of anything beyond dogs and 
horses ; and of them I am so ignorant myself, 
that I cannot well judge whether what he 
says on the subject is clever oi not ; but I 
should scarcely think such topics could atibrd 
much ground for the display of talent as a 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 191 

1 conversationalist/ to use your favourite Dr. 
Chalmers's word. 

" After dinner (to return to my story), I 
took the children out again ; then we returned 
to lessons till we had tea, at six o'clock, in 
the school-room. When tea was over, the 
children began some very noisy play (what 
a good thing it is that I have a very strong 
head), and continued it, until they went to 
be dressed for dessert. 

" I have been at Elm grove a week ; every 
day is precisely the same — rather fatiguing 
— but I have a great many comforts. How 
much better I am situated than poor Bertha ! 
I am sure I ought to be contented. How I 
wish you had such an engagement ! and yet, 
Annie, — no, — this life would not do for you ! 
Your mind would starve for want of food. 
You could not bear solitude, absolute soli- 
tude, as well as I. ' The higher the intel- 
lectual powers, the more aliment they require/ 
our dear father used to say ; ' it is a mistake 
to suppose great minds suffice to themselves. 
Eivers may exist on their own sources ; 
but the sea, the great wide sea, asks for tri- 
butary streams and receives them/ No, nice 
as it is, Elmgrove would not do for you, 
dear Annie ! The Ferrers see a great deal of 



19.2 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

company, but I never meet any of tlieir 
friends except at luncheon. I am not intro- 
duced to any one, so that I am not obliged 
to talk, happily. The only person that takes 
any notice of me is the old Vicar, who often 
drops in when I am at dinner. He is very 
amiable and good-natured ; but his sermons 
make me think of Mr. Pendexter's, in Long- 
fellow's Kavanagh. Mr. Weston is very 
old, and his old age is not the energetic, elo- 
quent old age of our dear father, who had 
the majesty of years without tlieir infirmities. 
I am afraid it is very wrong, but I can't 
help contrasting Mr. Weston's feeble voice 
with 

1 His voice's manly flow,' 

and his sleepy utterance with our dear 
one's 

1 Thoughts of power.' 

Only think, Annie, Miss Ellen has just come 
in to say that we shall spend an hour to- 
gether in improving conversation, every even- 
ing. That will be delightful ; she is so very 
good, and spends hours every day in visiting 
the sick poor, school, &c. I often wish I 
were as good. The only thing that I can't 
understand in her, is the sharp way in which 
she sometimes speaks to her sisters. Perhaps 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 193 

it is that she is vexed and sorry to see them 
without any serious thoughts, and so given 
up to the world. Then there is always a sort 
of wordy war going on between her and Mr. 
Vincent. Sometimes he takes the liberty of 
calling her ' a Puritan/ when she retorts by 
some biting sarcasm. Then he laughs, she 
gets more annoyed, and usually leaves the 
room, sometimes drawing a comparison be- 
tween the tares and the wheat, or murmuring 
'they that will live godly in Christ must 
suffer persecution.' Still I am sure she is a 
very good person, but she often looks unhappy 
and distressed. She frets a great deal about 
Mr. Pendexter — Mr. Weston, I mean (some- 
how the two names have got confused in my 
head), and says his light burns so dimly that 
he is leading his people to destruction. At 
times she talks as papa described the Whit- 
field preachers, so excitingly that one feels 
too much carried away, to examine the sound- 
ness of her arguments. She wants to see a 
more awakening preacher in our pulpit ; in 
that I think she is right, but Mr. Pendex — 
Mr. Weston — should be dealt tenderly with. 
She talks to him of the necessity of taking a 
young, energetic curate, and particularly re- 
commends a clergyman whom she met at the 
vol. i. o 



194 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

sea-side last year. Mr. Weston fears his 
holding what he calls exaggerated views, and 
though he is willing to take a curate, as he 
begins to feel his own infirmities, he very 
naturally likes to have one of his ow r n choos- 
ing, rather than of his friends' selection. He 
has been to town and seen a Mr. Newingham, 
who pleases him very much, but Miss Ellen 
says she is sure he is a Puseyite, and will 
preach in the alb. I should not much care 
what he preached in, provided he taught us 
the truth, but she makes herself positively 
unhappy lest he should wear what the Puri- 
tans called ' Aaronic garments ;' though we 
really don't know whether he is coming or 
not. One minute she exclaims ' we are in 
heathen darkness, and if he brings us light, 
it will be that of a firebrand, consuming, not 
warming the dying branches ! He will arrive 
armed with No. 90, and will know nothing 
among us but hagioscopes and lecterns, 
piscinas and credence tables ! It is horrible 
to contemplate !' 

" ' But how can you know all this :' asked 
Miss Ferrers, rather scornfully. ' By my 
presentiments,' her sister replied, with solem- 
nity j ' I see it all as if it had been revealed 
to me. If Mr. Weston had listened to me, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 193 

and secured Mr. Wilson, the dark clouds so 
ominously gathering over his flock, would 
have spread their sable pall elsewhere ; but 
we are a doomed people. Still — still there 
is among us an -election of grace !' 

" But now, my dearest Annie, I must say 
good-bye. I was going to add you will be 
weary of this long, rambling epistle, but you 
will not, no, I am sure you will not. 

Your own Ellen." 



o 2 



196 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XI. 

"When Annie had read Ellen's letter, her 
first impulse was to seize a pen, write, and 
tell her to return immediately, for she felt 
assured, even from the few hints of negli- 
gence of her comfort contained in her sister > 
simple narrative, that she could not he happy 
at Elmgrove. But then Annie exclaimed, 
" But to what shall I bid her return — to 
starvation? There she has at least food, 
except," she added, bitterly, "when they 
forget to give her her meals. My poor 
Ellen ! I see what they are, but (as she 
would say herself) it might be worse ! She 
might be with people who would work her 
to death, or goad her gentle temper into 
harshness — it might be, break her heart. 
"Well, she must stay for the present, she 
must stay and listen to Ellen Ferrers 1 
fanatic raving, and Mr. Vincent's veterinary 
lectures ! The one will not make her a 
visionary, the other will fail in teaching her 
farrier lore. Oh, my sister ! my sweet, in- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 197 

nocent Ellen ! how meekly she takes every- 
thing ! with what angelic patience she bears 
indignities that would gall and sting me 
unendurably !" Annie sat an hour longer 
quite lost in thought, in the solitude of the 
little chamber, and night shadows gathered 
round her. She dismissed all thought of 
the teacher's sordid cares, and of her own 
prospects as far as they were concerned. She 
bent her mind wholly on one subject, the for- 
mation of a poem, a poem which she dreamt 
would win her fame ; and while her heart was 
glowdng, and her very soul seemed uncon- 
trollable, she seized the pen with which she 
had been about to address her sister, and 
only then became conscious that she was 
sitting in the dark. "With a sigh of dis- 
appointment, poor Annie groped her way 
down the dark, narrow staircase into the 
landlady's kitchen. On her road thither she 
had time to reflect that she possibly mistook 
enthusiasm for genius, and memory for in- 
spiration ! The sickening doubt fell cold 
and chill on her heart. The landlady, a 
mass of bombazine and collar, broke harshly 
on her reverie with a very homely remark. 
" Do you know, Miss Sherwood, that machril 
you bought this evening wasn't fresh, not 



198 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

a bit of it? Whenever fish is cried about 
the streets nights, I always suspects 'em ; 
but I've cleaned it, and put a bit of salt and 
pepper in," &c. 

Annie laughed heartily, for she had a keen 
sense of the ridiculous, but her poetical ideas 
were effectually put to flight. A minute 
later she was in her room, pen in hand, 
trying to recalher scattered thoughts. A 
beautiful simile had occurred to her in illus- 
tration of the theme she had chosen. She 
looked up, as one is wont to do in a 
moment of inspiration that comes over the 
soul, like a thing too bright to be of earth — 
she looked up, not at the student's midnight 
lamp, with its classical memories and associa- 
tions, but at a tallow T -candle, which having 
been neglected, had guttered, and half filled 
the candlestick ! " One of poverty's vulgar 
realities !" thought Annie ; but the beautiful 
simile was lost ! 

Annie's mind had not yet acquired hard- 
ness enough to grasp and hold its own 
conceptions ; the}' were like the bright 
things we see in dreams, presented before 
her but to be snatched away and irrevocably 
lost. Between the landlady's fish and the 
unfortunate tallow-candle, her lovely visions 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 199 

were entombed, perchance to rise no more. 
And into what an nngenial grave the plan 
of an elaborate poem and a profusion of 
ornaments had fallen ! To the surface rose, 
after a deep search, the following decousu 
lines, which poor Annie in vain sought to 
connect, or reconcile with each other : — 

" My peace on earth, my hope of Heaven, 
I tell thee all — yea, all were given ! 
And more — if more had been my own— 
Upon that die I would have thrown ! 
Wild the ambition ; but the prize, 
To me, 'twas more than paradise ! 

* * * * 

Yea, call it madness — what thou wilt, 
None more than I discerns my guilt ; 
Yet one wild thought can still subdue, 
And bend, as man could never do ! 

* * * * 

Oh, give me but once more to feel, 
In this strong grasp, the unerring steel ! 
Give me the steed that knows the frame 
He bore so oft, through flood and flame ! 
Whose light foot spurns the sandy plain ; 
I shall be all I was, again. 
Give me the desert wild and free, 
And with it, life — and liberty 1" 

And here the elaborate poem began and 
ended. At first, when she had scrawled 
these lines, Annie really thought them 
poetry. She read them over two or three 
times, and decided that they looked like an 



200 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

imitation, and a very bad imitation, of " The 
Giaour." Then she tried something else, in 
which the following occurred : — 

" Across his large stag eye 'twould fling 
The shadow of past suffering." 

But immediately she recollected a similar 
expression in Lady M. W. Montagu's trans- 
lation from the Turkish. 

" Your large stag eyes, where thousand glories play." 

Ah ! she was an unconscious plagiarist ! 
and so poor Anne Sherwood went to bed 
with the uncomfortable conviction that she 
had been deceived in supposing herself a 
poet, and that she had just :2/. 18s., on 
which to exist until Ellen's first quarter 
should become due, and Ellen had been 
but a small portion of that quarter in the 
enviable post of governess, or more properly 
speaking, bear-leader to the tractable scions 
of the Ferrers family. Annie determined to 
attempt no more poetry. As well might a 
heart full of love's divinest feelings promise 
that it will hide for ever in its depth the 
welling affections that will rise and over- 
flow, in spite of the sternest, strongest efforts 
to check and seal them down. No, be it 
the emanation of genius, or merely the 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 201 

effervescence of fancy, the song conceived in 
the heart mnst spring forth, though it be 
but to meet neglect or ridicule. Apart from 
the puerilities of vanity, there is in some 
hearts a besoin de chanter, as in others a 
besoin Maimer, and few imaginative people 
but remember, when their fancy was young 
and warm, how they planned immortal 
poems that were to die of chilling neglect, 
or rushed to the press with matter suffi- 
ciently absurd to excite their own ridicule 
in after hours of calm reason. Ah ! how a 
young author is met with a dangerous paean 
of applause, or a harshness of satire, alto- 
gether disproportioned to his feeble efforts ! 
How we should mock at the madman point- 
ing a cannon at a wren, but no one sees the 
absurdity of the critic gunner who directs 
a broadside at the trembling ambition of 
the harmless sonneteer, who is probably 
frightened sufficiently by the uncouth echo 
of his tinkling rhymes. 

Annie Sherwood's dreams were troubled 
that night, as Mr. Churchill's might have 
been while planning and re-planning scenes 
in his long contemplated, but never executed 
romance. 

In solitude and frequent sadness, time 



202 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

rolled on for Annie Sherwood. AVhen Ellen 
remitted to her the whole of her quarter's 
salary, except a few shillings, Annie was still 
unplacee — still looking out for employment, 
which appeared to fly from her. 

Some few events had happened in her 
little world. Bertha was rejoicing in the 
comforts of Mrs. Harrington's house, and 
overwhelmed Annie with thanks for having 
procured her such a haven of rest. She was 
the more grateful for her success, as Mrs. 
Cheshyre, in a fit of aristocratic indignation 
at the poor girl's having dared to quit her 
service — (yes, it teas service, and very hard 
service too) — had refused to give her any 
testimonial for four years' conscientious dis- 
charge of arduous, heart-depressing duties, 
and Mrs. Harrington had received Bertha 
on Annie's simple recommendation. 

In the fulness of her grateful heart, 
Bertha would have forced a large part of her 
newly acquired riches on her friend, hut 
Annie steadily refused to receive anything 
from one who had higher duties to perform 
than relieving her necessities. 

Many were Annie Sherwood's privations 
during the first three months of Ellen's 
residence at Elmgrove ; but she concealed 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 203 

all she suffered, and even suppressed any 
comments of a painful nature on Ellen's 
letters, many of which detailed instances of 
mortifying neglect, or of still more active 
unkindness, on the part of those with whom 
she dwelt. And Ellen often told these 
things so simply, so artlessly, that it seemed 
she did not appreciate their meaning, was 
too humble-minded to resent them, or too 
patient to feel the useless indignation they 
were calculated to excite. 

But while Annie forcibly restrained the 
expression of her feelings, from the im- 
measurable love she bore her sister, the iron 
entered into her soul, and she view r ed her 
own future with increasing bitterness — 
mankind with something approaching mis- 
anthropy. 

Header, the humble delineator of this 
character should perhaps claim your for- 
giveness for attempting to invest your 
sympathies in a heroine full of faults, instead 
of craving your kind interest for the angelic 
creature of spotless perfection usually drawn 
by romance writers — an embodiment of what 
woman might have been, had our first 
Mother never sinned ! a being who goes 
through fiery trials, and comes forth purer 



204 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

than the refiner's gold! Eeader, such 
characters are not living ! You know they 
are not while you read of them ; and my 
heroine is not the child of imagination, 
whom I might at pleasure invest with 
unnatural perfections. No, she is a real, 
living, erring child of humanity, who set out 
in life with some, nay, with many, noble 
aspirations and generous passions, whom 
wrong, inflicted on herself, and a yet dearer 
self, drove into a thorny path of error, which 
a less proud spirit would have avoided at 
the expense of a crushed and broken heart. 
I have chosen this defective character to 
show the working of an oppressive, a cruel 
system on one subject to the frailties of 
humanity. An angelic model would be 
useless! and when she who sat for the 
portrait failed, or rather when I failed in 
drawing the likeness, I have followed Sir 
Philip Sydney's advice, " Look into thine 
own heart, and write !" When the thread 
of my narrative broke, I have stirred the 
records of my memory for scenes which I 
have at least witnessed — in some of which 
I have acted. 

To return from a digression. Annie had 
met with two or three events. Not only 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 205 

the all-important one of having placed Ber- 
tha — the kind, gentle, forgiving Bertha — 
in a happier position, but she had, despite 
her resolution of renouncing poetry, actually 
written a poem, and was simple enough to 
believe she would find a publisher ! Sad, 
indeed bitter, was her disappointment wdien 
they civilly told her that these were not the 
days of poetry, and tried to talk her into the 
belief that railroad times annihilated the 
sense of the divine and beautiful ! One, to 
whom she tremblingly presented her MS., 
had the candour to acknowledge that there 
was merit in the performance — fancy and 
feeling ; but he advised Annie not to pub- 
lish. Poor aspirant ! hopeless, but struggling 
on ; how she turned back; day after day, 
with wearied steps, and a more wearied 
brain, after long walks between governess 
institutions and booksellers' shops, in all of 
which she seemed doomed to meet disap- 
pointment. 

One day, however, came an order from a 
scholastic agent to wait on him (the great 
man) in order to receive instructions as to 
the manner in which she (Miss Sherwood) 
should present herself before " a very distin- 
guished lady;" possibly an ex-queen, cer« 



206 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

tainly, at least a countess. Annie set forth, 
unwilling to lose even a chance, but very 
doubtful, after so many failures, of any good 
result. 

On her way to the agent's, she happened 
to meet Bertha's French friend. " Where 
are you going?" she inquired. 

" To the Governess' Institution," replied 
Annie . 

" Not the Union, I suppose ?" said a 
lively young woman accompanying Made- 
moiselle. 

cc No, not to H Street," said Annie, 

smiling sadly. 

" I asked you," said the French girl, 
"because my — the lady with whom I 
live, is looking out for a governess for her 
sister." 

"Are the children boys?" asked Annie, 
eagerly. 

" No ; girls." 

" Then I shall not do for them. I can 
only teach boys, for I never learned the 
piano, nor French, nor bead-work, nor 
crochet." 

" Oh, pray do not name music and French 
with those silly things !" said Emilie. 

" Don't they always go together ?" 



ANNE SHE11W00D. 207 

" I can't argue the point," replied Emilie ; 
" argument tires the brain, and makes one 
look old and ridee before their time. I 
think you will suit Mrs. Maberly. Her 
children are young, and can't want music 
yet ; when they do, I dare say she will be 
liberal, and give them a master." 

Annie cared little for her destination ; 
she did not even inquire in what county the 
possible patroness resided. She knew that 
" the world was not all before her, where to 
choose " — that she must go where necesshVv 
pointed, and she almost mistook hopelessness 
for resignation. 

It was agreed that she should call at four 
o'clock that afternoon to see Mrs. Maberly' s 
sister, or rather to be looked at by her, and 
then Annie prosecuted her walk to the 
scholastic agent's, who had summoned her 
to his august presence. By the agent she 
was directed to the distinguished lady in 
question, who interrogated her so impe- 
riously, that pride conquering prudence, the 
governess-candidate remarked, that the en- 
gagement proposed would not suit her at all, 
and so saying bowed herself out, perhaps as 
much to her own surprise as to that of the 
great lady. 



208 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

The "distinguished lady" was not really 
of high rank, but having had a seventh 
cousin elevated to the peerage by the Liberal 
administration, when desirous of securing a 
majority in the Upper House, she had suc- 
ceeded in persuading herself — and indeed 
in persuading some other people, which was 
more remarkable — that she was a member 
of a noble family, though her own vulgarity 
of mind and bearing largely contradicted 
the blazonry she arrogated to herself. 

When the contumacious governess had 
departed, the great lady's footman heard her 
murmur to herself that the world must be 
coming to an end ; there was no distinction 
of ranks left, mushroom parvenus affected 
dignity, and low-bred povert}' insulted opu- 
lence and fashion ! 

Poor distinguished lady ! the footman 
who had heard her murmur her pathetic 
complaint, was commissioned to carry a 
note, which she wrote in agitated haste, to 
the agent who had recommended ]\li>- 
Sherwood, complaining of his client, and 
conveying something like a threat to him- 
self, if he should in any way assist the 
delinquent's views. The distinguished lady 
added, that " Mr. could inform thai 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 209 

civil young person, Miss Smith, that she 
might have a chance of success, if she liked 
to call again." 

The " civil young person" was the daugh- 
ter of a respectable grocer in the Edgware 
Road. She went to the great lady's, was 
very well treated, and being certainly very 

worthy of Mrs. 's praises, was shortly 

promoted to the post of head toad-eater, in 
which capacity she spent several happy and 
profitable years. 

At four o'clock Annie stood before Mrs. 
Maberly's sister, Mrs. Stuart, who gra- 
ciously waved her hand, thereby intimating 
that she might be seated. She was then 
catechised at length, and at the same time 
instructed as to the demeanour she was 
to observe at Locksly Lodge, should she 
be so fortunate as to obtain the appoint- 
ment. 

Mrs. Stuart's hauteur as she leaned back 
in her lounge, was particularly galling to 
Annie, but she forcibly compressed her lips, 
and determined she would bridle her indig- 
nation this time. In her walk from the 
mansion of the one great lady she had 
offended, to that of the other whose scrutiny 
she was to undergo, she had had time to 

vol. i. p 



210 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

reflect, and she had thought sorrowfully 
over her young sister's position, and resolved 
that, for the love of dear Ellen, she w r ould 
curb her proud spirit, and try to please Mrs. 
Stuart. For herself, Annie would not have 
borne the humiliation of that lady's arro- 
gance another moment. 

" I suppose you have no objection to 
solitude ? You can bear it well, Miss Sher- 
wood?" 

" Perfectly well." 

" And you are a good walker ? You can 
amuse the children in their play-hours, I 
hope ?'' 

41 Anything which the duties of my office 
require." 

" You do not expect, of course, to be 
mixed up in any way with the family — or 
their friends?" and Mrs. Stuart coloured a 
little, the least in the world. 

" I have no such expectations or wishes/' 
answered Annie, with a perfectly unmoved 
face. 

" Then you may call again. Let me see ! 
"What is to-day ?" 

14 Wednesday." 

44 Then you may call next Monday. By 
that time I shall be able to receive an answer 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 211 

from my sister. Yes, you may call on 
Monday." 

Mrs. Stuart turned away, and took up a 
book; Annie felt herself dismissed, and 
retired. 



p 2 



212 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XII. 

On a cold January night, with very insuffi- 
cient wrappings to defend her from the 
inclement weather, Annie Sherwood stood in 

the front of a little inn at L , watching 

the unlading of an omnibus, which had 
brought her from the railway station to the 
little old-fashioned country town, near wdiich 
she was to reside in the family of Mr. 
Maberly. 

A hired conveyance was waiting to receive 
her and her luggage, as soon as she should 
have identified and received her little pro- 
perty. Little, indeed, it was ; but ere the 
object of securing it could be effected, the 
poor girl was half frozen, and trembling in 
every limb. At length Annie found herself 
rolling along a smooth, level road, and knew 
that in less than half an hour she must 
stand before her future patron. She was not 
nervous, but low and sad. She knew what 
she had to expect, or rather fancied she 
knew it ; and instead of being overwhelmed 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 213 

by the coming trial, she felt nerved to en- 
durance. A sudden jerk, caused by a stone 
in the road, and the coachman alighted, 
turned his horses to the right, and entered 
the gates of some enclosure. Then he re- 
mounted the coach-box, drove a short dis- 
tance, and stopped before a large house, 
dimly denned in the gloom of night. A 
sharp, sudden ring, the hall-door opened, a 
stream of light from within pierced the 
obscurity. 

Annie Sherwood's heart did not beat ; no, 
it stood still, quite still; it seemed dead; 
she pressed her hands on her chilled bosom, 
drew one long gasping breath, and stood in 
the hall, frightfully pale, amid a group of 
servants. That night the footman told the 
butler in confidence that Miss Sherwood 
was decidedly ugly, whereas the previous one 
before was a splendid woman ! 

A respectable elderly woman in black 
approached Annie, and civilly, even respect- 
fully, offered to conduct her to her rooms. 
She even carried her parcels for her ! unpre- 
cedented condescension in an upper servant ! 

Annie looked up in gratified surprise at 
the pleasant countenance beside her ; a ray 
of hope darted into her heart ; perhaps, after 



214 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

all, she should find friends there, perhaps 
receive a kind, warm welcome, that would 
come like a balm to a spirit deeply wounded, 
though it was not of a nature to be crushed. 

She followed her guide up a broad stair- 
case, and across a gallery lined on either 
side with books, whose aspect greeted the 
student girl like familiar friends, and 
strengthened her new-born hope. She was 
led into a large carpeted room, tolerably well 
furnished, through which a blazing fire cast 
the ruddy hue of cheerfulness. A comfort- 
able and plenteous supper was spread on the 
table, and looked very inviting to the hungry 
traveller. Leaning one arm on the mantel- 
shelf, stood a lady, with so bright and fasci- 
nating a smile that the gazer would have 
been too much charmed to note that the 
features it lit were quite irregular, and that 
the tall, elegant figure they surmounted, was 
thin, almost to attenuation. 

Annie looked at that beautiful smile, and 
it won on her so much that its light became 
instantly reflected on her own speaking- face. 
She advanced with more confidence, feeling 
sure that a friendly hand would be extended 
to welcome her ; but she was mistaken : Mrs. 
Maberly only bowed, and said something 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 215 

civil about cold and fatigue. Annie forced 
back tlie appearance of disappointment, and 
answering with quiet self-possession, seated 
herself by the fire. Mrs. Maberly was natu- 
rally good tempered, she wished to be land, 
but at the same time to keep the governess 
in her proper place ; after a few unim- 
portant remarks, she said, " Grood night, 
ma'am," and retired. 

Annie scarcely tasted her solitary supper, 
but sat by the fire brooding over melancholy 
thoughts, inspired by the unimportant con- 
versation of the last few minutes. At length 
she took a candle, and prepared to try the 
comfortable-looking bed, which awaited her 
in the adjoining room. It was only on the 
following morning she discovered, that her 
apartments were placed at quite the opposite 
end of the house to that part which the 
family occupied, indeed so distinct were they, 
that her isolation was complete, her only 
neighbours during the long stormy nights 
of winter being the rats and mice which 
usually inhabit old country-houses. Annie's 
heart was too full of sad cares of another 
kind to admit of nervous fears, or imagina- 
tive terrors ; moreover, she was naturally 
courageous ; had it been otherwise she might 



216 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

well have conjured up a ghostly visitant 
stalking along the deserted gallery and 
gliding among the hangings of her bed. As 
it was, she spent a sleepless night, and rose 
unrefreshed, to begin her new and untried 
duties. 

When Annie's pupils were presented to 
her, she was agreeably surprised. Some of 
them were intelligent, and all so young that 
they were as yet untaught in the world's 
ways. One was a beauty, and in her motherly 
pride for her favourite child, and her earnest 
wish that she should produce a favourable 
impression on the stranger, insignificant as 
that stranger might be, Mrs. Maberly mo- 
mentarily forgot her family pride, and spoke 
naturally, even in a friendly tone to the 
governess, but ever and anon she checked 
herself, and resumed a proper distance of 
manner. Annie noticed that Mrs. Maberly 
always addressed her as "ma'am," and 
thought it must be an aristocratic habit (as 
the ^ood Vicar of Wakefield lone; considered 
the swearing of the ladies of quality, who 
patronized himself and his daughters), until 
she heard afterwards from undoubted autho- 
rity, that her country education had made 
her mistake novelty for high-breeding. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 217 

On the whole, Mrs. Maberly's children 
seemed well pleased with their new instruc- 
tress, regarding her entirely in the light of a 
fresh playmate ; but when they came to sit 
down to lessons, they speedily broke out into 
open rebellion, and Annie feared she had 
become tamer to so many importations from 
a menagerie. 

People may mock at what they imagine 
petty grievances, but the poor governess's 
heart sinks within her when, sitting down 
with three or four sweet-looking children, 
whose mouths dimple into smiles, whose 
sunny eyes tell of nothing but mirth and 
good-humour, she finds that the least effort 
for their real instruction, the least conscien- 
tious discharge of duty, and the smiling 
cherubs, from long indulgence and pamper- 
ing, are on the instant transformed into 
bitter revolters, agitated by the counterfeit 
of those evil passions which we are apt 
merely to attribute to their elders. It is 
heart-sickening to witness an attempt at 
leading such perverted spirits, perverted, not 
by themselves, but by their parents' careless 
habits or moral weakness. 

Some of them might be rescued from de- 
struction, some even trained to angels, but 



218 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the teacher's hands are fettered ; she has been 
told in general terms that her charges are to 
do just as they like ! that she is not to force 
them on in their studies — that all things will 
come right with time — that "the beauty" 
(the fairest child goes by that name in the 
household) is delicate, and must be especially 
spared ! yet the governess will presently be 
reproached with the slow progress of her 
pupils ! Poor governess — yet poorer children ! 
Before Annie had been one month in the 
house, she witnessed the disgraceful scene of 
the beautiful Ellinor slapping her mother's 
face, in a fit of passion at having received 
some unwonted command. Mrs. Maberly 
had perhaps never before contradicted her 
sweet Ellinor — she was roused to anger, and 
returned the blow, not in the way of correc- 
tion, but reprisal. The beauty reared once 
more on tip-toe, and with her fairy, little 
hand again smote the cheek of her parent ; 
for awdiile the scene continued — a blow, 
and its return. It ended by the foolish 
mother begging a sort of pardon, a kiss was 
exchanged, and the quarrel made up, to be 
renewed, probably, when the beauty should 
be again provoked by the exercise of an au- 
thority not habitual. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 219 

Annie Sherwood, with all her imagined 
knowledge of the world, was still too unso- 
phisticated to view without shuddering hor- 
ror, such scenes as we have attempted to 
describe. She had seen the children of her 
country neighbours sometimes wilful, some- 
times injured by injudicious training, but 
she had no conception of the school, in which 
nearly all the children of those considering 
themselves the higher classes, are brought 
up. 

Annie's heart sank within her, not so 
much at her own uncomfortable position in 
a family wherein selfishness and disorder 
reigned paramount, as from the dread of 
finding that Ellen was equally tried. Mrs. 
Maberly's children were not only idle in the 
common acceptation of the word, but were 
entirely wanting in energy for every purpose 
of life, except quarrelling and annoying one 
another. Their toys and varied means of 
amusement had lost all power to charm. 
They were all, especially the beauty, as com- 
pletely biases as the world's worn-out vota- 
ries. If Annie tried to teach them a new 
game, they were immediately wearied; did 
she read them a story, they gave their languid 
attention for a few minutes, and then insisted 



220 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

that that should be broken off and another 
tale begun. 

Ellinor Maberly had very little sense, 
and having been so frequently told of her 
exceeding loveliness, frankly declared that 
she need learn nothing — she was beautiful, 
that was enough ! 

Of course the labours of the governess 
among those poor children were very hope- 
less, but she had a woman's heart, and soon 
grew attached to them. They had their 
bright spots, they were very loving, and 
might have been rendered docile by gentle 
firmness ; but then they were never to be 
contradicted ; and indeed at the most trifling 
opposition, they filled the house with cries 
more piercing than the torture has drawn 
from man} r a martyr. What was the gover- 
ness to do ? complain ? to whom ? To the 
mother, who allowed her face to be slapped 
by her (mild ? To the father, who appeared 
ignorant of everything concerning his 
children ? 

Annie had been several weeks in the 
house before she had once met Mr. Maberly. 

Should she attempt correction herself, she 
would immediately lose her employment. 

"Do }'ou like company, Miss Sherwood?" 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 221 

asked Annie's eldest pupil one evening, when 
she had been, much to her own satisfaction, 
arrayed in white, with a broad blue sash, to 
go down to dessert, for there was a dinner 
party. " Do you like company ?" 

" I like good company, Geraldine ; that is, 
I like conversing with intelligent, well- 
informed people. But why do you ask ?" 

" Oh, nothing particular; only I was think- 
ing you would like to be down-stairs this 
evening. Now, wouldn't you ?" 

" No, indeed, Geraldine, I should not." 

" Oh, but I know you would ; you're only 
telling a fib, Miss Sherwood." 

" I don't know such things as ' fibs/ 
Geraldine," said iinnie, seriously ; " and I 
never tell what is not true; it would be wrong 
and dishonourable." 

" But if you're not found out, Miss Sher- 
wood ?" 

" Oh, Geraldine ! I am shocked to hear 
you talk this way," said Annie. 

" Now, pray don't scold me, Miss Sher- 
wood," said the girl, petulantly, and putting 
up her shoulder ; " it's very unkind of you ; 
you'll make me cry, you know you will, and 
then I shall look a horrid fright at dessert. 
I am sure I have been kind to you, for I 



222 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

asked mamma to let you go down to see the 
company, only she said she wouldn't !" 

" I am obliged to you, dear Geraldine, for 
thinking of me," said Annie, colouring with 
mortification ; " but I beg you'll never do 
such a thing again, for I am much happier 
up-stairs." 

" But I shall do it again, though," replied 
the child, " that I shall, for Uncle Hal says 
he is quite curious to see you. He asked 
me if you were pretty ; of course I said no, 
for you know r you're not at all pretty, Miss 
Sherwood. You are not fair, and you've an 
ugly nose, and your eyes are so big and grey, 
and your gown, why your gown is quite 
shabby ! Now, is not all that true ?" she 
added, looking quite triumphant at her own 
sagacity. 

" Quite true," said Annie, trying to laugh. 
" Yes, I am dark, I have grey eyes, and a 
bad nose. My gown is, as you say, very 
shabby. But you should not say these 
things. I don't mind — that is, I don't mind 
very much ; but it hurts people's feelings to 
hear " 

" What does hurting people's feelings 
mean?" interrupted Geraldine; but just 
then she was summoned to dessert. " Do I 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 223 

look nice ? do I look pretty ?" she asked, 
quickly. 

" No, Greraldine, you look " 

" How do I look ?" 

" Wilful and conceited l" said Annie, as 
the offended girl flounced out of the room. 

Annie did not speak thus because she was 
mortified ; but from what she believed to be 
her duty. She had no personal vanity to 
occasion mortification, therefore Greraldine' s 
coarse remarks had not galled her, but she 
was greatly annoyed at the supposition that 
Mrs. Maberly might imagine she had 
prompted Greraldine's request to admit the 
solitary governess to her circle. The next 
day, Mrs. Maberly said to her, " I should 
have asked you down-stairs yesterday even- 
ing, Miss Sherwood, but it would not be 
quite the thing. I have so many brothers I" 

" Thank you," replied the governess, " I 
find my time quite filled." 

Annie had habitually such command over 
her emotions, that her feelings were not 
betrayed, and Mrs. Maberly left her, with 
the promise of sending her a nice book and 
some patterns for collars ; and bore away 
with herself the comfortable assurance that 
she might pursue her selfish policy without 



224 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

making her governess discontented. As for 
her dress, no doubt Geraldine's mother appre- 
ciated its shabbiness as much as she did ; 
but then, who would see her toilette, shut 
up in that remote room at the top of the 
house ? On the whole, Mrs. Maberly liked 
Annie Sherwood, that is, she suited her pur- 
pose, so she did not ill-treat her ; but she 
took care to show her a back staircase, and 
hinted that she had much better use it — of 
course, entirely for her own convenience. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 225 



CHAPTEE XIII. 

Annie Sherwood seldom strayed from the 
precincts of her school-room, she had no 
reason for passing beyond. Her pnpils dis- 
liked walking, so of course they never walked, 
and she had little inducement to wander out 
alone. If she did so, it was with such a 
feeling of utter solitude, that she hastened 
back to the gloom of her own apartments, 
where, from the hour in which the children 
left her, no human foot but her own re- 
sounded till the following morning, unless 
it were that of the servant who had greeted 
her on her arrival, and whom Annie soon 
learned to thank as the thoughtful provider 
of the many comforts with which she was 
furnished — comforts which were so utterly at 
variance with the habitual negligence of the 
family towards her, that they seemed at first 
to have dropped direct from the skies. 

Mrs. Maberly had, as she told Annie, a 
number of brothers. One of them was 
peculiarly interesting, on account of his 

VOL. I. Q 



226 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

having endured some real or imaginary per- 
secution. He had challenged his commander, 
who had in some way offended his dignity, 
perhaps by exacting more subordination 
than Mr. Augustus Fitzgerald Oakley 
thought proper to be yielded by one of his 

descent and position in the county of . 

Through some inconceivable mistake, or 
some gross blunder on the part of Captain 
Blessington, of H.M.S. " Medusa," he had 
failed to discover the immense merits of 
Lieut. Augustus Fitzgerald Oakley, and had 
io-norantly confounded him with the sons of 
many other country squires of small for- 
tunes and large pretensions, and had con- 
sequently made no distinction in discipline 
between the said Lieut. Augustus Fitzgerald 
Oakley, and Lieut. Jones, Lieut. White, 
Lieut. Smith, Lieut. Brown, Lieut. Thomp- 
son, or — any other lieutenant ! The conse- 
quence was, that Lieut. Augustus Fitzgerald 
Oakley watched his opportunity, caught at 
some words of disparagement supposed to 
be uttered by the Captain, and repeated to 
Oakley by an empty-headed woman, and 
boldly challenged him. Capt. Blessington 
was a man of sense; his known bravery 
made it unnecessary for him to establish liis 



ANNE SHE11W00D. 2:27 

reputation by blowing out the Lieutenant's 
brains, and he wisely declined compromising 
his own dignity by fighting his subordi- 
nate. On this the fury of Lieut. A. F. 0. 
raged uncontrollably ; he did everything 
insulting which he possibly could to arouse 
the spirit of Captain Blessington and force 
him to fight, but his expectations were dis- 
appointed ; instead of meeting his com- 
mander in the field, he awoke one morning 
to find himself under arrest ! 

Poor unhappy Augustus Fitzgerald Oak- 
ley ! he was not literary, or he might have 
written verses ; not a philosopher, or he 
might have pondered how Pompey fell, or 
other men at least as great as Pompey or 
himself ! 

It was believed by some that Captain 
Blessington would have made strenuous 
efforts to soften the sentence of the court- 
martial to which Oakley's own intemperate 
folly had brought him, but his threats con- 
tinued so very warlike, that the only means 
of taming the belligerent seemed to be to 
deprive him of his sword. So Lieut. Augustus 
Fitzgerald Oakley was broken, and her Ma- 
jesty's royal navy deprived of its brightest 
ornament (in his own estimation), in fact, of 

Q 2 



228 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the only man capable, should opportunity 
offer, of eclipsing- the immortal names of 
Howe and Nelson. 

Since the decision of the venal court — as 
the ex-Lieut, was pleased to call the just 
tribunal which had per force condemned 
him — Mr. Augustus Fitzgerald Oakley had 
resided on his paternal estate, a dilapidated 
old place, which he fondly imagined one of 
the most valuable in the county. He had 
lived in retirement, from which few of the 
neighbouring families cared to draw him, as 
it was generally known, that he solaced him- 
self for past misfortunes by low pleasures. 
Those who lived at a distance, and knew 
him only through newspaper reports (espe- 
cially the ladies), had transformed him into 
a fieros de Boman, imagining, as man}' people 
do, that misfortune and merit are insepa- 
rable. 

On the whole, A. F. 0. was rather what 
the French call redevable to the circumstances 
which had occurred ; as to them he owed a 
species of notoriety .which he and his rela- 
tions mistook for celebrity, and which he 
certainly never would have enjoyed had it 
not been for the timely persecution of Capt. 
Blessington. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 2.29 

Among the ladies whose imagination, if 
not their sensibilities, had been touched by 
reading the newspaper paragraphs of which 
Oakley was the hero, was Annie Sherwood. 
His apparently gallant spirit had taught her 
to extenuate conduct, which her principles 
could not approve, and the issue of the trial 
secured her strongest, warmest sympathies 
for the supposed sufferer. The affair was 
not recent, but she remembered it well, and 
when the communicative Greraldine told her 
that the hero was her uncle, Annie was not 
only interested, she was positively anxious 
to see this " observed of all observers," as 
she believed Mr. Oakley to be, and fully 
expected to find him, "the glass of fashion 
and the mould of form ;" in fact, in every 
Way interesting. 

Thenceforward, for one long month Annie 
had an object in view that broke the mono- 
tony of her existence. She liked (herself 
unseen) to take her station by the window, 
and watch for his possible coming. Late 
one night she stood by that window — not 
looking for the hero of her imagination, but 
watching the troop of stars come forth from 
the prevailing gloom, like bright hopes 
arising in a despairing mind; and as she 



230 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

gazed, the poor solitary governess wondered 
whether any stars would ever come forth to 
light the midnight of her darkened life ! It 
was spring-tide, but still cold, nevertheless 
Annie Sherwood threw open the window ; 
and believing that at that hour she must be 
perfectly unobserved, she leaned for some 
time on the sill, resting her head upon her 
hand. Presently she thought she heard a 
rustling among the leaves (some of which 
still strewed the ground), but after listening 
for a while, she persuaded herself that it 
was a nervous fancy, and looked neither for 
an apparition ghostly nor bodily. A little 
later, the full-orbed moon came forth, and 
dimming the stars, gloriously lit up the lawn 
and shrubberies. It w r as a lovely night 
indeed, and Annie repeated to herself the 
lines from The Merchant of Venice, where 
Lorenzo says to Jessica — 

"How fair the moonlight sleeps upon that bank ;" 

and she w r anted some one with her to share 
the pleasure she felt in gazing on such a 
scene. She arose, and sought the only com- 
panion of her solitude, a book ; she needed 
no lamp but the serene light of heaven, and 
she sat down again by the window and read 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 231 

The Martyrs of Science (wherein science be- 
comes poetry), and while she communed 
with the sonl of Gralileo, she read too, in his 
book, the firmament. 

Again the sound that she had heard, like 
footsteps, struck her ear, and then a tap at 
one of the lower windows. A tall figure 
cast its shadow on the broad moonlight, and 
a young man stepped forward and paced up 
and down, not on the gravel path, but on 
the soft, yielding grass. His slight figure 
seemed well formed, and as he took off his 
hat, and shook back the dark locks from his 
brow, that brow, and the hand which re- 
vealed it, looked white as December's snow- 
wreath. Annie forgot the natural effect of 
moonlight ; forgot, moreover, that 

" Distance lends enchantment to the view," 

and mentally pronounced that Augustus 
Oakley (for who else could it be) was in- 
deed the " mould of form" her fancy had 
pictured, and she paraphrased Borneo s ex- 
clamation into 

" His beauty hangs upon the wings of night 
Like a rich jewels in an Ethiop's ear V\ 

Then she smiled at herself, and thought how 
she would have laughed at Ellen, if she had 



232 A^'NE SHERWOOD. 

thus admired a handsome stranger. Still, 
though she mocked herself, Annie would 
probably have dreamed of the hero of the 
night, had not her bud of romance been 
cruelly snapped from its stem by a veiy 
vulgar reality. A circumstance occurred to 
account for Mr. Oakley's apparent admira- 
tion of a moonlight scene, which he might 
have enjoyed equally on his own lawn : it 
was soon apparent that he had an appoint- 
ment with a servant-maid of his sister's, 
whom Annie afterwards accidentally disco- 
vered to be a young woman who waited on 
the school-room party, wearing no cap, but 
very carefully-dressed flaxen hair, and boast- 
ing a pair of deep blue eyes, as blue as glass 
beads, and very much like them ! Annie 
Sherwood shut the window and went to bed, 
rather chilled and disappointed in her little 
romance, but fortunately saved from the 
humiliation and sorrow, of becoming too 
deeply interested in her patroness's libertine 
brother. 

A few days after, as Annie was walking 
through one of the shrubberies, she overtook 
Mrs. Maberly's youngest child — a little 
boy, scarcely two years old, who had strayed 
forth unnoticed. She took the little thing 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 233 

in her arms, and was coaxing him into a 
better acquaintance, when a gentleman 
stepped forth from another path, and began 
to play with the child over Annie's shoulder, 
but without speaking or bowing to her. 
He however quite made up for his silence 
by the unscrupulous impertinence with which 
he examined her half-averted face. Appa- 
rently the examination did not please 
him j for as Annie was going to place 
the child on the walk, and leave it to his 
care, the gentleman (?) whistled and turned 
away. 

Annie had not failed to recognise the hero 
of the moonlight adventure, though the 
glare of day stripped him of many advan- 
tages, with which the goddess of night had 
invested him. He was good-looking, cer- 
tainly; but the bright, pinky hue of his 
cheeks gave him at once an effeminate and a 
vulgar stamp, and yet worse, he looked 
what he was — a brainless fool. He was, 
after all, not the interesting object of Cap- 
tain Blessington's persecution, for in the 
course of the evening Geraldine (who was 
always unwilling to suppress any informa- 
tion she possessed) exclaimed, "Miss Sher- 
wood, I was quite right in saying you were 



234 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

ugly ! Uncle Hal says you are a fright, and 

a dowdy, and " 

" You need not tell me the rest." 
" Oh, but I must ! He says he was very 
curious to see you (he always is curious 
when any new nurse or maid comes), but 
now he has seen you, he never wants to look 
at your face again ! I heard him tell mamma 
so (I stood behind the arbutus hedge to 
listen) ; and mamma laughed very much, and 
said she knew him and Uncle Augustus far 
too well to have a pretty governess, and that 
she was very glad you were ugl}', but that 
you suited her very well, and so Uncle Hal 
must not tease and make fun of you, but 
leave you alone." 

It was all in vain that Annie tried to set 
before Geraldine the impropriety of listening 
to conversations not meant for her ear. 
She did not seem to know what " wrong ' 
meant ; so Annie tried to explain by Ellen's 
word " sinful," and was met by the startling 
remark, from a girl scarcely eleven, " But 
perhaps the Bible is not true ! Uncle Hal 
told me it wasn't ; and if he is right, of 
course it's no matter if we do bad things, as 
we sha'n't be punished for them ! 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 235 

The governess heard the child's speech 
with the deepest consternation, and gazed 
on her with a conntenance so full of sorrow 
and pity, that the girl's heart was touched, 
and its best feelings awakened. She threw 
her arms round Annie, expressed contrition, 
and promised not to say such things again, 
though she added, naturally enough, " I am 
always hearing them from my relations, 
though papa and mamma don't talk so. 
Uncle Augustus never goes to church ; 
Uncle Hal does sometimes, but then it's to 
see some one. I know who 1" she added, 
slily. 

" But, Greraldine, you promised me that 
you would try to avoid saying or doing 
wrong things. Now, if you really mean to 
keep your word, you must resolve never to 
listen when your parents or uncles are 
talking ; or, if you hear anything acciden- 
tally, not to repeat it." 

" But don't you like to hear everything, 
Miss Sherwood ?" 

" No, indeed, there are many things I 
would much rather not hear, I assure 
you." 

" Well, I can't understand that at all ! I 



236 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

like to hear everything that happens, and 
more too. I would much rather people 
would invent something to tell me, than 
that I should hear nothing new. Oh, I 
must tell you one thing — I really must. Do 
you know what the nurserymaid says ? She 
thinks it quite beneath her to wait on the 
school-room, and says you're a hired servant 
just as much as she is ! Uncle Hal thinks 
her very pretty ; do you call her pretty?" 

" Oh, Geraldine, your word is already 
broken; you promised me " 

" I'll try and keep my promise, indeed I 
will. I mean to begin to-morrow, but habit 
is so strong !" 

" Strong indeed !" said the disheartened 
governess, shaking her head. 

In the meanwhile, Geraldine rushed to 
the window. " Come here, Miss Sherwood ! 
come here !" she cried suddenly. Willing to 
please her by compliance, Annie went over 
to the window. A gentleman was at the 
door on horseback, his hat was off, his face 
fully revealed. He was about forty ; plain 
would be a very mild word to describe his 
coarse features, unredeemed by any pleasing 
or intelligent expression. The only thing 
that countenance spoke was fierce passion 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 237 

and gross sensuality ; his figure was short 
and thick set. " There ! that is Uncle 
Augustus, Miss Sherwood; the one I told 
you about, who wanted to fight with Captain 
Blessington !" 



238 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

" My best-loved Annie, — 

" How welcome your kind letters are to 
me, doubly welcome since their cheerful tone 
assures me that you are not unhappy. I 
prayed and hoped it might be so, till at last 
I began to feel confident that your merits 
must command the consideration they de- 
serve. 

" You have told me to write about myself 
(though I would much rather talk of you, at 
once an easier and a pleasanter task), and I 
will try to do as you wish. In my existence 
no change ever comes. I am sure I ought 
to be contented, for no one ever finds fault 
with me, and when my day's work is over, 
which it is at eight o'clock, I am left entirely 
to myself. I believe the Ferrers actually 
forget my existence. Of course the evening 
is quite at my own disposal. I am sorry to 
say that there is no piano in the school-room, 
(I give the children their music lessons in 
the drawing-room, when the family are out 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 239 

driving or walking,) so that I cannot practise. 
There is often music down- stairs in the even- 
ings ; I used to leave my door open to listen, 
hut it made me feel sad, so now I shut my- 
self in and read, when I can get a hook. 

" Miss Ellen used to come for an hour 
every evening to talk to me, which made me 
feel very grateful, I thought it so kind j but 
she tried so hard to convince me that our 
dear father's system of religion was errone- 
ous, that at last her visits became more pain- 
ful than pleasant. She was then very low 
church, but now has gone into the contrary 
extreme. But I must tell you some of the 
late events of this little world of Elmgrove. 
I should not feel it right to talk of the 
family I live with to any one else, but you, 
dear Annie, you are myself! 

" You remember that in one of my former 
letters I spoke of a new curate coming, and 
of Miss Ellen's dread of Puseyism arriving 
in his train ? Well, he did come, that 
dreaded curate, and all her predictions were 
strangely verified. Mr. Newingham preached 
in a surplice the first Sunday after his arrival, 
and showed various other signs of Oxford 
training. Mr. Pendex — Mr. Weston is rather 
lax, though it seems unkind to say so of him, 



240 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

and perhaps he is better described as an easy, 
good-natured man, who, unless people do 
something very glaring, w r ill see no fault in 
them, and lets them have all their own way. 
Mr. Newingham is a great zealot ; but seems 
amiable and pleasant, and certainly is 
remarkably handsome. The Squire of Elm- 
grove — Le. 9 my patron — is very much opposed 
to Puseyism ; he not only refuses to invite 
Mr. Newingham, but after remonstrating 
with the Vicar on the impropriety of his 
choice, has grown quite cool to him, and 
will not attend church when the curate 
preaches. The ladies of the family, however, 
attend, and you w T ill scarcely believe me 
when I tell you that Miss Ellen was con- 
verted almost immediately to the Tractarian 
views. I am sure she is perfectly sincere, 
and she certainly does a great deal of good, 
incessantly visiting the poor, and schools, 
&c. She is the only member of the family 
personally acquainted with the curate ; of 
course they are drawn together by his duties, 
and the good works in which she delights. I 
should not be surprised, with her enthusiastic 
character, if she became a Sellonite. 

" There is something of a poetical and ima- 
ginative cast in this Puseyism. I like their 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 241 

beautiful churches, their grandchoral services, 
and their self-denying charities, but I cannot 
get reconciled to a system which magnifies 
human merits ; surely we have nothing to 
boast. I have positively caught myself 
writing reflections for which I have not head 
enough, so I must return to Mr. JSTewingham. 
He has a fine voice, and his preaching is 
often effective in matter, always so in man- 
ner j but I wish he would talk to us a little 
more of God and the Bible, and a little less 
of ' the church !' Our dear father used to 
explain ' the church' as formed of all 
believers and doers of the Word ; Mr. 
Newingham's theology makes it a body of 
ecclesiastics. 

"Poor Miss Ellen is getting into great 
trouble at home on account of her new 
views. Her father is vexed and angry, her 
sisters and Mr. Vincent (he almost lives 
here), rally her unmercifully. She does not 
now bring forward texts as she used to do 
when assailed, but quotes instead the Fathers, 
and ' Tracts for the Times/ She seems born 
to be a martyr ; but she takes persecution 
so joyfully, that I suspect she has either the 
fancied consciousness of meriting reward, or 
else she is attached to Mr. Newingham, and 

VOL. I. R 



242 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

bears all for his sake. Perhaps it is so, they 
are so much together. 

" Now, Annie, you must not think, from 
what I am going to tell you, that I have 
grown vain and foolish, for I know he is 
only amusing himself at my expense ; but if 
I chance to meet Mr. Francis Vincent alone, 
(though he never addresses one word to me, 
or one look, in the presence of any other 
person,) he immediately begins talking, and 
pays me the most exaggerated compli- 
ments. 

" If he sees any one approaching at such 
times, he darts off, as if detected in a crime ! 
You must not fancy I am flattered or pleased 
by these attentions ; he is the last man whose 
compliments I should value ; and he is on 
other occasions so grossly rude, that I must 
despise him. Only fancy his meeting me in 
the hall, walking before me into the dining- 
room to luncheon, and seating himself with- 
out offering me a chair, and perhaps the very 
next day telling me I am an angel, and that 
he adores me. I believe he knows pretty 
well what I think of him. I am not sur- 
prised Miss Ellen admires Mr. Kewingham, 
however extravagant his views may be : he is 
evidently a highly-bred, as well as a clever 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 243 

man ; she must contrast his polish with her 
cousin's coarse vulgarity. 

" Mrs. Ferrers continually lies on the sofa, 
but I cannot tell why, for she looks quite 
strong and well. When her husband is 
away, the young ladies are often very rude 
to her, but she does not mind it, and reads 
all the new novels with uninterrupted plea- 
sure. 

" My charges do not improve, I am 
sorry to say ; perhaps I have a wrong 
method with them, but I am afraid they are 
learning nothing. They so often run away, 
and hide themselves at lesson-hours, that a 
great part of my time is consumed in hunt- 
ing for them ; it is usually on these occasions 
I meet that odious Mr. Vincent. I never 
called any one odious before. You see the 
commerce of the world makes one wicked ! 
but indeed, he is very disagreeable; you 
would almost hate him. 

" I am very much interested in what you 
told me of your discovery; I mean, that 
Mr. Augustus Oakley is Mrs. Maberly's 
brother. Perhaps, by this time, you have 
seen him ; pray tell me exactly what he is 
like. I can't help fancying him something 
of a hero. I declare your going to his sister's 

r 2 



244 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

may prove quite a little romance ! After 
all, though, one can't help sympathising with 
such an interesting person ; it was wrong in 
him to want to fight a duel. So don't lose 
your heart to him. / should not like you to 
marry him, Annie, unless he were very, very 
sorry for having sent a challenge. 

" Your loving sister, 

Ellen." 

Poor simple Ellen ! Your letter must 
stand as you wrote it ! But what a day- 
dream ! Mr. Augustus Fitzgerald Oakley 
marry your plain little governess sister I 
Silly, silly Ellen ! you have been poring 
over fairy tales by the light of your single 
dim candle ! Mr. Augustus Fitzgerald 
Oakley ! What next ? a royal duke ? 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 245 



CHAPTEK XV. 

" A dismal letter, dear Annie, I must send 
you this time ; I am afraid I must, though 
I had quite resolved only to write cheer- 
fully, but I have been so vexed and annoyed 
lately that I cannot refrain from telling you 
of my little trials. I have had one pleasant 
surprise however, but I hope you wont 
laugh at me for calling it pleasant, when 
you know what it is 1 Indeed, I have had 
two surprises lately ; not the least has been 

j 

to recognise in a young relation of Mrs. 
Ferrers', who is spending his vacation at 
Elm grove, the jjreicx chevalier who de- 
livered me from a monster, and so strongly 
recommended to us the study of Froissart. 
He is a very nice, amiable, high-spirited 
lad, as his timely assistance once testified. 
Perhaps I should not have recognised him, 
only that he came into the school-room one 
day, and turning over some books, in the 
course of conversation, exclaimed — c Have 
you ever read Eroissart, Miss Sherwood?' 



246 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

concluding with, £ Pray do read Froissart, if 
you have not.' Mr. Beresford, for that is 
his name, certainly did not recognise me the 
least ; but involuntarily I laughed so heartily 
that I was heard in another part of the 
house. Little did I know the mortifica- 
tion which that unfortunate laugh was to 
cause me ! 

"Mr. Beresford looked rather surprised 
and offended. Of course I apologized, and, 
regarding him in the light of a youth, I 
think that when I begged his pardon I 
shook hands with him. I told him that 
I was the person to whom he had some 
months before shown great kindness, and he 
appeared much pleased at the recognition. 
I, too, was pleased, for of course after what 
had passed I felt that we could not be quite 
strangers to each other. I am afraid you 
will think I acted imprudently in recalling 
our unpleasant adventure ; but I think, 
indeed I am sure, our young knight -errant 
has too much discretion to publish it. 

" The next day, when I took the children 
out, young Beresford went with us ; and I 
was very glad to have him to talk to, for 
though a mere boy in years, he is very 
sensible and well read. But oh, Annie 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 247 

dear ! it seems that I committed a grievous 
indiscretion in allowing a youth of sixteen 
to accompany my pupils and myself. When 
we returned, Miss Ferrers was standing at 
one of the windows, and looked so extremely 
ill-natured, that her very glance made me 
nervous. I had scarcely taken my bonnet 
off before I was summoned to Mrs. Ferrers' 
presence. After motioning me to draw near 
the sofa, she began in her usual gentle voice 
(a very gentle one it is), to this effect : ' I 
am grieved and pained, Miss Sherwood, after 
the good opinion I had formed of one so 
strongly recommended to me by my sister, 
to be constrained to remonstrate with you 
on the levity, not to say the gross impro- 
priety of your conduct !' I was shocked, 
Annie ! completely stunned ! The very ex- 
clamations of surprise and pain which I 
might naturally have uttered, were checked 
by the choking tears which gushed forth in 
spite of me. I could not ask an explanation 
in words, but I suppose my face of dismay 
spoke for me. * The preceptress of youth is 
particularly called on for discretion,' con- 
tinued Mrs. Ferrers ; ' and a young person 
in your position, should be doubly careful to 
evince, by the modesty of her demeanour, 



it i 



(C 



248 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

that she has no intention or desire to lay 
snares for any gentleman !' 

Snares I' I gasped out. 
Yes, Miss Sherwood,' she repeated, in 
the same soft voice ; ' Snares. I must re- 
quest that while you are in my ser — my em- 
ployment, you will refrain from receiving 
gentlemen in the school-room. 5 

" ' I have never received any gentlemen 
there/ I replied; and all this time I was 
standing at the foot of Mrs. Ferrers' couch, 
and feeling quite sick and faint. 

" ' Can you deny Mr. Beresford having 
heen there yesterday?' I was going to say 
that I regarded him as a mere boy, but Mrs. 
Ferrers did not intend me to answer; she 
was now growing warmer. 'Nay; do not 
add duplicity to impropriety,' she exclaimed; 
' not only was he there, but you were seen, 
through the open door, holding his hand, or 
he yours, which is much the same thing. 
And I find that this morning he has accom- 
panied you in your walk ! You may now 
retire ; your youth and inexperience induce 
me to be lenient; but remember, it is the 
last time I can pass by such glaring miscon- 
duct ; if it occurs again, you Avill leave !' 

" Oh, Annie ! my agony at these unmerited 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 249 

accusations made me feel as if my heart 
would burst. I tried hard to speak, but 
words utterly failed me ; my breath came in 
gasps, and I stood riveted to the spot. Mrs. 
Ferrers waved me away, with one word — 
f Remember !' and turned again to her book. 
Still I stood; I had no power to move. 
Young Beresford came in ; he looked sur- 
prised and sorry to see me in tears. But 
there is an intuitive delicacy of feeling in 
that boy, and he uttered no exclamation. 
When, at length, I turned to leave the 
room, he hastened to open the door for me, 
and, as he did so, bowed. 

" A loud, ringing laugh from a bay-window 
at the end of the room made me start ; it 
came from Miss Ferrers, who had been 
present, though I was quite unconscious of 
it, and had witnessed the whole scene of 
humiliation. I went straight to my work ; 
my pupils were doubly troublesome, or I 
less patient than usual. I cried nearly all 
day like a child. From that time Miss 
Ferrers and Miss Sophia, especially the 
former, have sneered at me whenever we 
have met. Sometimes I think they have 
noticed Mr. Vincent's talking to me now 
and then, and imagine that I encourage 



250 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

him ; if so, they little know me, for I have 
a complete aversion to him, and always 
shim his path. If Miss Ferrers is attached 
to her cousin, there is every excuse to be 
made for her; and in any case, I must try 
to avoid all angry and unforgiving feelings, 
though it is hard to be accused of conduct 
which makes one tremble to think of only. 

" When I had a little recovered from my 
agitation, I was tempted, very strongly 
tempted, to return to the drawing-room, and 
tell Mrs. Ferrers I would leave. But then I 
thought over the trials we went through last 
year, and our immense difficulties before we 
could obtain situations, and I determined to 
pray for patience, and hope on, feeling sure 
that all will work for good in the end. 

" I am not the only one in trouble ; poor 
Miss Ellen is in great grief. I told you a 
great deal about Mr. Newingham in my 
last letter. He is certainly a man of talent, 
but he has introduced so man}' innova- 
tions in the service, and Mr. "Weston has 
let him have so much of his own way, that 
nearly all the people have deserted the 
Church, and are gone over to the Wesleyans. 
One day he actually retired from the altar 
backwards, bowing all the time ; and, in 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 251 

doing so, he gave ns the opportunity of 
observing, that he had a small circle on the 
crown of his head shaven, like the tonsure of 
the Eoman Catholic priests. 

a 'To keep him in the curacy after this 
discovery was quite impossible, though he 
was a great favourite with Mr. Weston, who 
was sincerely grieved to part with him. But 
he is gone, and poor Miss Ellen is broken- 
hearted. She looks so wretched, I am afraid 
she will have a fit of illness ; and, I am sorry 
to say, that instead of trying to console her, 
her sisters laugh and sneer at her openly, and 
most unkindly encourage Mr. Vincent to do 
the same. She has begun to come back to 
me in the evenings, but she often sits with- 
out saying a w r ord. I wish so much that I 
could do something to comfort her ; she has 
always been kind to me. Young Beresford 
is gone. He never came into the school- 
room again after that day: I asked him not 
to do so, and he complied without asking 
me for any reason. He knew that I should 
not like to give an explanation. Only think, 
Annie! the day before he left he rode over 
to Groverton, and returned with a parcel 
under his arm. Well, you will say there 
was nothing wonderful in that; but after 



252 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

he was gone, I found on the school-room 
table such a beautiful copy of Froissart. He 
must have put it there while I was out. He 
had written my name in it, and added, — ' In 
remembrance of the 10th of September.' I 
think that must have been about the date of 
our first meeting. Ah! why should the 
innocent friendship of this good youth be 
construed into evil ! 

"But, Annie dear, I have not yet told 
you of my other pleasant surprise — I have 
put that off till the last. I am like Miranda 
in The Tempest, 

' I weep at that I'm glad of !' 

and yet, perhaps } r ou will think it a mere 
trifle when I have told you. But it is so 
pleasant to see a face that is not quite 
strange when one lives among those who 
will always continue distant strangers, even 
if I remain with them for years. 

" You see I am beginning to know the 
world, and have always seen many ot^ nvy 
fanciful visions (of realizing friends in a 
governess life) melt away 

• Like snow-flakes in the river !' 

But to return to him, to my story I mean. 
I fear I am writing quite incoherently. The 
very Sunday after poor Mr. Newingham's 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 253 

abrupt dismissal, a candidate for the curacy 
preached, and oh, Annie ! I was so surprised 
to find it was none other than that Mr. 
Stan cliff — but perhaps you forget the name. 
I mean the gentleman in shabby black, with 
the torn cuff, whom we saw at Mr. Major's 
one day. Do you remember the circum- 
stance ? I am sure you must — it was on 
the 8th of June. The reason I remember 
it so well is, because you joked me so much 
about him. The surprise of seeing him, and 
the remembrance of having met him at the 
pawnbroker's once, together with the recol- 
lection of your jokes, made me grow quite 
scarlet, and I am almost sure that he looked 
at me, as he came down the pulpit stairs. 

"He preached such a beautiful sermon, 
Annie, so different to Mr. Newingham's, so 
very different, but just as clever, or more so. 
The Squire went into the vestry to make 
his acquaintance, and brought him home to 
luncheon. He sat opposite me at table, and 
though we had not been introduced, spoke 
to me several times, and I am sure I made 
awkward, silly answers, for I felt that every 
one at the table was watching me. What 
an uncomfortable feeling that is ! 

" That evening Mrs. Ferrers sent for me 



254 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

to her dressing-room, and desired me to give 
up curls, remarking that plain hair was much 
more modest and becoming for a young 
person in my situation. I have changed my 
style accordingly, though it does seem very 
strange not to leave me a free choice in such 
a trifle ; but I thought it best to yield. 

"I am certain Mr. Stancliff knew me 
asrain : I wonder whether he remembers 
the pawnbroker's shop as well as I do ? Is 
it not very strange that I should meet him 
here? By the bye, remember the spoons, 
Annie ; the man told me that if we did not 
pay back the money by the time the year 
was finished, that the spoons would be his, 
and he could sell them if he liked. 

" Yes, it is very strange I should meet 
Mr. Stancliff here, and he is so amiable 
and pleasant, it is almost like seeing an old 
friend. He certainly must have known me, 
for he called me by my name as if it were 
quite familiar to him, and when he went away 
after luncheon the other day, he shook hands 
with me. How different Mr. Vincent looks 
to Mr. Stancliff; the one so rough and un- 
couth, the other so gentle and polished. Do 
you know of whom he makes me think ? — of 
course I mean Mr. Stancliff — of Melancthon, 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 255 

the gentle, elegant-minded Melancthon ! 
He is quite as clever as Mr. Newingham, 
and a thousand times more agreeable. I 
think too, that he will be useful, if he stays. 
I hope he will remain, if it does not hurt 
poor Miss Ellen's feelings. She would not 
go to church to hear him preach last Sunday, 
but went (on foot) four miles to the town, to 
St. Mary's, which is said to be Tractarian. 
Mr. Stancliff is not quite low church, but 
preaches practical sermons in beautiful, yet 
simple language; the poorest hearer could 
understand him, and the most refined would 
discover nothing to offend their taste. 

" But what a thoroughly selfish letter I am 
writing! andnot a word about you, my dearest 
Annie ! What a comfort it is to me to think 
that you are in a nice family who can appre- 
ciate you, and spare you those cruel morti- 
fications so often inflicted on a poor depen- 
dent. And yet, do you know, Annie, that 
sometimes I do not think you quite tell me all. 
At times I think you may have trials to en- 
dure which you heroically keep to yourself, 
while I — weak-minded, silly girl that I am — 
pain you by the recital of petty grievances. 
I will try for more courage ! 

" Farewell, dearest, best of sisters ! guide, 



25G ANNE SHERWOOD. 

counsellor, all and everything good and 
kind ! I leave you to dive into Froissart. 
Despite what has lately happened, my spirits 
rise to-day like mercury in a July sun. 

Your ever affectionate 

" Ellen. 

« ps.— It is decided Mr. StanclifF is to 
remain here. Every one is charmed with 
him, and Miss Ellen has most amiably pro- 
mised to attend the church, in order to 
oblige her papa, though I can well under- 
stand that it will be a great trial to her, to 
see any one in Mr. Newnngham's place. 

" You must not think from what I have 
said that I am unhappy at Elmgrove. I 
am not ; indeed I am not. I become more 
contented every day, and should regret a 
change very much. The scenery round here 
is so beautiful, I should enjoy my walks 
extremely, if I were quite sure of never 
meeting Mr. Vincent. The two Miss 
Ferrers tease me still a good deal, but I do 
not now seem to feel it. Mr. Stancliff is a 
great favourite with them ; sometimes lie 
rides with them, and they frequently urge 
their papa to invite him to dinner." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 257 



CHAPTEE XVI. 

Since we last peeped in at her, in her lonely 
schoolroom, a bright beam of sunshine has 
found its way through those thick, melan- 
choly walls to cheer the solitary Annie 
Sherwood in her sterile path. She has found 
a jewel, to her of inestimable value, which 
sheds rays of light on her monotonous, un- 
interesting tasks ; and, reader, the gover- 
ness's task is monotonous, is uninteresting, 
when she sees no fruit of her weary months 
of labour, no blossoms, no buds even, to 
promise fruit at a far distant day. Yes, 
Annie Sherwood's desert life has at last put 
forth a flower, a solitary prison flower, and 
she smiles on it fondly, like the man who 
watered and reared " Picciola." She is com- 
forted by one sweet consoler — she chides her- 
self that she has doubted of humanity, and 
grows reconciled to hourly trials. She has 
found a lover, perhaps, you think ? Oh, no ! 
but a warm-hearted, loving friend ; and the 
lonely girl throws all the earnest feelings of 
vol. i. s 



253 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

her nature into a romantic friendship, which 
she dreams will last for life, and that friend- 
ship is to her in place of the love she has 
not known. 

Annie came in one day from a solitary 
walk in the grounds of Locksley Lodge. 
In that walk she had met a lady who had 
looked at her very earnestly, and with an 
evident interest, in which no curiosity 
mingled ; her face said plainly, " I should 
like to talk to you — I see you are lonely ; so 
am I ! Let us he friends." The stranger 
was not a beauty — most people would have 
called her plain ; perhaps she was so, but 
Annie never saw it. 

They had not spoken in words, but they 
had already conversed ; Annie already loved 
the unknown, and her imagination imme- 
diately created for her, all the beauties we 
invariably discover in a loved face. 

When the governess came straight from 
that pleasant meeting back to the school- 
room, so far removed from all the household, 
it did not look half so desolate. Nothing 
had been changed ; there was still the same 
old-fashioned, half-faded furniture, the thrice- 
read book, the two or three shrivelled 
flowers, the still, cold silence — for the noisy 



<"V 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 259 

children were all out ; but by some means 
the whole scene wore a new aspect. Per- 
haps it was that the rich sunset was throw- 
ing its dazzling beams into the chamber ! 
No, no, it was not that ; it was the kindly 
smile cast by a stranger on the lonely one 
which had lit her very soul within her, 
and that soul now threw the reflection of 
its own brightness on every surrounding 
object. Annie sat down by the window, 
and watched the gleaming of a white robe 
in the distance among the green trees, much 
as a lover would watch the new idol of his 
affections. She had a friend there — she was 
sure she had — the feeling was as delightful 
as it was new. 

Geraldine rushed in, her plain face lit with 
a kind smile (for the child had a heart), and 
exclaimed, " See what some one has sent 
you ! I am not going to tell you who !" and 
she put a fragrant bunch of lily-of-the-valley 
into Annie's hand. 

" You need not tell me, for I know," said 
Annie, involuntarily pressing the flowers to 
her lips, as she burst into tears. "Ah, how un- 
grateful I have been to say there was no " 

"Do finish your sentence, Miss Sherwood!'' 
said Greraldine, " do, pray, instead of crying ! 

s 2 



2 GO ANNE SHERWOOD. 

That is such a provoking way of yours, 
breaking off in the middle of a speech. You 
are very, very disagreeable, and I wont tell 
you a word of the message, that I wont ; 
and you may guess it as well as you can !" 

Annie was in too happy a mood for anger, 
or even remonstrating, and gently drew from 
Greraldine a message, which was to the effect 
that her aunt Antonia would be very glad to 
lend Miss Sherwood any books she had, and 
had sent her some flowers from her own 
garden. 

From that day Annie's existence changed. 
She saw Antonia, and they immediately be- 
came friends ; in fact, they had been friends 
before. 

Antonia was the youngest of the Oakley 
family, and had lived much in retirement. 
She was not handsome, not clever, not dash- 
ing, not attractive in any way, except to the 
few who knew her kind heart ; and her own 
people either knew it not, or were incapable 
of appreciating it, if they did know it. 
Antonia was three years younger than Annie 
Sherwood : if she did not possess actual 
talent, she had at least sufficient intelligence 
to appreciate a mind which she unenviously 
acknowledged to be deeper than her own. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 261 

As yet the quality of worldly-mindedness did 
not exist in Antonia, or it was wholly unde- 
veloped. She did not enter into the full 
absurdity of forming a romantic friendship 
with a poor governess, whatever her friends 
might do ; and in a very short time Annie 
Sherwood and she became like shadows of 
each other, and interchanged their thoughts 
with the frank ingenuousness of school-girls. 

Together they read, thought, and felt; 
their happy intercourse existing without the 
shadow of envy on the part of the less 
gifted. Annie's labours became pleasanter 
to her ; not that their nature had altered, 
not that her pupils' humours had changed, 
but that when the tasks were over, there 
would be a nice walk with Antonia, or a 
pleasant visit from her, during which the 
world's masquerading would not step in, to 
disguise a single thought of either ingenuous 
nature; during which Annie might fondly 
dwell on the praises of her young sister, 
talk freely of her hopes and fears for her, 
and even of her aspirations for herself, bold 
and daring as they were, for Annie knew her 
own powers. Antonia loved her, and enthu- 
siastically shared her dreams. 

When in after life, that confiding pair 



262 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

became women of the world, and had learned 
to wear the mask that worldlings assume, 
perhaps each looked back with a sigh of 
regret to their trusting friendship ; certainly 
one did, and bore v about with her an abiding 
grief, that friendship, like love, is too often 
doomed to wear a thorn, when all its bright 
petals are withered. 

In the fulness of her joy at having found 
a friend, Annie forgot the back staircase and 
the many indignities which had been offered 
her. When the Mr. Oakleys walked into 
the room wearing their hats, and seated 
themselves without one single word of cour- 
tesy (reader, the Mr. Oakleys were well-born 
gentlemen), if Annie felt indignant for a 
moment she stifled the feeling, for she could 
not be angry with Antonia's brothers. On 
the whole, though worried and worn-out by 
her pupils, neglected by their parents, in- 
sulted by their relations, Annie was happy, 
for she had a friend. Her evenings were 
pleasantly spent in reading books, with 
which Antonia's thoughtful kindness had 
provided her, or in imaginative compositions, 
in executing which she not only surrounded 
herself with beautiful beings of her own 
creation, but even bv dreams that the crea- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 263 

tures of her fancy were destined for some- 
thing more than an ephemeral existence. 

In the midst of her newly-fonnd con- 
tentment, Annie's peace was bitterly wounded 
by receiving a letter from Ellen, with which 
our readers are already acquainted. It ap- 
peared to her a thousand times more terrible 
that her sweet innocent sister should be 
insulted by unjust accusations, than it had 
appeared to Ellen herself; at least, Annie 
bore it much worse. She was almost frantic 
with indignation. Had it been herself, she 
might have borne it in silent bitterness of 
spirit, and derived some consolation from 
the little-mindedness of her accusers ; but 
Ellen — her dear, modest Ellen — she who had 
been the light of their happy home and its 
idol ! — she to be accused of impropriety ! It 
was too much to endure. Annie instantly 
wrote, not only entreating Ellen to leave 
Elmgrove, but even laying her commands 
on her, as an elder sister might, to depart 
immediately. Ellen was to proceed to Lon- 
don, and, with Bertha s counsel and assis- 
tance, to place herself as a parlour-boarder 
in a school, Annie fancying — and it was but 
fancy — that her own moderate salary would 
supply all her sister's wants. 



264 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Of course Annie expected to meet with 
the ready compliance which Ellen was wont 
to show. She looked anxiously for a reply 
to her letter, quite certain that she should 
hear of her sister's being already in town. 
Her surprise was great, very great indeed, 
when, instead of the intelligence expected, 
she received an earnest, appealing letter 
from Ellen, entreating her to allow her to 
remain at Elmgrove, as she was so happy 
there ! Her pupils were indeed rather wild ; 
their mother had been unjust; but then 
the little things were improving in conduct, 
and she saw so little of the family, that they 
had no opportunity of annoying her ; then 
Elmgrove was such a sweet place, she was 
growing quite attached to it. Ellen thought 
too, and she w r as quite sincere, that the 
ministry of Mr. Stancliff had been peculiarly 
blessed to her. Perhaps it had. Perhaps 
some other ladies of the Elmgrove congre- 
gation thought the same — one certainly 
did. Annie folded up the letter with a 
sigh, and sat for a long time holding it 
tightly between her hands, while her fore- 
head rested on them, and she thought in 
dejected sorrow of her sister's possible fate — 
an unrequited attachment. Ellen was evi- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 265 

dently, however unconscious of the truth, 
becoming too deeply interested in the amiable 
curate ; and that interest was heightened by 
the little romance of their meeting again at 
Elm grove, after their first rencontre under 
peculiar circumstances. 

" She must — she shall leave, before it is 
too late !" cried Annie, starting up and 
pacing the room. Then sitting down again, 
her head once more drooped on her hands, 
and she murmured, " No, no ; let her stay 
and indulge her young dream of innocent 
romance ! Love will be a heaven of light to 
her, — why should I forebode clouds to dim 
it? Ellen was born to love, I — only to 
dream that such things are !" 

So Ellen stayed at Elmgrove, and months 
rolled on, and her letters were all so cheerful 
and happy, and daily she grew more attached 
to the beautiful scenery around ! 



26G ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XVII. 

" Dearest Annie, — After the letter which 
you wrote to me live months since, in which 
you told me to leave Elmgrove, I fully 
resolved not to pain you again by the use- 
less recitals of those grievances which people 
in our position must expect to meet with, 
and which no doubt true Christians would 
bear with humility and resignation. I was 
very vexed with myself for having so grieved 
you with my selfish complaints, and deter- 
mined that you should hear no more of 
them. I have been enabled for some time 
to keep my resolution, either by a change 
in myself or in my circumstances — which, I 
know not — but after the time I refer to, 
either I grew more contented, or my path 
less thorny. Yet now, Annie dear, I must 
again grieve you. Either I have returned 
to a murmuring spirit, or the thorns have 
grown up sharper than ever. And now I 
must really leave ; I think there is no choice 
left me, — I must give warning, or receive it. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 267 

But I must tell you, coherently if I can, 
what has happened. About tw r o months 
since, Mrs. Ferrers renewed her accusations 
of impropriety. What would our father 
have said — what would he have felt, to hear 
me thus accused ! And then you will 
scarcely believe that Ellen Ferrers is my 
persecutor ! I am overwhelmed at the dis- 
covery ; she used to be so kind, and never 
at any time w r as haughty to me. But her 
manner is altered lately ; not that she has 
been proud — no, she has no pride ; but she 
has said so many unkind, cutting things, and 
even hinted that she considered me a re- 
ligious hypocrite ; but still I could not have 
believed that she would be the person to 
misrepresent my most innocent actions. 
She told Mrs. Ferrers that I was in the 
habit of walking by the river-side with Mr. 
Stancliff, and of corresponding with him. 
I declare to you, dear Annie, that it is not 
at all true. I have never done either ; I 
will tell you the exact truth. 

" Twice when wandering about in search 
of the children, who had, as they often do, 
run away from me, I met Mr. Stancliff, and 
on each occasion he very kindly insisted on 
hunting for them, while I sat down to rest, 



263 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

after running till I was out of breath. Two 
or three times he has sent me books, and 
once I had a drawing of his to copy ; and 
altogether he has been so kind, so very kind, 
that I really think he has done more to re- 
concile me to Elmgrove than any one else. 
And what was I to do, Annie? I could not 
be ungrateful when he offered to spare me 
fatigue by finding the children for me ! I 
could not refuse the books, which he took 
the trouble to walk to the town to fetch me ! 
I assure you, Annie, and I know }-ou will 
believe me, there was no letter with the 
books, no note, not a line nor w T ord of writing. 
But Mrs. Ferrers says — but listen, Annie, 
and try to be patient. Mrs. Ferrers sent 
for me. I went to her trembling, for I 
knew I was to hear something dreadful. 

" ' Miss Sherwood,' she exclaimed, ' we 
must come to an understanding. I was 
in hopes that out of regard to your own 
interests, if not from principle, 3-011 would 
have avoided the recurrence of the im- 
proprieties with which I have already 
had to reproach you. Now pray don't affect 
that look of surprise ; you very well know 
what I mean. All counsel appears lost on 
you. You will force me to believe the doc- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 269 

trine, which my naturally soft feelings long 
made me reject, that young women only 
enter families as governesses, the more 
effectually to carry on their own base in- 
trigues. Nay, that theatrical start, those 
clasped hands, those tears, are quite useless. 
I show kindness to my dependents always, 
till ingratitude calls forth a severity quite 
foreign to my nature/ 

" ' But what have I done ?' I at last ex- 
claimed. 

" ' What have you done ? rather what 
have you not done ! Not contented with. 
artful endeavours to inveigle the affections 
of a mere youth — you well know I refer to 
Mr. Beresford — Miss Ferrers has detected 
you several times in cunning endeavours to 
attract Mr. Vincent's attentions/ 

" ' Mr. Vincent ! I detest the sight of Mr. 
Vincent / I cried, I am afraid very passion- 
ately. 

" ' Unless in the shrubbery, I suppose, 
Miss Sherwood !' said Miss Ferrers, entering, 
and looking very maliciously at me. 

" ' And I suppose you equally detest Mr. 
Stancliff?' said Mrs. Ferrers, with a sneer. 

" 'No, Madam, I respect and esteem him,' 
I replied, as firmly as I could. 



270 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" * It is unfortunate/ said Mrs. Ferrers, 
' that your conduct will not allow him to 
return the compliment. As it is, Miss 
Sherwood, I am constrained to tell you that 
Miss Ellen Ferrers informs me you are con- 
stantly throwing yourself in his path, joining 
in his walks, and even receiving letters from 
him, though you must be perfectly aware 
that no gentleman could offer a young person 
in your situation attentions which she ought 
to receive. I don't wish to be severe on 
any one ; my servants can testify to my in- 
dulgence. Of course I don't mean to say 
that a governess should not look forward to 
a settlement in life, as well as any one else ; 
but if she has any discretion at all, she will 
make no attempt to step out of her own 
class. Had Mr. Park been the person in 
question (Mr. Park is the village school- 
master), I might have thought the ailliir 
very suitable ; but one of the clergymen of 
the parish ! really your head must be com- 
pletely turned by vanity, to have thought of 
such a thing ! As for Mr. Stancliff, if he 
has any thoughts of you, he must be insane 
to cut himself off from so many advantages. 
Of course he knows that if he were to marry 
beneath him, we could never ask him to our 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 271 

table, where, under present circumstances, 
whenever there is a vacant place, we are glad 
to see a modest, unassuming young man. 
You may retire, and go to your duties, Miss 
Sherwood. See that you confine yourself to 
them ; and remember, I must hear no more 
of these improper doings !' 

" I did retire, but firmly resolved that 
nothing should make me submit to such an 
attack again. At dinner, my eyes were red 
and swollen with weeping. Every one 
looked quite unconcerned except Mr. Ferrers, 
who asked if I had a cold, and gave me a 
glass of wine ; perhaps he did not know I 
was in disgrace. 

" I have been very careful since to avoid 
Mr. Stancliff, but he looks sorry and vexed, 
and I feel quite unhappy at seeming un- 
grateful to one who has been so very kind 
to me, and — but it is no use continuing. 

" No, dear Annie, I will not accept your 
generous offer of long ago. I will not live 
at ease on the fruit of your toil, but will try 
for employment ; perhaps I shall be happier 
in my next engagement. 

" I shall immediately write a note to Mrs. 
Ferrers, and give her warning. I do not 
feel that I have courage to talk to her. I 



'272 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

am a sad coward ! I have so little of what 
people call spirit • in lieu of it, I must stri 
and pray for Christian resignation, and a 
heart to forgive. 

" Dear Annie, don't be unhappy about 
me ; I am sorry to leave Elmgrove, for, with 
all their waywardness, I love the children 
(there is always something to love in chil- 
dren), and I shall regret Mr. Stand iff 's 
ministry ; but if it be Grod's will for me to 
depart, I shall try to make it my will too. 

" This is a beautiful country ! I never 
thought it so beautiful till I found I must 
leave it. Mr. Stancliff draws ; he has pro- 
mised to make a sketch of the church for 
me ; at least, he did promise the last time I 
spoke to him, but that is very long ago. 
The church is very pretty, many centuries 
old, with a tapering spire which, rising from 
a cluster of dark trees, points to Heaven 
like hope rising amid life's sombre cares. I 
can't help loving this place. How strange 
that one should love a place in which the}' 
have suffered ! But then I have been happy 
too sometimes, at Elmgrove, and I am not 
sure, taking them all together, whether my 
bright days would not outnumber my dark 
ones. I often wonder why people count up 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 273 

the rainy days, and talk so little of the 
sunny ones, though they are so much more 
numerous ; to-night I think I shall give my 
warning, that is, if I can find courage ! 

" I am just going to hang up the old shawl 
that has so long been my curtain, but it 
seems a sin to shut up the window that 
shows so beautiful a scene. The moon is 
shining on the landscape j I can see in the 
distance the 'heaven-directed spire/ close 
by it is the Eectory. Mr. Stancliff lives 
with the Eector. I can fancy I see him 
studying now by the light of the holy stars, 
his pale, thoughtful face raised to heaven ! 

" Oh, Annie ! I have something to tell you, 
but I cannot write it, indeed I cannot. Do 
you know that I am tempted, yes, strongly 
tempted, to bear all these insults, and stay 
at Elmgrove, but I will strive against the 
weakness. 

" Your loving sister, 
'< Ellen." 



VOL. I. 



274 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTEE XYIII. 

" Dearest Annie, — Do not be vexed with 
ine when I tell you that, notwithstanding 
your earnest wishes and my own determined 
resolves, I foolishly hesitated to give the 
letter of warning to Mrs. Ferrers ; indeed, I 
have kept putting it off. 

" I had written the intended note, but it 
lay in my desk day after day, and though I 
well knew how weak and silly I was, I kept 
saying, 'To-morrow I will put it on Mrs. 
Ferrers' table ; but the time never came ; yet 
I did not know my own reasons for this 
vacillating folly — perhaps I had no reason 
but want of courage. I have been well 
punished for my cowardice, as you will see, 
dear Annie. One day last week I walked 
out with the children before breakfast. We 
had not gone very far, when I felt both the 
little things suddenly snatch their hands 
from mine, and before I could speak they 
were off like arrows, and shouting with 
merry laughter. I called after them in 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 275 

vain; they were soon out of sight and 
hearing. I often lose them thus, for two or 
three hours. I ran as quickly as I could in 
the direction they had taken, scarcely hoping 
to find the truants, but not daring to return 
without them! I was soon beyond the 
grounds of Elmgrove. I met several poor 
people, and asked if they had seen the 
children. ' Yes, they had only just passed 
that way.' I encountered Mr. Stancliff 
coming out of a cottage; he seemed to 
understand what my business was, and asked 
if he could help me. I could not answer, 
but shook my head and rushed on, leaving 
him in the road, looking after me with 
wonder ! At that minute the clock struck 
the hour at which we always breakfast, and 
Mrs. Ferrers likes us to be in at the exact 
time. (The children breakfast with her ; I 
quite alone in the school-room.) I well 
knew that I should be blamed for their not 
appearing, so I hastened on ; quite wearied 
and out of breath, I found myself at the 
entrance of a little wood. From within I 
heard the mischievous laugh of little Franky ; 
I was in hopes that the children were turning 
back ; but no, I called till I was quite ex- 
hausted, and they answered, but they led me 

t 2 



276 annj; SHERWOOD. 

such a weary chase for half an hour longer, 
that at last (I am ashamed to confess it) I 
leant against a tree and burst into tears. I 
soon dried them, however, when I heard 
some one approaching. Annie, it was that 
hateful Mr. Vincent, and he came up to me 
with the most impertinent smile. 

« < What, in tears, my charming Ellen !' 
he exclaimed, drawing nearer as I involun- 
tarily retreated from his disagreeable pre- 
sence. ' Come, don't fret,' he added, attempt- 
ing to draw my hand through his arm \ ' these 
little rogues have led you a nice chase, but 
I can't find in my heart to be angry with them, 
since they have procured me what I have so 
long wanted — the opportunity of telling you 
how much I adore you, and of telling it, too, 
in this charming solitude. Come, we wont 
leave it yet ; let us take a turn this way. 
The children have gone home through the 
village; you wont be missed, at least not 
directly, and when you go back, you can say 
you lost your way, you know ! Very likely 
you may slip in unobserved. We can part 
before we come in sight of the house, and 
no one will know that ' 

" ' Let me go, sir !' I exclaimed ; • I wish 
to have nothing to do with you ; let me go !' 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 277 

" ' I see how it is/ he said, confidently, 
and still holding my hand so tightly that I 
could not withdraw it. f You are jealous of 
that fright, Sophy Ferrers ; but you little 
know me ! I am only civil to her in case I 
should one day find myself constrained to 
marry her, or her tin, rather ! You need 
not pout, for if I did, it could make no diffe- 
rence in my feelings for you !' 

" ' Your feelings are of no consequence to 
me, sir/ I replied ; ' you have none belonging 
to a gentleman or man of honour, or you 
would not thus insult me!' 

" ' Well, I had no idea you could look so 
vixenish, but 'pon my honour it rather be- 
comes you/ he cried ; ' why, you silly child, 
what have I said or done to insult you? 
You're really too romantic ! I want nothing 
in the world from you, but that you should 
take a turn with me in the wood, give me 
two or three kisses from those pretty lips, 
and keep your own counsel and mine. No 
one need be the wiser, if you're only discreet, 
and you'd see, I could meet you afterwards 
without any one suspecting that we had ever 
exchanged a word in our lives. See what I 
have brought you from London, you little 
vixen !' and he thrust a glittering ring into 



278 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the hand that was free. I am afraid, Annie, 
that I have become very wicked, for what do 
yon think I did ? Eeturn him the ring ? No, 
I threw it with all my force over the bank 
into the river; while he, though still de- 
taining me, uttered an angry exclamation; 
but cooling down, he added, ' After all, as I 
find you've so much pluck, I think I'd rather 
win your love than buy it !' 

" ' My love !' said I ; ' I hate, despise, 
loathe you !' 

" ' No, no, I'm sure you don't/ he replied ; 
' give me a kiss, and let us be friends. 'Pon 
my life I'd rather win you than the Derby !' 

" ' It is plain I have no protector !' I ex- 
claimed, in great misery, as I found the in- 
sulting villain attempting to kiss me, despite 
all my efforts to frustrate his intentions ; 
but oh, Annie, what were my feelings of 
joy and gratitude when I heard a well-known 
voice calling out loudly, c Yes, yes, you have 
one !' and at the same minute Mr. Vincent 
staggered, and fell down heavily, from a 
blow across his face, while Mr. Stancliff 
stood beside me, trying to soothe me with 
the kindest words and looks ; and I found 
myself, though trembling with many con- 
flicting feelings, clinging to his arm, as if he 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 279 

had been my brother all my life ! He made 
no attempt to move away from the spot, but 
stood still, as if waiting for Mr. Vincent to 
rise, which he slowly did, looking very like 
what one fancies a bad spirit, a very per- 
sonification of malice and hatred. 

" ' Your cloth shall prove no protection to 
you, sir/ he muttered, while his mouth was 
bleeding profusely, which frightened me very 
much, though I own it was more from fear 
of the consequences to my kind preserver, 
than from any pity for that wicked man 
'What I dare do, I dare justify, sir,' said 
Mr. Stancliff, with great dignity. ' But did 
I need or desire protection, I should be 
amply provided with it in your cowardice. 
The man who would take advantage of her 
friendless situation to insult an unprotected 
girl, would scarcely have the courage to boast 
of his exploits!' So saying, he turned and 
led me away. But grateful as I was to 
Mr. Stancliff for his kindness, I dreaded the 
conclusion of the walk. He would not leave 
me till I reached the house. On the way there 
he said everything he could think of to con- 
sole me and quiet my fears. But kind as 
he was, his manner was so full of grave 
respect, that I felt he was trying to efface 



280 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

the remembrance of the mortifying insult I 
had just received. As we walked along, 
Mr. Stancliff told me that he was in the 
habit of taking an early morning walk every 
day ; that in those rambles he had often seen 
me, but had never ventured to speak or 
approach me, lest his doing so should excite 
disagreeable remarks, for he had long noticed 
that the Ferrers' family did not treat me 
with kindness and consideration. He told 
me too (though at the same time he begged 
my pardon for having misconstrued my con- 
duct so far), that he had been both surprised 
and pained, at seeing me enter the wood alone 
that morning, and Mr. Vincent immediately 
after, as it made him fear that our meeting 
was not wholly accidental. Of course I ex- 
plained to him as well as I could, what had 
led to the unfortunate meeting with Mr. 
Vincent, and he seemed quite satisfied with 
my account. 

" Mr. Stancliff then asked me, onlv hesi- 
tatingly, why I had avoided him so much 
lately. I believe I looked quite silly and 
confused, but it was of course impossible 
to answer the question by telling him all, 
or even a part of what Mrs. Ferrers had 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 281 

said on the subject of my acquaintance with 
him. 

" When we reached the house, he said, 
hurriedly, ' I cannot bid you good-bye now. 
I have much more to say, but our walk has 
been so hurried, I could not tell you all. But 
you will let me go in with you? I must 
see Mr. Ferrers on your account ; indeed I 
must !' he added, earnestly ; and he held my 
hand in his while he spoke, but so differently 
to Mr. Vincent, that I could not feel offended. 
1 I know,' he continued, ' the unpleasant 
scene that awaits you with those heartless 
women; perhaps there may be even some 
misrepresentations from that miscreant. I 
cannot bear you to brave the storm alone ! 
Dear Ellen, let me shield you from it !' 
Perhaps it would have been better if I had 
yielded to his kind wishes ; but as it was, I 
earnestly intreated him to forego his in- 
tentions. I was so afraid of his injuring 
himself; and felt that I would rather endure 
anything, than occasion his receiving rude- 
ness, perhaps insult. Besides, I dreaded 
hearing a repetition of Mrs. Ferrers' charges, 
and they would be probably made in his 
presence, if he accompanied me. Mr. Stan- 



282 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

cliff reluctantly gave up the point, and 
departed, taking leave of me more like an 
affectionate though respectful friend, than a 
comparatively recent acquaintance. 

" I went in, you may be sure with a 
beating heart, and hastening up-stairs found 
I was an hour beyond my time, and that Ellen 
Ferrers was seated in my place, teaching the 
children. c Miss Sherwood V she exclaimed, 
in a very harsh voice, ' so you have at length 
returned ! Perhaps it will be agreeable to 
you to perform a portion of your duties 
yourself! The salary you receive might 
surely entitle us to expect that your office 
would be a little more conscientiously ful- 
filled. But this is, I suppose, your view of 
religious obligation; this, your exemplifi- 
cation of faith and practice ! I am obliged 
to do your work, while you are wandering 
in the green shades with a sentimental 
curate. You need not deny it/ she added, 
in a very shrill voice, ' for you were seen ! 
Happily, your career in this quarter will soon 
be stopped however ! Mrs. Ferrers has au- 
thorized me to tell you that you leave the 
house the moment your quarter ends; 
before indeed, if you attempt a renewal of 
this morning's scenes. And as for Mr. 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 283 

Stancliff, he had better beware how he acts ; 
after having had the presumption to pay his 
addresses to me, it is going rather too far 
to transfer them to our dependent, though I 
don't doubt the least that your artifices 
rather than inclination, have drawn him 
on to act absurdly ! You need not attempt 
an explanation ; I will not listen to any : 
nor need you try to see mamma; she has 
promised to leave the business entirely in 
my hands. One word of advice I give you, 
though — stop short before your reputation 
is quite gone. Eemember, as Mrs. Ferrers 
said, no gentleman would or could marry 
you !' I saw indeed, that I should be 
allowed no opportunity of justifying myself, 
so I merely replied that if I had not re- 
ceived warning, I meant to have given it ; 
indeed, had written a note to Mrs. Ferrers 
on the subject, though I had not yet given 
it to her. She told me plainly she did not 
believe a word I said, so I gave her the 
note, which she opened, read, and then 
tore up. The perusal seemed to make her 
more and more angry. She continued 
talking in a violent tone for some time, 
without suffering me to reply, but was in- 
terrupted by Miss Ferrers, who rushed in, 



284 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

exclaiming, ' Poor Francis lias been thrown 
from his horse, and had three of his front 
teeth knocked out ! Do come, Ellen, and 
stop Sophy's meddling; she will do him 
much more harm than good. Pray do come, 
and leave that creature !' A few minutes 
after, I heard Miss Ferrers and her sister 
Sophia quarrelling violently. Ellen tried 
to pacify them, and her endeavours were met 
with the ill-natured remark, l You know 
you're only spiteful because Mr. Stancliff 
has been making love to that little fright up- 
stairs. You're just like the ox in the man- 
ger, Ellen; you can't have him yourself, 
and — ' I did not hear the rest of that 
speech, but involuntarily caught enough to 
show me that Mr. Vincent had forged a tale 
of being thrown from his horse, to account 
for the state, in which the well-merited chas- 
tisement he had received from Mr. Stancliff, 
had placed him j but I had quite made up my 
mind that I would explain everything before 
I left the house. 

" I tried to be patient with the children at 
their lessons that day, though they had oc- 
casioned all the mischief. But after all, the 
fault is not really theirs when they get one 
thus into trouble ; they have been so badly 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 285 

trained that they are beyond all authority, 
and I have too little firmness and dignity to 
counteract their previous bad training by 
commanding obedience and respect. 

" I am sure it is a great mistake, a very 
great mistake, for poor gentlewomen to be- 
come governesses, unless they have suitable 
talents, and have been regularly taught their 
profession. I am sure I wish to do my duty, 
and I love children too much to be unkind 
to them, but I want management and de- 
cision ; they see that I do, and treat me 
as a playmate, while their friends treat 
me as — alas, I cannot say what ! but if 
I were to stay here, my heart would be 
broken. 

" Yet I have not told you all, Annie ! 
Are not dark and sunny skies strangely 
blended ? Even while I write of injustice and 
oppression, there is a glow of happiness in 
my heart which the darkest memories could 
not wholly shadow. 

" Only think, Annie ! your simple little 
sister, with neither mind nor talent, with 
little to engage, and much to condemn in 
her feeble character, is loved by the most 
superior of men ! 

" But you will be better pleased if I tell 



286 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

things ill order. Yesterday evening, to my 
great surprise the footman knocked at the 
school-room door, and then looking behind 
him, as if he had some secret message to 
deliver, pushed a letter into my hands, say- 
ing, ' I fancy, Miss, here's something you'll 
be glad to get, and as I've been paid hand- 
some for being postman, I've run the risk 
of bringing it to you. But I hope you'll 
be prudent, and keep things nice and snug, 
for as sure as you're alive, if Miss Sophy 
finds us out (and she's as cunning as a cat) 
if II cost you and me our places /' 

" You would have found a ready answer 
for such a speech, but I was too much stu- 
pified to reply, and when he went away, I 
had not the least notion of the man's errand. 
The letter proved to be from Mr. Vincent, 
and contained proposals even beyond the in- 
sults he had already offered me. Every in- 
dignant feeling in my nature was roused ; so 
thoroughly did I feel exasperated, on finding 
that the lesson enforced by the oaken stick 
was not enough for him, that in the first 
moments of resentment, I was going to carry 
the letter straight to Mr. Ferrers. Perhaps I 
ought to have done so, but after a little 
(aimer thought, I resolved to leave him tu 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 287 

that vengeance, which sooner or later over- 
takes the guilty. 

" This morning, dear Annie, has brought 
me another letter, so different, so widely 
different from that wicked Mr. Vincent's ! 
I was so surprised, so frightened too, though 
my fright was of a joyful nature, to think 
that I, — poor little insignificant Ellen Sher- 
wood, should — but I am growing quite inco- 
herent again ! My letter was from Mr. Stan- 
cliff, and he told me, Annie, that he loved 
me, and hoped I would one day be his w T ife ! 
His wife — I can scarcely believe it possible ; 
I feel so unworthy of such a destiny ! He is 
so immeasurably my superior. Only fancy 
your little Ellen the wife of a learned, elo- 
quent man ! 

" He seems to feel sure I will accept him, 
and yet he is the last man in the world who 
would be vain or conceited. Perhaps he has 
found out that I think him superior to every- 
body else, but I hope not, lest he should 
fancy me forward, and seeking his attentions, 
as the Miss Ferrers say I am. I assure you, 
dear Annie, I have done nothing wrong, at 
least I hope not, and if he has discovered my 
partiality, it must be because I have been 
myself ignorant of its existence. 



288 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" He says that he is resolved to leave this 
place immediately ; that he has the offer of a 
better curacy in Somerset, and that in a few 
months he hopes to have a home to offer me. 
He adds so kindly, ' You must bring me a 
sister, as well as a bride, my Ellen !' Oh, 
Annie, how happy we shall be together 
again ! for I know you will come to us as he 
wishes, and for ever leave the stranger's 
home ! Are not these blessed prospects 
too, too blessed for my deserts ? How plea- 
santly w T e shall spend our days ! Surely it 
will be heaven begun ! 

" Richard says (I love to write his name, 
and yet tremble at my own presumption 
when I do so) that he is sorry he struck Mr. 
Vincent, /cannot think he was at all wrong ; 
but he thinks he should have contented him- 
self with protecting me, and have left him to 
heaven and his own conscience. 

" But, dear Annie ! the strangest thing 
of all, and to me the sweetest surprise, has 
been to recognise in Richard Standings writ- 
ing that of our unknown benefactor, the 
person who so unostentatiously came to our 
assistance when we might, but for that pro- 
vidential succour, have perished with want. 

" You remember the words that accom- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 289 

panied the note? — c He feedeth the young 
ravens/ &c. I shall not venture to tell him 
of my discovery, of which I am sure he 
would rather not hear, though I long to find 
out how he knew T all about us and our 
circumstances. 

" He says he will not try to see me again 
till after I have left here, lest he should 
render the rest of my sojourn more uncom- 
fortable. But nothing now will make me 
unhappy ! Every one in the house is set 
against me ; but I have love, and hope, and 
happiness, and, I humbly trust, Heaven too 
on my side, and with supports and shields 
like these, I shall be invulnerable. I do not 
— w T ill not believe that Richard ever paid his 
addresses to Ellen Ferrers ; but she looks 
very miserable — and had she not lately, so 
very lately, been attached to Mr. Newingham, 
I should think she loved him. 

" I have a fortnight more to spend here. 
I shall try and keep our engagement a secret, 
lest it should pain her ; but I am afraid that 
some of the happiness I feel, will shine out 
in my face. Fortunately, I don't go down- 
stairs to dinner now : the children do ; but 
all my meals are sent up to me from the 
kitchen. 

vol. i. u 



290 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

"I ought to have shown you Eichard's 
letter first, dear Annie — I mean before I an- 
swered it — and asked your advice ; but he 
begged so much for an immediate reply, that 
I could not keep him waiting. But I gave 
him your address, and asked him to write to 
you, to confirm what I had told him. Have 
I been wrong, Annie ? I hope you will not 
think so. 

" I am doing all I can to fulfil my duties 
to the last ; but it is a hard task to teach 
these poor, spoiled children. Still I am sorry 
to leave them, for love grows up in one's 
heart for even the wayward, before we know 
it, and these little ones have really kindly 
natures, if they were well directed. 

" Your affectionate Ellen. 

" P.S. to this already overgrown letter, 
written three days since. — Don't think I am 
unhappy ; Elm grove itself has no power 
now to make me so. I am strangely 
strengthened against unkindness, but really 
the petty persecutions of Ellen Ferrers must 
task her invention to devise. Mr. Vincent 
is staying in the house ; he is better, but suf- 
fering a good deal from the rough chastise- 
ment received in the wood. He and his 
cousin Ellen, formerly so opposed in every- 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 291 

tiling, are now confederated on one point — 
that of turning Mr. Stancliff into ridicule ; it 
is envy in the one, and malice — I am afraid 
jealousy — in the other. Whenever Richard is 
the subject of discourse, they seem to raise 
their voices on purpose for me to hear. He 
preached such a beautiful sermon on Sunday, 
Annie ; our dear father would have liked it 
so much (I often think how he and Richard 
would have loved and appreciated each other). 
The text was, * Lay not up for yourselves 
treasures on earth/ It seemed to rebuke me 
for being too happy, when he spoke of the 
uncertain nature of the deepest happiness 
arising from earthly causes. Several times 
he repeated, ' here we have no abiding city.' 
I thought he looked sorrowful and grieved 
about something, but I did not dare to look 
up a second time ; I felt as if every eye were 
upon me. One pair was, and they looked as 
if they would read my soul — Ellen Ferrers'. 
She was seated directly opposite to me, and 
was quite pale and agitated. Certainly she 
loves Mr. Stancliff, and I must pity her, and 
forgive the wrongs which jealous love has 
made her inflict on me. Oh, Annie, it is so 
easy to forgive every one now ! My heart is 
too full of happiness to hold resentment. 

xj 2 



292 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Dear, dear Annie ! when I remember how 
soon we are to be restored to each other, I 
am too happy ! It seems as if some reverse 
must come ; but I will not think of that, the 
present is so cloudless and joyful ! Bless 
you, my dear, kind sister." 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 293 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Annie Sherwood read her sister's last letter 
with conflicting emotions; and while she 
rejoiced at her bright prospects (for it never 
occurred to her that a curacy was a very 
poor provision), she yet felt a brief pang at 
the thought of henceforth holding a second- 
ary place in Ellen's heart, for hitherto she 
had been all in all to her. But Annie's 
nature was too generous to allow that jealous 
pain to endure long, and she soon woke to a 
sense of happiness such as she had not 
known for years, when she remembered that 
the cruel yoke which Ellen had so meekly 
borne in the house of the stranger was so 
soon to be broken, and that for ever. 

How merrily Annie's laugh rang through 
the room when Greraldine began thus : " Do 
you know, Miss Sherwood, you don't look 
quite so ugly to-day — indeed you don't 1" 

" Don't I ?" 

" No, that you don't ! Now, if you would 
only stop like that, I should like to run 



294 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

down and fetch up "Uncle Hal, that he might 
see you're not quite so frightful as he thinks. 
I know he is down stairs, for I just now put 
my eye to the key-hole, and my ear too, 

and But it's no use my going ; you're 

quite ugly again ! I see you don't want to 
look pretty." 

" I don't care very much about it, Geral- 
dine." 

" But I do, Miss Sherwood, and I like 
pretty people. Joseph (the footman) is very 
handsome, and I like him. Oh, how I wish 
he would marry me when I'm big ! Don't 
you wish he would marry you ? I'm sure 
you do !" 

Then Annie's unwonted joyousness was 
clouded by a futile effort to convince the 
poor spoiled child that honour and duty alike 
forbade her peeping and listening at key- 
holes, and propriety equally condemned her 
familiarity with a handsome young footman. 
To the latter observation Geraldine certainly 
made a very natural and logical reply. " My 
uncles always talk and laugh with the maid- ; 
why shouldn't I with the footman?" Ere 
the argument concluded, Antonia entered. 

" A new book for you, Minnie !" said she, 
holding up a fresh-looking volume to her 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 295 

friend, for whom she had adopted the pet- 
name of Minnie. 

" But what has happened ? You are be- 
tween tears and sunshine/' 

"The sunshine is from within," said 
Annie, smiling, " and I have good reason 
to hope will prove permanent ; the tears are 
but a passing shower." 

Antonia was surprised at Annie's un- 
wonted cheerfulness ; but she understood 
from her air that, though she had something 
pleasant to tell her, she did not wish to 
speak before the talkative Greraldine. So the 
friends began to talk of books, and the child, 
after lingering awhile, and finding nothing 
that passed would be available as retail gossip, 
departed to seek amusement elsewhere. 

When the door was shut, Annie freely 
poured forth her joyous tidings, but was 
rather disappointed to find that Antonia did 
not view Ellen's prospects in as bright a 
light as she did. The reason was obvious. 
Antonia had always been accustomed to 
easy circumstances, though not to actual 
wealth ; while Annie's only experience was 
of very slender means, or of actual poverty. 
To Antonia it seemed a very poor thing to 
marry a curate. 



296 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Only a curate !" said she. 

" But then, Mr. Stancliff is such a good 
and superior man," said Annie, warmly ; 
" and Ellen will be so happy with him ! Is 
not that the chief thing to be thought of?" 

"Oh, of course, dear Minnie," saidAntonia; 
" of course, to be happy is the principal 
thing. But how are they to live on a curacy?" 

" By economy and care." 

" Well, perhaps they may manage," said 
Antonia, doubtingly. " There is one tiling 
to be said, they'll have you to help and 
advise them." 

" No," said Annie, sighing ; "I shall not 
live with them. I must not decrease their 
small means ; besides, I must preserve my 
independence." 

" Your independence ! Poor Minnie !" 
said Antonia, who had seen enough to esti- 
mate the value of a governess's indepen- 
dence ; but seeing the train of thought her 
exclamation excited, she kindly turned the 
conversation to other matters. 

" So you think they will be able to ma- 
nage on about a hundred a year ?" 

" I am sure they will," said Annie ; " and 
they shall have my stipend to help them 
out. But you look sad, Antonia ! ' 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 297 

" I was only thinking, " said Antonia, 
" wliat I should do if I were married to a poor 
man. I should be utterly helpless." 

" But I would teach you to keep house," 
said Annie, " in return for all the pains you 
have taken to teach me a little French." 

Antonia, although not naturally very in- 
dustrious, had for the last few weeks been 
making really Herculean efforts to teach 
Annie something of the language in which 
she was so deficient, and for the want of 
which, not all her classical knowledge could 
compensate. 

Antonia Oakley was one of those rare 
mortals who do not over-estimate them- 
selves. She felt quite confused and ashamed 
at the thought of possessing any one advan- 
tage over Annie Sherwood. Ah, Antonia, 
thine was a simple, lovely nature ! Couldst 
thou have been transplanted to a healthier, 
worthier soil ! for the world was not worthy 
of thee ; yet it has gathered thee into its vor- 
tex, and thy nature is marred, thou art be- 
come of the world, worldly ! But, Antonia, if 
thine eyes fall upon this page, if thou seest 
thyself mirrored therein, let the remem- 
brance of thy early, single-minded friendship 
snatch thee away one moment from the 



298 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

heartless, and remember Annie Sherwood. 
Sweet Antonia ! the lonely governess who, 
consoled by thy gentle friendship, grew re- 
conciled to life, still thanks thee for the 
pleasant past, and forgives the weakness 
that constrained thy unwilling heart to in- 
flict a pang on hers, by forsaking her for the 
world's opinion! Early friendship has all 
the beautiful romance of early love ! 

Antonia and Annie talked for a Ions: time 
of Ellen's prospects, till Antonia grew 
quite persuaded that a curacy, with a rustic 
porch shaded by woodbine, w T as the only fit 
substitute for Eden, since Eden was lost; 
and Annie dwelt with more pride than 
became the subject, on Ellen's deep piety, 
which would shine forth so beautifully in a 
sphere for which she w r as born. 

All that interested Annie had an equal 
interest for Antonia, and day after day wore 
away in the pleasant expectation of the 
friends being enabled more fully to estimate 
Mr. Stancliff's character, when they should 
have read his anxiously expected letter to 
Annie ; but the letter came not. 

Ellen wrote to say that she had left Elm- 
grove; she w r as in London, boarding at a 
cheap school, where, as the period likely to 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 299 

elapse between that time and her marriage 
would probably be short, she hoped to re- 
main till it took place. She hoped too, that 
Annie would soon join her, and was anxious 
to know what she thought of Richard's 
letter, which she was sure had been received. 

Annie delayed her reply to Ellen for a 
week, and then a second week, still hoping 
to hear from the intended bridegroom ; but 
no missive came. Two months slipped 
away, and no tidings arrived ! Annie grew 
vexed, and her pride was chafed. She 
thought her sister trifled with and forgotten. 
Ellen's letters betrayed neither resentment 
nor mortified vanity. She had perfect con- 
fidence in her lover. She was sure, quite 
sure, that he had been prevented writing 
by illness, or some other cause over which he 
had no control. 

When the third month of silence was past, 
she quite gave him up ; he was dead, certainly 
dead. A few weeks of quiet sorrow, and 
Ellen began to reproach herself for her 
inactivity. She would not remain unem- 
ployed while Annie was labouring. Annie 
was content to labour herself, but not at all 
satisfied that Ellen should return to the kind 
of life she had led at Elmgrove. She 



300 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

therefore strenuously combated her sister's 
resolution; but Ellen had heard of an 
engagement, and thought she ought to take 
what offered. 

The Emersons were not the least like the 
Ferrers family; no, they were deeply re- 
ligious people ; with them she could not fail 
to find happiness. 

The family consisted of three little girls 
and one boy. The father, a gentleman of 
private fortune, devoted himself entirely to 
going about doing good. The mother, a 
great invalid, never went out, or very 
seldom, but she exercised the most un- 
bounded benevolence. They invited Ellen 
to spend a week with them, and though she 
could not but notice that a melancholy 
atmosphere pervaded the house, she w T as so 
pleased with her reception that she wrote to 
Annie, "Don't oppose my going to these 
really Christian people ! Such an air of peace 
and quiet fills their home ; it will be a 
heaven after Elmgrove I" 

So Annie yielded, and Ellen went into 
Buckinghamshire ; sorrowful, indeed, but 
much more sorrowful for the uncertain late 
of her lover than for the rude dispersion of 
her first love-dream. Meekly resigned to do 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 301 

and suffer all God's will, and fully resolved 
to exert herself to the utmost for the con- 
scientious discharge of her duties, Ellen 
could not be really unhappy ; but Annie was 
unhappy for her ; yes, and even angry for 
her, too ! 

Her own occupations were becoming more 
agreeable. Her pupils, though spoiled and 
wayward, were insensibly beginning to feel 
the influence of her teaching. Had Mr. and 
Mrs. Maberly renounced a little, nay, a 
very little, of their overweening pride in 
her favour, they would have rendered their 
dependent not only contented with her lot, 
but even grateful for it. Such a sacrifice 
was not to be thought of for a moment ! 
Mr. Maberly was an amiable man — no one 
could call him otherwise ; strictly honour- 
able, sometimes even generous; but much 
that was excellent in him was marred by 
one unfortunate mania, a mania to take a 
position in society for which neither his 
connexions (though they were highly respect- 
able) nor his attainments (though they were 
of average merit) fitted him. He did not, 
like Yussuf, exclaim, " I am Yussuf, the 
water-carrier, and as a water-carrier I will 
live and die !" but his countenance, bearing, 



302 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

habits, all loudly proclaimed, " I am striving 
to live among the great and as do the great, 
and with that sole ambition I will live 
and die !" 

Like the man in the play, Mr. Maberly 
adored a lord, and doted on a duke. He 
would certainly have given a considerable 
part of his substance to see his name in 
print among the guests at a reunion in the 
fashionable world. Foolish Mr. Maberly ! 
he would cringe to a set of men equally 
beneath him in character and conduct, lend 
them money, do their bidding blindly, with 
no other recompence than having it said 
that he w r as the intimate friend of the 

Marquis of , or like a brother with 

Lord E L ! 

Au reste, Mr. Maberly had really few 
faults ; just, honourable, kind-hearted, ready 
to bestow help on the needy, he would not 
have inflicted the least injury on any one. 
He was an indulgent, generous master, and 
would no doubt have been polite and con- 
siderate to his children's governess, if he had 
not feared that he might thereby lose caste ! 

When he was not in attendance on his 
noble friends, Mr. Maberly lived in digni- 
tied solitude. There were scarcely any 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 303 

families in the neighbourhood with whom 
he could associate on equal terms. Some 
were self-made men; others did not know 
who their grandfathers were. When reduced 
to solitude, Mr. Maberly studied, and 
apparently studied very hard ; not the 
classics, however, but the Peerage. He knew 
the descent, the intermarriages, the em- 
blazonment of all the peers of England. 
The Peerage, in fact, so absorbed his mental 
powers, that though he sometimes read other 
books, he seldom remembered them ; in fact, 
to leave clear space for his darling subject, 
he seemed, like Hamlet, to have wiped from 
his " memory, all foolish, fond records." It 
was sad that a good heart like Mr. Maberly 's 
should have been wasted by thus tenaciously 
clinging to the skirts of a world, from which 
fortune, position, and nature had separated 
him ! 

With greater intelligence, and conse- 
quently greater responsibility, Mrs. Maberly 
pursued the same course as her husband. 
She too, aimed high, but less successfully, 
for he often found ingress when she did not, 
and yet her appearance and manner were far 
more aristocratic than his. But then, she 
did not lend money; perhaps she had not 



304 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

thought of it as a passe partout, perhaps she 
had not sufficient at her command. She was 
very benevolent to the poor, and gave freely 
of what she had. She encouraged her children 
to relieve the wants of the indigent ; and if 
she taught them no other virtue, the lesson 
of generosity was given by precept and 
example. But Mrs. Maberly forgot that 
charity is something more than relieving the 
physical wants of the necessitous. She knew 
nothing, positively nothing, of the large- 
hearted charity which, calling all mankind 
by the name of brother, is tenderly careful 
even of the feelings of others. A kinder 
mistress than Mrs. Maberly never existed, 
but it would have been vulgar to show any 
attention to " the governess," and quite 
degrading to associate with her ! 

And besides wishing to do as the great 
world did, Mrs. Maberly had a particular 
aversion to bringing any one into contact 
with her who might draw attention from 
herself, or share with her that which she 
received. So the governess must remain 
shut up in that room at the top of the 
house. Certainly she wanted for nothing. 
There was an excellent dinner sent up there 
every day. She had a good supper too, and a 



/ 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 305- 

tea-caddy, with a key in her own possession. 
" What more could she want ! Lonely ? 
Nonsense ! She is fond of reading. We lend 
her plenty of books ; and if the men are 
rather boorish, it is only the penalty that 
ugliness must pay. Has she not plenty of 
consolation in the sentimental friendship of 
Antonia ? Come down- stairs, indeed ? No, 
indeed she shan't. If she is not satisfied, 
we can find plenty to replace her !" 



VOL. I. 



306 ANNE SHERWOOD. 



CHAPTER XX. 

" Only think, Miss Sherwood, we're going 
to London 1" exclaimed Miss Greraldine, 
rushing into the school-room one day. 
" Going to stay there the whole season ; but 
perhaps you don't know what the season 
means, as you're so poor, and have always 
lived in the country, and your papa was not 
a gentleman. Why, how you colour ! Have 
I said any harm ? I really didn't know it, 
if I did say anything to offend you ; and I'm 
sorry too, for I do love you when we're not 
at lessons, though you are so ugly ! Ah ! 
you're laughing ! Now you're not ugly at 
all. Aren't you very glad we're going to 
London ?" 

" Not very." 

" But London is so gay, Miss Sher- 
wood !" 

" It will make very little difference to 
me," said the governess ; " very little indeed. " 

" Oh yes, it will make a difference ! You 
wont be so lonely there. I know you i 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 307 

here; and I've often asked mamma to let 
you come down-stairs. Perhaps she will 
when we're in town, as my uncles wont be 
there. She says you could not come where 
they are. In London she'll often let you go 
out, and let you take us to see sights ; that 
w r ill make you happy, I'm sure." 

" But I have no taste for sight- seeing, 
and I like the country best," said Annie, 
who was saddened by the prospect of leaving 
Antonia. 

" Well, you are the strangest person that 
ever lived !" said Greraldine. " Not care for 
sight- seeing ! Not care for London ! We 
shall walk in the Park, and see so many 
people ; not St. James's — vulgar people go 
there — but Hyde Park. All the people of 
rank go to Hyde Park, Miss Sherwood ! 
You didn't know that before, I dare say. 
Did I ever tell you my godmother was a 
countess ?" 

" Yes, a great many times, Geraldine ; 
but you never told me whether she was a 
nice, kind, amiable woman." 

"She is not a woman, Miss Sherwood; 
she's a lady, a lady of rank ; did I not tell 
you she was a countess ? As to her being 
amiable, I don't know, for I never saw her. 



30S ANNE SHERWOOD. 

Oli, yes ! I did once ; but so long ago. Oh, 
here comes Aunt Antonia ! She is really 
very u^ly ; almost as ugly as you, Miss 
Sherwood, and doesn't even look handsome 
when she smiles. Now, don't put on that 
grave face. I am saying no harm of her, I 
am sure. Mamma lets me say and do all I 
like ; and so must you if you want me to 
love you ! I shall get quite good presently, 
if you let me have all my own way. Have 
I not already begun to read some Bible 
every day (though I hate it), only to please 
vou r 

Antonia entered without her usual smile. 
She had learned that she was to lose her 
companion and friend ; one who her partial 
friendship taught her to believe could not 
soon be replaced, and her heart felt sad ; 
while Annie could not restrain the tears of 
regret for their approaching separation. 

" But we shall meet again in a few- 
months, dear Minnie," said Antonia. 

" But not as now," replied Annie. " You 
will have seen something more of the outer 
world by that time, Antonia, and will per- 
haps learn to smile at your friendship for 
a poor dependent." 

" I wish you wouldn't conjure up such 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 309 

dreadful things!'' said Antonia. "Why 
pain your own mind by constantly recurring 
to your situation? Why, dear Minnie, 
wrong me, by supposing that my feelings 
towards you could change ? No one in the 
world could ever be to me what you have 
been, and are/' she added tenderly, em- 
bracing Annie. "Come, tell me that you 
believe all I say, Minnie !" 

" Most implicitly," said Annie, seriously. 
" So implicitly, that if I find you changed, 
it will break — or harden my heart.' 3 

"Nothing in me shall wilfully occasion 
you a moment's pain," replied Antonia. " I 
have found in you what I have all my life 
desired, but never possessed till now, a sym- 
pathising friend. Do you think I will volun- 
tarily resign such a prize ? No ! when you 
are gone, I scarcely know how I shall be 
able to pass the hours you have made so 
pleasant. But you will write to me often, 
dear Minnie ?" 

" Very, very often I" 

"And you will tell me everything?" 

" Yes, positively everything. But you 
know my world is in books, so I must often 
talk to you of imaginary characters, places, 
and things." 



310 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

" Never mind ; all you talk about will be 
pleasant to me. You will advise me what 
is best to be done for the poor ; you will tell 
me what books to read, will give me your 
own thoughts upon them. You will tell 
me too, of all you write, and thus I shall 
become acquainted with the creatures of 
your imagination." 

" And you, Antonia ! You will write me 
nice long letters, and very often ?" 

" Indeed I will ; but you must promise me 
to take care of yourself, for your sister's 
sake and for mine !" 

" For her dear sake and yours, I will," 
said Annie. " I live for no one else." 

" There is no single vision of my future 
life with which you are not mingled," said 
Antonia ; "no plans for days to come, in 
which I do not see you joining. You will 
not distrust me again, Minnie ?" 

" Never 1" said Annie, warmly. 

The friends parted then, and Annie spent 
an hour in composing some pathetic verses 
to her dear Antonia, which when they came 
to be read over in after years, Annie found 
out to be very bad poetry, and Antonia pro- 
bably discovered that the sentiments they 



ANNE SHERWOOD. 311 

expressed were as absurd as the composition 
was defective ! 

Antonia Oakley enjoyed a small indepen- 
dence, but it was not spent in selfish indul- 
gence or in trifles. A large part of her 
income went to relieve the unfortunate. It 
was Annie Sherwood's chief pleasure to go 
through the adjoining village, examine into 
the wants of the poor, and report their cases 
to her friend, who never failed to answer the 
appeal by granting help to the sufferers. 
Sometimes it was warm flannel for a rheu- 
matic old man, sometimes coal for a shiver- 
ing family, sometimes better food for the 
sick than their penury would permit them 
to obtain for themselves. And all Antonia's 
charities were so sweetly, so modestly dis- 
pensed, all her gifts so free from ostentation 
and display ! 

Sweet Antonia ! whose early life was so 
beautiful in charity and friendship — sweet 
Antonia ! why didst thou let the unfeeling 
world rudely break the bands of a friendship 
cemented by such holy charities ! 

The journey to London was through a 
monotonous, uninteresting country — those 
counties which Dr. Arnold (essentially a 



312 ANNE SHERWOOD. 

man of taste,) declared were calculated to 
annihilate every conception of the beautiful 
in those who dwelt in them. But Annie 
Sherwood was too sad to notice anything, if 
her route had been through Arcadia. 



end or vol. x. 






'/> < 








ItUMmmwIttat 



