A! 






^'/ ''^ 




THE LIBRARY 

OF 

THE UNIVERSITY 

OE CALIFORNIA 

LOS ANGELES 

V 

GIFT OF 
FREDERIC THOMAS BLANCHARD 





flT OT 



^ 











XONDOT; &-UEW YORK: &SORGE R0UTL£DO£ SrSOSS 



CEICI-ITON" 



B7 



WILLIAM HARRISON AINSWORTII 



Ergo, flos juvenum, Scotia? spes, Palladis ingens, 
Ereptumque decus Musanim e dulcibus ulnis, 
Te, quanivis sileant alii, Critone, poetaj, 
Teque, tuamque necem nunquam mea Musa silebit. 

Abernethy. Musa Campestrh 



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY HABLOT K. BROWNE 



AUTHOR'S COPYRIGHT EDITION 



LONDON 
GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, Limited 

BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL 
MANCHESTKR AND NEW VOKK 

i<syi> 






PREFACE. 



There is a passage in David Buchanan's memorial of Crichton, in 
which, alluding to the deadly enmity home towards the Admirable Soot 
by Vincenzo di Gonzaga, he assigns as the cause — " quod nmasiam 
principis deperiret." This passage may be regarded as the text of the 
narrative of Sir Thomas Urquhart, and of the following Romance. To a 
certain extent I have pursued the course taken by the never-sufficiently- 
to-be-admired Knight of Cromarty, whose " Discoverie of a Jewel" is, 
indeed, a jewel of a book. Urquhart's descriptions of the masque and 
duel at Mantua are inimitable. So thoroughly was this singular writer 
imbued with the spirit of Rabelais (of whom he has left an unfinished, 
but, so far as it goes, most exquisite translation), that in his account of 
the disputation in the college of Navarre, he seems to have unconsciously 
imitated Panurge's controversy with Thaumast, the Englishman, while, 
in the " true pedigree and lineal descent of the ancient and honourable 
family of Urquhart,' he appears anxious to emulate the iiii-hty genea- 
logical honours of the good Pantagruel. Sir Thomas, hcvever, is a 
joyous spirit — a right Pantagruelist ; and if he occasionally 

Projicit arapuUas et sesquipedalia verba, 

he has an exuberance of wit and playfulness of fancy that amply redeems 
his tendency to fanfaronade. 

In my endeavour to illustrate the various shades of Crichtou's many- 
coloured character, I have, perhaps, touched too lightly on its scholastic 
features. But feeling that adequately to exhibit one of the scenes of 
intellectual digladiation in which he was so frequently and so trium- 
phantly engaged, it would require the possession of a depth ol learning 
little inferior to that of the invincible disputant himself, I have elected 
as the safer and more suitable course to portray him as the preux cheva 
Her and all-accomplished gallant, rather than aa the philosopher and iia- 
loctitian. l> 



G8497i 



PRF-FACE. 

Boccaliiii's " Satiric Sketcli," Sir Thomas Urquliart's " Jewel," and 
other allusions of more accredited biographers, would justify main giving 
my hero an air of gallantry, were it possible to conceive that he who sur- 
passed all the aspiring spirits of tlie age in which he flourished in the 
feats of arts and arms (and whose aim was to excel in everything), could 
be behind them in their excesses, especially when those very excesses 
tended to advance his reputation. The manners of the time were corrupt 
in the extreme ; and the fascinations of the belles et honnetes datnes et 
demoiselles of the Court of Catherine de Medicis were such as required 
more stoicism to withstand than the handsome Scot cared to practise. 
The reader may, if he chooses, speedily gather a notion of the universal 
profligacy of the period from the bons contes of Brantome, and the dif- 
ferent memoirs included in the " Journal of Henri III." 

What I have advanced respecting ^Margaret de Valois is fully borne 
out by the Divorce Satirique, and the details of Scipio Dupleix. The 
majestic and terrible figure of Catherine de Medicis is too deeply im- 
pressed upon the page of history to make it necessary to advert to the 
sources whence I have transferred its lineaments tc n.y canvas. 

It only now remains to speak of Vincenzo di Gonzaga, whose cause 
has been warmly but unsuccessfully advocated by Dr. Black. Notwith- 
standing his patronage of men of letters (extended towards them as 
much from ostentation as any other motive by the various Italian rulers 
of the time), this prince was, we learn from Muratori, exceedingly luxu- 
rious and profuse in his habits — ^'- gran giocatore, grande scialacquator 
dal danaro, setnpre in vol to fm il li/sso, egli amori, sempre in lieti pas- 
\atempi o difcsli, a di balli, o di musiche, o di commedie." Sismondi, 
who has given an excellent summary of his character, says — " il umait 
avec passion lea femmes lejeu, la danse, le theatre.''^ And Possevino, 
the annalist (and, therefore, the panegyrist) of his family, expressly 
alludes to his vindictive disposition — " quidam cindictcB tiimium, ideoque 
in abrupta tracfum opinanfur." For the rest, I may affirm with 
Victor Hugo — " qiie souvent les fables du peuple font la verite du 
poeie." 



CONTENTS. 



i3ooii]I 



CHAP. 

I. The Scholaks 
11. The Gelosa 

III. The Rector . 

IV. An English Bulldog 
V. Cosmo Kuggieri . 

VL The Mask 



PAOI 
1 

IS 
. 21 
33 
39 
43 



I. 

11, 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XV. 



I. 

II. 
III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 

XIII. 

KIV. 



The Court of Henry III. . 

ESCLAIRMONDE 

Henri III 

Catherine de Medicis . 

Marguerite de Yalois 

The Oratory . 

The Bezoar 

The Jester 

The Sabarcane 

The Hotel de Soissons 

The Laboratory .... 

The Incantation 

The Magic Ring .... 

The Two Masks 

The Colusin of Catherine de Medicis 



i3oofe Ml. 



HiC BiBITUR ! 

The Huguenot 
The Frocession 
The Lists 
The Pavilion 
The Bearnais 
The Barb 
TuE Englishman 
The Two Henris 
The Missal 
The Bull 
The Prize 
The Dungeon 
The Conspiracy 



51 

64 

72 

76 

84 

92 

104 

119 

126 

141 

149 

157 

172 

181 

191 



199 
219 
226 
232 
242 
255 
268 
273 
282 
295 
308 
318 
325 
332 



The Scottish Catalier 17 

The Admirable Scot 50 

Marguerite 101 

A_',--5pice 110 

The Thirty Requisites • HI 



CONTENTS. 



TuE Temptation of Satnt Anthont 
The TiiuKE Orgies . . . . 
The Legesp of Vai.dez 
Anacreontic Ode 
The Dirge of Bourbon 
The Dittv of Dugiesci.in 
The SwouD of Bayakd 

YUSEF ANU ZoRAYDA 
YOLANDE .... 

esclaikmonde . 

Ale and Sack 

Incantation 

Song of the Spirit 

Invocation 

The Sorcerer's Sarbatii 

Venite Potemus 

Song of the Scholar . 

The Chronicle of Gargantia 

Song of the Sorbonist . 

Charles IX. at Montfaucon . 

Les plus rouges y sont pris 

Druid 

Love's Homilt 



glppcntiix. 



PAGE 
. 113 

. 117 
. 121 
. 124 
. ib. 
. 128 
. 129 
. 132 
. 133 
. 135 
, 143 
. 170 
. 172 
. 174 
. 175 
. 206 
. 209 
. 210 
. 214 
. 217 
. 260 
. 278 
. 334 



Epicedium on the Cardinal Borromeo 
To Caspar Visconti 



343 
349 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 



VXGB 

1. THE DESCENT OF THE COLUMN . . . (fRONTISPIECe) . 196 

2. CRICHTOX AT THE GATE OF THE COLLEGE OF NAVARRE . (TITLE) . 1 
'A. THE CONFLICT WITH THE STUDENTS . . 38 

4. PRESENTATION OF E.SCLAIRMUNDE TO HENRI III. ..... 66 

5. THE MORTAL DEFIANCE BY THE MASK ... ... 81 

6. THE ORATORY 97 

7. THE VENICE QUVSS 119 

8. HENRI ANU THE DEMOISELLE TORIUNl . .... 139 

9. CRICHTON's RENCOUNTER WITH OGILVY AND BLOLT^T BEFORE THE 

FALCON 144 

10. THE LABORATORY . . . .156 

I J. THE Pr.l7HT .189 

12. HENRY OF NAVARRE AT THE FALCON ... . . 212 

13. REUOURS RKCOGNISING HENRY . . . . . . 223 

14. THE PROCESSION . . 228 

15. THE LISTS . . 238 

16. THE PAVILION , ... . . 249 

17. THE BULL .... ...... 317 

I«. crichion's »:,owess hewardi'.i^ . , . 321 



CPJCHTOlS^. 



BOOK THE FIRST.— ClIxiPTER I. 

THE SCHOLARS. 

Tu vicns doncques tie Paris ? dist Pantagrael — Et a quoy passez-vous le temps 
vous aultres IMessieurs Estudians au diet Paris ? — Rabelais. — Pantagruel. — 
Liv. J[., chap. vi. 

Towards the close of Wednesday, the 4th of February, 1579, 
a vast assemblage of scholars was collected before the Gothic gate- 
way of the ancient college of Navarre. So niunerous was this con- 
course, that it not merely blocked up the area in front of tlie renowned 
seminary in question, but extended fir down tlie Rue de la Mon- 
tague Sainte-Genevieve, in which it is situated. Never had such 
a disorderly rout been brought togetlier since the days of the 
uproar in 1557, wdien the predecessors of these turbulent students 
took up arms, marched in a body to the Pre-aux-Clcrcs, set fire to 
three houses in the vicinity, and slew a sergeant of the guard, who 
vainly endeavoured to restrain their fury. Their last election of a 
rector, JMcssire Adrien D'Aniboise, '•' ])ater eniditionwn" as he is 
described in his epitaph, when the same body congregated within 
the cloisters of the Mathurins, and thence proceeded, in tumultu- 
ous array, to the church of Saint-Louis, in the isle of the same 
name, — had been nothing to it. Every scholastic hive sent forth 
its drones. Sorbonne, and jNlontaigu, Cluny, Harcourt, the Four 
Nations, and a host of minor establishments — in all, amounting to 
forty-two — each added its swarms ; and a pretty buzzing they 
<;reated! The fair of Saint- Germain had only commenced the 
day before; but though its festivities were to continue till Palm 
Sunday, and though it was the constant resort of the scholars, who 
committed, during their days of carnival, ten thousand excesses, 
It was now absolutely deserted. 

The Pomme-de-Pin, the Custcl, the Magdaleine, and the jMuIc, 

B 



2 CRICIITON. 

those tahernes vitrito'tres, cclebratoJ in Pantagruel's conference with 
the Llmosin stiulcnt, Avliicli luu; conferred upon them an immor- 
tality like that of our own hostel, the INIermaid, were wholly neg- 
lected; tho dice-box was laid aside for the nonce; and the Avell- 
Tised cards were thrust into the doublets of these thirsty tipplers of 
the schools. 

Ikit not alone did the crowd consist of the brawler, the gambler, 
the bully, and the debauchee, though these, it nuist be confessed, 
predominated. It was a grand medley of all sects r.nd classes. 
The modest demeanour of the rctirira^, palc-browcd student, 
Avas contrasted with, the ferocious aspect and reckless bearing of 
his immediate neighbour, whose appearance was little better than 
that of a bravo. The grave theologian and embryo ecclesiastic 
were placed in juxta-position with the scolTing and licentious 
acolyte ; while lawyer in posse, and the law-breaker m es'ie, 
were numbered amongst a group, whose pursuits -were those of 
violence and fraud. 

V'arious as were the cJiaracters that composed it, not less diver- 
sified were the costumes of this heterogeneous assemblage. Subject 
to no particular regulations as to dress, or rather openlv infracting 
them, if any such were attempted to be enforced, — each scliolar, to 
whatever college he belonged, attired himself in such garments as 
best suited his taste or his linances. Taking it altogether, the mob 
was neither remarkable for the fashion, nor the cleanliness of the 
apparel of its members. 

From Rabelais we learn that the passion of play was so strongly 
implanted in the students of his day, that they would frequently 
stake the points of their doublets at tric-tracor trou-madame ; and 
but little improvement had taken })lace in their morals or manners 
some half century afterwards. The buckle at their girdle — the 
mantle on their shoulders — the shirt to their back — oiten stood 
the hazard of the die; and hence it not unfrequently happened, 
that a rusty pourpoint and ragged c/iausses were all the covering 
which the luckless dicers could enumerate, owing, no doubt, " to 
the extreme rarity and penury of pecune in their viars2ij)iesy 

Kound or square caps, hoods and cloaks of black, grey, or other 
sombre hue, were, however, the prevalent garb of the members oi' 
the university ; but here and there might be seen some gayer 
specimen of the tribe, whose broad-rimmed, high-crowned felt hat 
and Haunting feather; whose putfed-out sleeves and exaggerated 
ruff — with starched plaits of such amplitude that they had been 
not inappropriately named j^lats de iiaint Jean Bapthte, from 
the resemblance wlilch the wearer's head bore to that of the saint, 
when deposited in the charger of the daughter of Ilerodias, were 
intended to ape the leadin'; mode of the elefrant court of their 
sovereign lienn irois. 

To such an extent had these insolent youngsters carried their 
licence of imitation, that certain of their members, fresli from the faiu 



THE SCnCLARS. 3 

of St. Germain, and not \vholly una(:(.|uaintecl witli tl'.c hippocrasof 
tliesuttlcis crowding its mart, wore around their tlux)ats enormous 
collars of paper, cut in rivalry of the legitimate plaits of muslin, 
and bore in their hands long hollow sticks, from wliich they dis- 
charged peas and other missiles in imitation of the ^arhacancs then 
in vogue with the monarch and his I'avourites. 

Thus fantastically tricked out, on that same day — nay, only a 
few hours before, and at the fair above-metitioned, had these 
facetious wights, -with more merriment than discretion, ventured 
to exhibit themselves before the cor.'erje of Henri, and to exclaim 
loud enough to reach the ears of royalty, " a in f raise on loimnii 
h Venn /" — a piece of pleasantry for which they subsequently paidl 
dear. 

Notwithstanding its sliabby appearance in detail, tlie general 
cfll'ct of this scholastic rabble was striking and picturesque. The 
thick moustaches and pointed beards Avith which tlic lips and chins of 
most of them were decorated, gave to their physiognomies a manly 
and determined air, fully borne out by their unrestrained carriage 
and deportment. To a man, almost all were armed with a tough 
vine- wood bludgeon, called in their language an estoc volant, tipped 
and shod with steel — a weapon fully understood by thetn, and 
rendered, by their dexterity in the use of it, formidable to their 
adversaries. Not a few carried at their girdles the short rapier, sa 
celebrated in their duels and brawds, or concealed within their bosom 
a poignard or a two-edged knife. 

The scholars of Paris have ever been a ttu'bulent and ungovern- 
able race ; and at the pjcriod of which this history treats, and, 
indeed, long before, were little better than a licensed horde of 
robbers, consisting of a pack of idle and wayward youths drafted 
from all parts of Eiu'ope, as well as from the remoter provinces of 
their own nation. There Avas little in common between the mass 
of students and their brethren, excepting the fellowship resulting 
from the universal licence in which all indulged. Hence their 
thousand combats amongst themselves — combats almost invariably 
attended with fatal consequences — and which the heads of the 
university found it impossible to check. 

Their own scanty resources, eked out by what little they could 
derive from beggary or robbery, formed their chief subsistence ; 
for many of them were positive mendicants, and were so denomi- 
nated ; and, being possessed of a sanctuary within their own quar- 
ters, to which thev could at convenience retire, they submitted to 
the constraint of no laws except those enforced within the jurisdic- 
tion of the imlverslty, and hesitated at no means of enriching 
themselves at the expense of their neighbours. Hence, the frequent 
warfare waged between them tuid the brethren of Saint Germain 
des Pres, wdiosc monastic domains adjoined their territories, and 
wliosc meadov/s were the constant champ c/os of their skirmishes ; 
according to Dulaurc — pj-csf^ue Unijouis un iJiidtie dc tumuite, de 

B 2 



4 CRICHTON. 

rrahmtcrie, de combats, de ditch, de dt-bauches, ct de sedition. Hence 
their sanguinary conflicts with the good citizens of Pari?, to Avhom 
they were wliolly obnoxious, and wlio occasionally repaid their ag- 
gressions with interest. In 1407, two of" their number, convicted 
of assassination and robbery, Avere condemned to tlie gibbet, and the 
sentence Avas carried into execution; but so great was the uproar 
occasioned in tlic imiversity by this violation of its immunities, that 
the provost of Paris, Guillaume de Tignonville, was compelled to take 
down their bodies from Montfaucon, and see them honourably and 
ceremoniously interred. This recognition of their rights only served 
to make matters worse, and for a series of years tlie nuisance con- 
tinued unabated. 

It is not our purpose to record all the excesses of the university, 
nor the means taken for their suppression. Vainly were the civil 
authorities arrayed against them. Vainly were bulls thundered from 
the Vatican. No amendment was eflectcd. The weed might be 
cut down, but was never entirely extirpated. Their feuds were 
transmitted from generation to generation, and their old bone of 
contention with the abbot of Saint Germain (the Pre-aux-Clercs) 
Avas, after an uninterrupted strife for thirty years, submitted to the 
arbitration of the Pope, who very equitably refused to pronounce 
judgment in favour of cither party. 

Such were tlic scholars of J-*aris in the sixteenth century — such 
the character of the clamorous crew who besieged the portals of the 
college of Navarre. 

The object that summoned, together this unruly multitude, was, 
it appears, a desire on the part of the scholars to be present at a 
public controversy, or learned disputation, then occurring within 
the great hall of the college before which they were congregated, 
and the disappointment caused by their finding the gates closed, 
and all entrance denied to them, occasioned their present disposition 
to riot. 

It was in vain they were assured by the halberdiers stationed at 
the gates, and who, with crossed pikes, strove to resist the on- 
ward pressure of tlie mob, that the hall and court were already 
crammed to overflowing, that there was not room even for the solo 
ot"afootof a doctor of the faculties, and that their orders were 
positive and imperative tluit none beneath the degree of a 
bachelor or licentiate should be admitted, and that a trcop of mar- 
iniets* and Bejaiinesf could have no possible claim to admission. 
In vain they were told this Avas no ordinary disputation, no 
common controversy, that all Avere alike entitled to license of in- 
gress, that the disputant Avas no undistinguished scholar, Avhose re- 
nown did not extend beyon i his own trilling sphere, and Avhose 
opinions, therefore, few Avould care to hear, and itlll fewer to 

* Scliolars eitlicr not living vithin the walls of the univorsity, or not being tn 
pension at the colloi^es. 

■f Yellow-beaks j a ni<jkn:inie applied to now ly- admitted students. 



THE SCHOLARS. 5 

opp'^gn, but a foreigner of high rank, in iiigh favour and fasliion, 
and not more remarkable for his extraordinary intelleetual endow- 
ments, than for liis bi-ilHant personal aceompHshments. In vain 
the trenibUng olhcials sought to chnch their arguments by 
stating, that not alone did the conclave consist of the chief mem- 
bers of the university, the senior doctors of theology, medicine, and 
law, the professors of the humanities, rhetoric, and philosophy, and 
all the various other dignitaries; but that the debate was honoured 
by the presence of Monsieur Christo])he de Thou, first president ot 
parlianient ; by that of the learned Jac(pies Augustin, of the same 
name; by one of the secretaries of state and governor of Paris, ]\L 
Kene do Villequier; by the ambassadors of Elizabeth, Queen of 
England; and of Philip II., King of Spain, and several of their 
suite; by Abbe de Brantomc; by M. Mlron, the court physician; 
by Cosmo Ruggicri, the Queen Mother's astrologer ; by the re- 
nowned poets and masque writers, INIaitres Ronsard, P)aif, and 
Philippe Desportes; by the well-known advocate of parliament, Mes- 
sire Etiennc Pasquier; but, also (and here came the fjravauic/i o? 
tlie objection to their admission) by the two especial favourites of 
his majesty and leaders of affairs, the seigneurs of Joycusc and 
D'Epernon. 

It was in vain the students were informed that, for the preserva- 
tion of strict decorum, they iiad been commanded by tlie rector to 
make flxst the gates. No excuses would avail them. The scholars 
were cogent reasoners, and a show of staves soon brought their op- 
ponents to a nonplus. In this line of argument they were perfectly 
aware of their ability to prove a major. 

"To the wall with them — to the wall T' cried a hundred infuri 
atcd voices. " Down with the halberdiers — down with the gates — 
down with the disputants — down with the rector himself! — Deny 
our privileges! To the wall Avith old Adrien d'Amboise — ex- 
clude the disciples of the university from their own halls ! — curry 
favour with the court minions ! — hold a public controversy in pri- 
vate ! — down with him I We will issue a mandamus for a new elec- 
tion on the spot !'' 

Whereupon a deep groan resounded throughout the crowd. It 
was succeeded by a volley of fresh execrations against tlie rector, 
and an angry demonstration of bludgeons, accompanied by a brisk 
shower of peas from the sarbacancs. 

The officials turned pale, and calculated the chance of a broken 
neck in reversion, with that of a broken crown in immediate pos- 
session. The former being at least contingent, appeared the milder 
alternative, and tliey might have been inclined to adopt it, had not 
a further obstacle stood in their way. The gate was barred witliin- 
side, and the vergers and bedels who liad the custody of the door, 
though alarmed ut the tumult without, positively lelused to un- 
fiisten it. 



CRICnTON". 



Apfain, tlio tlircats of* tlic scholars were renewed, and further 
intimations of violence were exhibited. A<iain the peas rattled 
upon the hands and faces of the halberdiers, till their ears tini^lcd 
^vith pain. " Prate to us of the king's favourites," cried one of the 
foremost of the scholars, a youth decorated with a paper collar; 
" they may rale "within the precincts of the Louvre, but not within 
the walls of the university. Mauorcbleu ! We hold them cheap 
enough. We heed not the idle bark of these full-fed court lapdogs. 
What to us is the bearer of a bilboquet? By the lour evangelists, 
Avc will have none of them here! Let the Gasconcadet, D'Eper- 
non, reflect on the fate of Quelus and Maugiron, and let our gay 
.Toyeuse beware of the dog's death of Saint Megrin. Place for better 
men — place for the schools — away with frills and sarbacancs !" 

" What to us is a president of parliament, or a governor of the 
city?" shouted another of the same gentry. " \\'e care nothing for 
their ministration. We recognise them not, save in their own courts. 
All their authority fell to the ground at the gate of the Rue Saint 
Jacques, when they entered our dominions. We care for no 
parties. We are poUtiqiics, and steer a middle course. We hold the 
Guisards as cheap as the Huguenots, and the brethren of the League 
weigh as little with us as the iollowers of Calvin. Our oidy sove- 
reign is Gregory XIIL, Pontilf of Rome. Away with the Guise 
and the Bearnais !" 

"Away with Henri of Navarre, if you please," cried a scholar of 
Harcourt; " or Henri of Valois, if you list, but, by all the saints, 
not with Henri of Lorraine, he is the fast friend of the true laith. 
No ! — no ! — live the Guise — live the Holy Union !"' 

"Away with Elizabeth of England," cried a scholar of Cluny; 
" what doth her representative here? Seeks he a spouse for her 
amongst our schools? She will have no great bargain, I own, if 
she bestows her royal hand upon our Due d'Anjou." 

"If you value your bulf jerkin, I counsel you to say nothing 
elighting of the Queen of England in my hearing," returned a 
bluff, broad-shouldered fellow, raising his bludgeon after a menacing 
fashion. lie was an Englishman belonging to the Four Nations, 
and had a huge bull-dog at his heels. 

" Away with Philip of Spain and his ambassador," cried a Ber- 
nardin. 

" Por los ojos de mi Dama !" cried a Spaniard belonging to the 
College of Narbonne, witli huge moustaches curled half way up 
his bronzed and insolent visage, and a slouched hat pulled over his 
brow. " This may not pass muster. The representative of the 
King of Spain must be respected even by the Academics of Lutetia. 
Which of you shall gainsay me? — ha!" 

" What business has he here with his suite, on occasions like to 
the present?" returned tlie Bernavdin. " Tete-Dieu ! this disputa- 
tiou is one that little concerns the interest of your politic king; 



THE SCIIOLAr.S. 7 

and mctliinlcs Dom riillip, or his representative, has reprard for little 
else than Avhatsocver advances his own interest. Your ambas- 
sador hath, I doubt not, some latent motive for his present atten 
dance in our scliools." 

" Perchance," returned the Spaniard. " "We will discuss that 
point anon." 

"And wliat doth the pander of the Sybarite within the dusty 
halls of learning?" ejaculated a scholar of Lemoine. " What doth 
the jealous-patcd slayer of his wife and unborn child Avithin the 
reach of free-spckcn voices, and mayhap of Aveli-directcd blades? 
Methinks it Averc more prudent to tarry within the bowers of his 
harem, than to hazard his perfumed person among us." 

" Well said," rejoined the scholar of Cluny — " down with 
Rene de Villequier, though he be Governor of Paris." 

" What title hath the Abbe de Brantome to a seat amongst us?" 
said the scion of Harcourt; "ceites he hath a reputation for wit, 
and scholarship, and gnllantiy. But what is that to us? His 
place might now be filled by worthier men." 

" And what, in the devil's name, brings Cosmo Ixuggieri 
hither?" asked the Bcrnardin. " What doth the wrinkled old 
dealer in the black art hope to learn from us? We arc not given 
to alchemy, and the occult sciences; we practise no hidden mys- 
teries; wc brew no philtres; we compound no slov/ poisons; we 
vend no waxen images. What doth he here, I say! ^Tis a scan- 
dal in the rector to permit his presence. And what if he came 
imder the safeguard, and by the authority of his mistresr--, Cathe- 
rine de IMcdicis! Shall we regard her passport? Down with the 
heathen abbi^, his abominations have been endured too long; they 
smell rank in our nostrils. Think how he ensnared La Mole — 
think on his numberless victims. Who mixed the infernal potion 
of Charles IX.? Let him answer that. Down with tlic infidel — 
the Jew — the sorcerer 1 The stake were too good for him. Down 
■with Ruggicri, I say." 

" Ay,"down with the accursed astrologer," echoed the whole 
crew. " He has done abundant mischief in his time. A day of 
reckoning has arrived. Hath he cast his own horoscope? Did he 
foresee his own fate? Ha! ha!" 

" And then the poets," cried another member of the Foui 
Nations, — " a plague on all three. Would they were elsewhere. 
In what does this disputation concern tliem? Pierre Konsard, 
being an offshoot of this same College of Navarre, hath indu- 
bitably a claim upon our consideration. But he is old, and I 
marvel that his gout permitted him to hobble so far. O, the 
mercenary old scribbler I His late verses halt like hiniself, yet 
he lowereth not the price of his masques. Besides Avhich he is 
grown moral, and unsays all his former good things. Mort-Dieu 1 
your superannuated bards e\'er recant the indiscretions of their 
nonage. Clement iNLarot took to psahn-writing in his old age. 



8 CRICHTON. 

As to Bnir, his name will scarce outlast tLe scenery of his ballets, 
liis plays are out of fashion since the Gclosi arrived. He deserves no 
place amonii;st us. And Philip Desportes owes all liis present pre- 
lernient to the Vicomte de.Toycuse. However, lie is not altoucther 
devoid of merit — let liim wear his hays, so he trouble us not v/ith 
liis company. Koom for the sophisters ol" Xarbonnc, I say. To the 
dogs with poetry !" 

" IMorbleu !" exclaimed anotlier. " "What are the sophisters 
of jSarbonne to the decretists of the Sorbonne, who will discuss 
you a position of Cornelius u Lapide, or a sentence of Peter I>om- 
bard, as readily as you would a llask of hippocras, or a slice of 
botargo. Ay, and ciy traiiseat to a thesis of Aristotle, though it 
be against rule. What sayst thou, Capete?" contiiuicd he, ad- 
dressing his neiglibour, a scholar of JMontaigu, whose modest grey 
capuchin procured him this appellation; " Arc Ave the men to be 
thus scurvily entreated?" 

" I see not tliat your merits are greater tlian ours," returned he 
of the cnpuch, " though our boasting be less. The followers of 
the lowly John Standonclit are as well able to maintain tlieir tenets 
in controversy as those of Kobert of Sorbon? and I see no reason 
why entrance should be denied us. The honour of the university 
is at stake, and all its strength should be mustered to assert it." 

" Kiglitly spoken," returned the Tjcrnardin, " and it were a 
Listing disgrace to our schools were this arrogant Scot to carry olF 
tlieir laurels Avhen so manv who might have been found to lower 
his crest are allowed no share in their defence. The contest is one 
that concerns us all alike. We at least can arbitrate in case of 
need." 

" I care not for the honours of the university," rejoined one of 
tlie Ecossais, or Scotch College, then existing in the Rue des 
Amandiers, " but I care much for the giory of my countryman, 
and I would gladly have witnessed the triumph of the disciples of 
Rutherford, and of the classic Buchanan. But if the arbitrament 
to Avhich you would resort is to be tliat of voices merely, 1 am glad 
the rector in his wisdom has thought fit to keep you without, even 
though I mvself be personally inconvenienced by it." 

" Ilijo di Dios ! what fine talking is this?" retorted the Spaniard. 
" There is litt'e chance of the triumph you predicate for your coun- 
tryman. Trust me, we shall have to greet his departure from the 
debate with many hisses and few cheers; and if we could penetrate 
through the plates of yon iron door and gaze into the court it con- 
ceals from our view, we should find that the loftiness of his pre- 
tensions lias been already liumbled, and liis arguments gravelled. 
Por la Litania de los Santos! to think of comparing an obscure 
student of the pitiful College of Saint Andrew with the erudite 
doctors of the most erudite imiver.sity in the world, always except- 
ing those of Valencia and Salamanca. It needs all tliy country's 
assurance to keep the blush of shame from mantling in thy cheeks." 



THE SCi:OI.Ai:3. 9 

** Tlic seminary you ycvilc,"" replied the Scot, liaufrlitily, "lias 
been the nursery of our Scottish kings. Nay, the youthlul .Tunics 
Stuart pursued his studio? under the same roof, beneath the same 
■wise instruction, and at the sell-same time as our noble nnd gifted 
James Crichton, whom you have filsely denominated an adventurer, 
but whose lineage is not less distinguished tlian his learning. His 
renown has preceded him hither, and he was not unknown to vour 
doctorswhenhc affixed hisprogrannneto these college walls. Hark !" 
continued the speaker, exultingly, " and listen to yon evidence of 
bis triumph." 

And as he spoke, a loud and continued clapping of hands pro- 
ceeding from within was distinctly heard above the roar of the 
students. 

" That may be at his defeat/' muttered the Spaniard, between 
his teeth. 

" No such thing," replied the Scot. " I heard tJie name ot 
Crichton mingled Avith the plaudits." 

" And who may be this Phceni.x — this Gargantua of intellect — • 
who is to vanquish us all, as Panurge did Tliaumast, tlie English- 
man?"' asked the Sorbonist of the Scot. — " Who is he that is luoro 
philosophic than Pythagoras? — ha!" 

" Who is more studious than Carneades !" said the Bcrnardin. 

" More versatile than Alcibiades !" said Montaigu. 

** More subtle than Averroes!" cried Harcourt. 

*' More mystical than Plotinus !" said one of the Four Na- 
tions. 

" More visionary than Artcmidorus!" said Cluny. 

" More infallible than the Pope !" added Lcmoine. 

*' And who pretends to dispute f/t' onini sciuiUr' shouted tho 
Spaniard. 

" £t quolihet ente /" added the Sorbonist. 

" Mine cars are stunned with your vociferations,"" replied the 
Scot. " You ask me who James Crichton is, and yourselves give 
the re.=iponse. You have mockingly said he is a rata avis ; a pro- 
digy of Avit and learning; and you have unintentionally spoken 
the truth. He is so. But I will tell you that of him of which you 
are wholly ignorant, or which you have designedly overlooked. His 
condition is that of a Scottish gentleman of high rank. Like your 
Spanish grandee, he need not doff his cap to kings. On either 
s.de hath he the best of blood in his veins. His mother was a 
Stuart directly descended from that regal line. His liither, who 
owneth the fair domains of Eliock and Cluny, was Lord Advocate 
to our bonny and luckless Mary(wdiom Heaven assoilzie !) and still 
holds his high office. Methinks the Lairds of Crichton might have 
been heard of here. Howbeit, they are well known to me, who 
being an Ogilvy of Balfour, have often heard tell of a certain con- 
tract or obligation, whereby — " 



10 cnicnTox. 

" Basta!" interrupted the Sjxiniavd, " licecl not tliinc own aflairs, 
^vol•tllV• Scot. Tell us of tliis Crichton — lia !" 

" I have told you already more than 1 ouu;lit to have told,'' re- 
plied Ogllvy, sullenly. " And if you lack i'urtlier information 
respecting James Crichton's favour at the Louvre, his feats of arms, 
and the esteem in Avhich he is held by all the dames of honour in 
attendance upon your Queen Mother, Catherine de jNIedicis — and 
moreover," he added, with somewhat of sarcasm, "with her fair 
daughter. Marguerite dc Valois — you will do well to address your- 
pclf to the king's bulloon Maitrc Chicot, whom I sec not far olF. 
Few there are, mcthinks, who could in such short space have won 
so much favour, or actjuired such bright renown." 

" Humph !" muttered the Euglishmiin, "your Scotsmen stick 
by each other all the world over. This James Crichton may or 
may not be the hero he is vaunted, but I shall mistrust his praises 
Irom that quarter, till I iind their truth confirmed." 

" He has, to be sure, acquired the character of a stout swords- 
man," said the Bernardin, " to give the devil his due." 

" He has not met with his match at the salle-d'armes. though he 
has crossed blades with the first in FrancCj" replied Ogilvy. 

•' 1 have seen hiiu at the Manege,'' said the Sorbonist, " go 
thi-ough his course of equitation, and being a not altogether unskil- 
ful horseman myself, I can report favuurably of his performance." 

'• There is none among your youth can sit a steed like him," re- 
turned Ogilvy, " nor can any of the jousters carry off the ring with 
more certainty at the list?. I would fain hold my tongue, but you 
enforce me to speak in his praise." 

"Cuerpo di Dios !" exclaimed the Spaniard, half unsheathing the 
lengthy weapon that hung by his side. " I will hold you a wager 
often rose-nobles to as many silver reals of Spain, that with this 
staunch Toledo I will overcome your vaunted Crichton in close 
(ight in any manner or practice of fence or digladlation which he 
may appcint — sword and dagger, or sword only, — stripped to the 
girdle or armed to the teeth. Por la s^^nta Trinidad ! I will have 
satisfaction fur the contumelious afliont he hath put upon the veiy 
learned gymnasium to which I belong; and it would gladden me 
to clip the wings of this loud-crowing cock, or of any of his dung- 
hid crew," added he, with a scornful gesture at the Scotsman. 

" If that be all you seek, you shall not need to go far in your 
quest," returned Ogilvy. " Tarry till this controversy be ended, 
and if I match not your Spanish blade with a Scottish broadswoi-d, 
and approve you i\z recreant at heart as you are boa-c/id and inju- 
rious of speech, may Saint Andrew for ever after willdiuld from 
me his ])rotection." 

" Diablo!" exclaimed the Spaniard. " Thy Scottish saint Avill 
little avail thee, since thou hast incurred my indignation. Betake 
thee, therefore, to thy paternosters, if thou hast grace withal to 



THE scriOLAns. • 11 

nivittcr tlicm ; for witliin tlic liour tliou art assurccffy food for tlio 
kites of the Piv'-aux-Cleics — sa-lia 1" 

" Look to thyrelf, vile bnvrg''^rt !" rejoined Ogilvy, scornfully ; 
" I promise thee thou shalt need other intercession tluiu thine own 
to purchase safety at my hands/' 

" Courage, JMaster Ogilvy," s.aid the Englishman, " thou Avilt do 
■well to slit the er.vs of this Spanish swash-buckler. 1 -wanant me he 
hides a craven spirit beneath that slashed pourpoint. Thou crt in 
the right, man, to make him eat his words. Be this Crichton what 
he may, he is, at least, thy countryman, and in part mine own." 

" And as such I will u])hold him," said Ou'llvy, " against anv 
odds." _ /^^ 

'• Bravo ! my valorous Don Diego Carava a," said the Sorboiiist, 
slapping the Spaniard on the shoulder, and speaking in his car. 
" Shall these scurvy Scots carry all before them ? — 1 warrant me, 
no. We will make common cause against the whole beggarly 
nation ; and in the meanwhile we intrust thee with this particular 
quarrel. See thou ac(|uit thyself in it as beseemeth a descendant 
of the Cid." 

" Account him already abased," returned Caravaja. " By 
Pelayo, I would the other were at his back, that both might be 
transfixed at a blow — ha !" 

" To return to the subject of difference,'" said the Sorbo- 
nist. who was too much delightod with the prospect of a duel to 
lUow the quarrel a chance of subsuling, while it AVi'S in his 
power to fan the flame ; " to return to tlie dillerence," said he, 
aloud, glancing at Ogilvy ; " it must be conceded that, as a 
•wassailer, this Crichton is without a peer. None of us may pre- 
sume to cope with him in the matter of the flask and the llagon, 
though wo number amongst us some jolly topers. Fri?r John, with 
the Priestess of Bacbuc, was a washy bibber compared with hiui." 

" He worships at the shrines of other priestesses besides hers ot 
Bacbuc, if I be not wrongly informed ;" added Montaigu, who 
understood the drift of his companion. 

" Else wherefore our rejoinder to his cartels ?" returned the Sor- 
bonist. " Do you not call to mind that beneath his arrogant 
■defiance of our learned body, affixed to the walls of the Sorbonne, 
it was written, ' That he who would behold this miracle of learn- 
ing must hie to the tavern or the bordel ?' Was it not so, my 
hidalgo ?" 

" i have myself seen him at the temulentive tavern of the 
Falcon," returned Caravaja, " and at the lupanarian haunts in the 
Champ-Gaillard and the Val-d'Ainour. You understand me— -ha T' 

" Ha ! ha ! ha !" ehorussed tlie scholars. " James Crichton is no 
stoic. He is a disciple of Epicurus. Vel hi puellain inrjniKjtt^ vci 
in pocnlum — ha ! ha !" 

" 'Tis said that he hath dealings v,-ith the Evil One," observed 
the man of Harcourt, avIlIi a mysterious air ; " and that, like Jeaue 



12 ' cr.iciiTON". 

d'Arc, lie liath surrendered his soul for liis temporal Avclfare 
Hence his wondrous lore ; hence his supernatural beauty and ac- 
complishments ; hence his power of Aiscinating the fair sex; lienco 
his constant run of luck with the dice ; hence, also, his invul- 
nciablencis to the sword." 

" 'Tis said, also, that lie has a familiar spirit, who attends him in 
the semblance of a black doir," said Montaigu. 

" Or in that of a dwarf, like the sooty imp of Cosmo Ruggieri," 
said llarcourt. " Is it not so ?"' he asked, turning to the Scot. 

" He lies in his throat Avho says so," cried Ogilvy, losing all 
patience. " To one and all of you I breathe defiance; and there 
is not a brother in the college to which I belong who will not 
maintain my quarrel." 

A loud laugh of derision followed this sally; and, ashamed of 
havinijf justly exposed himself to ridicule by his idle and unAvorthy 
display of passion, the Scotsman held his peace and endeavoured 
to tura a deal" ear to their taunts. 



THE GELOSO 33 



CHAPTER ir. 

THE GELOSO. 

Ham. — Will you play upon this pipe? 

Gail. — My lord, 1 cannot. 

Bam.— I pray you, ShakspearE. 

While his eye glanced fiercely round upon Lis tormentor?, 
Ogilvy suddenly encountered the dark and earnest orbs of a youth, 
standing- at a little distance from him, but fully within hearini^ of 
their contention, who appeared to take a lively interest in the 
cause of quarrel, though his sympathy was evidently strongly en- 
listed in behalf of the Scotsman. There was something in the 
appearance of this youth that, despite the excitement of his feel- 
ings, at once arrested the attention of Ogilvy. 

In age, the youth could not be more than eighteen, perhaps not 
so much, as his slight, though exquisitely symmetrical figure, 
fragile even to effeminacy, denoted immaturity. But the fire and 
intelligence of his glances showed that his spirit and resolution 
were lar in advance of his years. Tresses of jetty hair over- 
shadowed his flushed cheek — the olive tint of which, together 
^vlth his intensely black eyes, proclaimed him a native of some 
more southern clime — while his attire, though not otherwise 
singular, was neither that of a member of the university nor 
accordant with any of the received usages then adopted by the 
good citizens of Paris. A cap of green Genoa velvet fell on one 
side of his liead ; a mantle of the same material, and of ampler fold 
than was the mode, was clasj^ed with a chain of gold, and disposed 
so as best to hide his slender shape, and to give a semblance of more 
manly width to his narrow proportion of shotdder. 

" You are moved in my behalf, young sir," said Ogilvy, re- 
marking that the youth still kept his eye fixed upon him, forcing 
his way at the same time towards the spot where he stood. " ]\Iay 
1 ask to which of our academies you belong ?" 

" I belong to none of your schools," replied the youth, now 
shrinking from the Scot's approach as much as he had courted his 
attention from afar. " 1 came hither as a stranger, attracted solely 



14 CRICHTON. 

bv curiofity to learn tlie result, of a disputation ■with Avliick nil 
Paris rinijjs ; and having unwittingly entered this crowd, though I 
would lain retire, I must now peri'orce abide its issue, which," he 
added, -with some hesitation, and a slight increase of colour, " will, 1 
trust, result in the triumph of your peerless countryman, in whose 
success I am, I own, nearly as much interested as yourselt." 

There was a music in the tones that vibrated in a strange manner 
upon the heart of Ogilvy. 

" As I have a soul to be saved," he thought, " but that they are 
boy's lips that uttered that speech, 1 could have sworn it was tlie 
verv voice of Marion; and, but that the eyes are darker, and it mav 
be larger, I could swear they had the Siine look too. By Saint 
Andrew, but it is singular how like they are. I would gladly know, 
if he be not from my own country, what can make him express him- 
self so warmly in behalf of James Crichton. Hark ye, young sir," 
lie cried aloud, "you are not, I suppose, ironi Scotland, are you?" 

The youth could scarce Ibrbear a smile at the inquiry ; but he 
shook his head in denial. The smile that severed the lips displayed 
a row of pearls. " The very teeth are Marion's," thougiit Ogilvy. 

"From Scotland?" shouted the Sorbonist. "Can any good 
come from out that rascal country? I know this youth well — he is 
one of the Gclosi — one of the Venetian troop who have the king's 
licence to enact their plays at the Hotel de Bourbon. I thought 1 
knew th'j face and figure, but the voice was not to be mistaken. 
'Tis he who singeth the airs in the comedies ; and riglit Avell, too, 
I warrant him. Ah! — a thought strikes me — we have a minute 
or two to spare, — why not employ it in a song ? What say you, com- 
rades, shall we lose this golden opportunity? — A song! — a song!" 

" Bravo ! — bravo !" cried the scholars, clapping their hands. 
** Nothing can be better. A song by all means ;" and a circle of 
faces was presently formed round the Geloso. 

Meanwhile Ogilvy, not less annoyed at the turn which affairs had 
taken, than at the supposed imputations thrown out against the 
stranger, for, not being untinctured by the prejudices of his country, 
as to the morality of stage representations, he entertained a feeling 
of contempt, amounting almost to abhorrence, for the vocation of 
an actor, thus addressed him : — " Hath he not belied thee?"" he said, 
with something of distrust. " Say he hath spoken falsely — say 
thou art no ])laycr — no hired mimic, and, by the pious memory of 
John Knox, I Avill hurl back the loul aspersion in his teeth." 

" Peace!" cried the scholar of Montaigu. "Down Avith the fro- 
ward Scot, if he oiler further interruption." 

" Let him answer me, and I am dumb," returned the resolute 
Ogilvy. " Once more, stranger, — have I misconstrued thee?" 

" You have done so if you supposed me other than I am," replied 
the youth, raising his head. " I am one of the Gelosl !" 

" You liear him," cried the Sorbonist. " He admits it. Now, 
{.'ive us the song without more ado." 



THE GF.T.OSO. 15 

"1 deny not my calling," icplicd tlie C!clo?o, " hut 1 \\\\[ not 
sing at your Lidding." 

" "\\'c Avill sec that," returned tlic Sorbonist. " Tliere are piiinp.-) 
Avithin our courts -whose waters arc trs song-coinpclliii<-- as thu^e o: 
Helicon, Their virtue is marvelloiis." 

"Sangre di Dios! let us drag the young spark thither," cried 
Caravaja ; " he'll hnd his voice. I'll engage, rather than brook the 
catarrhs likely to be engendered by the gelid Jbunt." 

So saying he laid his hand rudely upon the Geloso"'s shoulder. 
The latter started back — his dark eyes shot ligluninii-s at the air- 
gressor, while, quick as thought, he drew Ibrth a stiletto, and 
placed it at Caravaja's throat. 

" Withdraw thv hand from my person," he cried, "or by St. 
Mark I will strike !' 

And Caravaja, seeing from his manner that the Gcloso was in 
earnest, deemed it prudent to relinquish his hold, which he did 
witli a shrug and his habitual braggadocio exclamation. 

" Bravissimo !" shouted the bystanders with renewed acclama- 
tion ; " a capital tableau. It would tell i'amously at the Hotel 
de Bourbon." 

" By my faith !" said the Englishman, laughing heartily, " our 
Spaniard hath the worst of it." 

" I pray you, signori," said the Geloso, heedless of their sarcasm, 
taking oil' his cap and displaying at the same time a shower of 
raven ringlets. " I beseech you to let me depart without further 
molestation ; I have it not in my power to comply with your 
Avishes, neither do I see your title to require my coinpliance. 

Though a player, I am not AvhoUy unfriended; and if " 

" Pie threatens us," said the Sorbonist ; " marked you that if? 
It Avill never do to give up our point. The song, Signor Geloso, 
and then depart as soon as you list." 

" Never !" replied the Geloso ; " and I counsel you to beware 
liow you drive me to extremities." 

" If none other will take the youth's part I will." said the Eng- 
lishman ; " I care not if ho be Geloso or Diaboloso. If all are 
against him I am for him. The Blounts ever take the weaker 
side, and Simon Blount will not disgrace the name he bears. 
Come, Sir Scot, this quarrel is partly yours. Draw your blade, 
man, and stand bv this poor lad, who looks as if he had never seen 
a blow struck beibre." 

A blithe jingle of small silver bells Avas heard amongst the 
crowd, offering a seasonable interruption to the brawd, and a very 
fantastic personage, from whom the sound proceeded, strove to 
press forward. He was clad in a singular parti-coloured raiment, 
composed of white, crimson, and blue damask, so quaintly fashioned, 
and striped with such numberless straight and horizontal lines, that 
it produced the most Avhimsical cfFcct imaginable. His slashed 
juste-uu-corps was puffed out at the hips in the most extravagant 



!6 CRicnxox. 

St vie, and served as an admirable {"•■'il to liis tliin mis-shapen lerrs, 
decked in hose of amaranthine luic. Over his shoulders was 
thrown a sxircoat which resembled nothing so nearly as the vestment 
wherewith the knave of clubs is arrayed, and which depended 
in huire sleeves over his arms. 

At the back of this surcoat the royal arms were cndjlazoned in 
■^old tissue, and again displayed on cither sleeve. Innumerable 
tags, to which, as well as to the edges of hi| sleeves, hung the bells 
in question, adorned each knee. Around his neck he wore a chain 
of small medallions, stamped with devices a Ic folic, the gift of his 
c/ur llaiiiot, as he fraternally termed his royal master, and his tall 
conical cap — which had superseded the old orthodox cock's-comb, 
then quite out of date — had the triple points a la cornette, borne 
by all the servitors of the court. In his hand he carried his ensign 
of office — the bauble, an ebony truncheon decorated with the fool's 
head, cast in wrought silver. A huge escarcelle, or poucli, filled 
with confectionery, of which he was immoderately fond, hung at 
his girdle, and near it was stuck a formidable dagger of lath. 

This bizarre fiiiure was the king's favourite bufibon Chicot. 

" I>y your leave, my masters," he cried, shouldering his way 
through the crowd, and bestowing buffets with his bauble upon all 
\\\\o opposed his progress. " Why would you stop me? Folly 
v.-as ever current in the University of Paris. Besides, all my 
wisdom is needed. They arc about to souse a singer in cold water 
to give him a voice. That were a feat Avorthy the first fool in 
France. I should lose my post were I not to assist. Have a care, 
I say. Make way for the Abbe of the Bejaunes, though he be 
not mounted on his ass as at the Feast of the Innocents." 

And planting himself immediately before the Geloso, to whom 
he nodded in the most familiar manner, Chicot drew his lathen 
dagger, and, with abundance of gesticulations and grimaces, bran- 
dished it in the flicc of the students. *' This youth, who is my 
foster-brotlier," said the jester (here there was a loud laugh), " is 
in the riirht to refu.^e vou. He isenoao-ed for the masque to-night, 
and must not exhibit himself before-hand. Our gossip Henriot is 
chary of his services. If you want music, come with us to the 
gates of the Louvre. The band of the Swiss Guard is celebrated 
for its quick movement." 

" Exasperate them not, kind sir," whispered the Geloso, " I will 
rather comply with their demands, imrcasonablc though they be, 
tlian endanger another's safety by refusaL Signori," he continued, 
addressing his persecutors, " I will do your bidding, provided I 
am free to depart when my song is ended."" 

" Agreed !" shouted tlie scholars, waving their caps. In an 
instant the clamour ceased. A dense ring Avas formed around the 
Geloso, while in a voice of the most exquisite modulation, tliough 
with something of sarcasm in its tone, he sang the following strain, 
evidently the inspiration of the moment: — 



THt, cJKLOSO. \J 



THE SCOTTISH cav^vlier. 
I. 

"Ftmii Scotiii's clime to l;viiHliin},r Franco 

'llie iiccrless Crichtoii cutnc ; 
Like liMii no kiiijilit could shiver lance, 

Wield sword, or worsliiji dame. 
iMas ! each maiden siolis in vain. 

He turns a careless ear : 
For (jHccnlij tette;-.s last enchain 

The Seoltisli cavalier ! 
U. 
Ent not o'er camp and conrt, alone, 

Hesistless C'ricliton rules ; 
Logicians next, tleteated, own 

His empire o'er the Schools, 
'Gainst sojihists shrewd shall wit prevail, 

Thouirh t ime on tome they rear ; 
i\nd jitdan^s jiale, as victor, hail 

'i'he Scottish cavalier ! 

*' No more of this," cried the Sorbonist, " this is not tlic son^ 
^y^ bargained for. A\^e Avill liavc tliy favourite air from La IMiui^ 
dalena, or the canzonet Ironi La Florinda, or thou stirrcst not, 
mon mignon." 

" Bah !" ejaculated Chicot ; " you arc no judges. The song was 
charming, and I vote lor its repetition. But the buHoonery of the 
tioop at the hotel of the Abbe de Clugni, in the Rue des Ma- 
ti-.uiins, Avould be more in your way. What say you to a motet 
Irom their last sotie — La Farce joydise dcs btjaiines sojilthtes ?" 

" Ventrebleu ! What mockery is tiiis ?" cried one of the scho- 
lars with the preposterous paper collars. " Are we to be challerecl 
out of oiu- projects by yon magot-pie, who, having newly-escaped 
his cage, hath llown hither to babble at his ease ?" 

" ""Lis well," returned Chicot, " that, like some I wot of, I have 
not arrayed myself in peacock's plumes. Strut as it may, the daw 
will out; and roar as loudly and lion-like as he may, the ass is an ass 
still. Fool as I am, I am not folly's counterfeit. The ape, but 
not the ape's shadow, compere. ' By the caul you may know the 
calf;' that is your cry, they tell me. Now. were yoin- calf-ship to 
be jiulged by that rule, we could scarce llnd subject fitter for the 
shambles." 

" A thousand devils !" cried the enraged scholar. " Were yoii 
ten times the licensed fool you are, you shall repent this insolence." 

" Back !" exclaimed Blount, interposing his l)ludgeon so as io 
ward olfthc blow aimed at the jester's sconce. " A bloody cock's- 
comb were an unseemly consinnmation to such gay apparel. Reserve 
your blows for one more able to requite them. Sec you not his 
weapon is of lath ? ' 

" ]^et him keep better rule over his tongue, then," replied tlitf 
angry scholar. 

" JIa! ha! ha!" cried Chicot, screaming with laughter, "stay 
me not. 1 will combat with him to the outrancc. l''\y marotto 

C 



1 8 CT^.TC,"T'^y 

to liis nifi". Lut I slay him on the exchange of a stoccata. ^ly fecLle 
sluill prove his reversed 

" In the mean time we are losing sight of our songster," said 
the Sorbonist. " What liath become of the Geluso?" 

" Vanislied, as I tliink," exclaimed Caravaja. " I nowliere be- 
held hiai." 

" I had not remarked his departure," thought Ogilvy, '^ but 'tis 
better thus. I could not l^ave refused the poor ycutii aid in case of 
need, and yet my soul revolts at the thought of being embroiled 
in the quarrel of a stage-])lay('r. 'Tis strange the face should haunt 
me so much. I will thiidc of liim no more." 

I5ut, in spite of his resolution, Ogilvy could not prevent his eyes 
from wandering amongst the distant ranks of the scholars in search 
of the fugitive. His quest was vain. During the confusion created 
by the jester's defiance of the student, and not improbably by his 
connivance, or that of the Englishman, the G.'loso had contrived, 
unobserved, to make good his retreat. 

" Hath IMaitre Chicot secreted him in his escarcelle ? It is largo 
enough," said Harcourt. 

" (Jr in the sleeves of his surcoat?" said the Bernardin. 

" Or swallowed him, as Gari>;antua did the pilirrim," added 
Cai-avaja, lauglnng. 

" Or as thou wouldst a cup of Val do Penas, were it pro fie red 
thee ; or thine own Avords, if need be, Senor CabalUro." said tho 
jester. 

"Senor Satan I" roared Caravaja, unsheathing his sword; "1 
will carve thee into as many slices as there are patches in thy 
jerkin — sa — ha !" 

" Or as there are dints on thy sword, of thine own notching," 
rejoined Chicot, with a malignant grin; " or oaths in thy mouth, of 
thine own coining. Or lies in thy brain, of thine own hatching. Or 
dice in thy pocket, of thine own loading. Or pence in thy pouch, of 
tiiinc own pilfering. Or scars in thy back, of thine own procuring 
— ha! ha! Shred me into as many pieces as a Spanish onion, 
and the number shall yet be far below thy own countless pecca- 
dilloes — sa — ha !" 

'• Sangro di Dios! Give me v;ay to the scurrilous ribald," 
A-ociferated Caravaja, furious as a bull chafed by the matador, 
flourishing his rapier and stamping on the ground, and with difK- 
culiy withheld by the students. But nothing could check tho 
wild exhilaration of the jester, Avho was nigh convulsed with 
laughter at the inellectual attempts of the vindictive Spaniard to 
reach him. He exhibited no alarm, but stood his ground as care- 
lessly as if no danger threatened him. Nay, he even continued his 
fralling mockery, and might, in all probability, have paid the 
penalty of his rashness, if a new incident had not occurred, which 
operated as a diversion in his favour. 

The gates of the College of Navarre were suddenl}' thrown open. 



THE GELOSO. 19 

and a lon2;-continiicd tlumdcr of applause burstini^ from witliin, aii- 
noimced the conclusion of the debate. That it Tiad terminated in 
favour of Crichton could no_ longx-r be doubted, as his name formea 
the burden of all the plaudits with -which the courts were rin'dni,'. 
All was excitement: there was a general movement. Ogilvy could 
no longer restrain himself. Pushing forward by prodigfous cllbrts, 
he secured himself a position at the portal. 

The lirst person who presented himself to his inrpiirin^^ eyes, was 
a gallant figure in aghttering steel corslet, crossed by a silken 
sash, who bore at his side a long sword with a magnidcent handle, 
and upon his shoulder a lance of some six feet in length, headed 
with a long scarlet tassel, and brass half-moon pendant. " Is not 
Crichton victorious?" asked Ogilvy of Captain Larchant, for he it 
was. 

" He hath acquitted himself to admiration," replied the guards- 
man, who, contrary to the custom of such gentry (for captains of 
the guard have been fine gentlemen in all ages), did not appear to 
be displeased at this appeal to liis courtesy, "and the rector hath 
adjudged him all the honours that can be bestowed by the uni- 
versity." 

"Hurrah for old Scotland," shouted Ogilvy, throwin'-'' his bon- 
net in the air, "I was sure it would be so; this is a day worth 
living for. Hccc olini vietn'mlsse juvahit T 

" Thou at least shall have reason to remember it," muttered Ca- 
ravaja, who being opposite to him, heard the exclamation — "and 
he too, perchance," he added, frowning gloomily, and drawing his 
cloak over his shoulder. 

" If the noble Cricliton be compatriot of j^ours, you are in the 
right to be proud of him," replied Captain Larchant, " for the 
memory of his deeds of this day will live as long as learning shall 
be held in reverence. Never before hath such a marvellous display 
of universal erudition been heard within these schools. By mv 
fiiith, I am absolutely wonder-stricken, and not 1 alone, but all. In 
proof of which I need only tell you, that coupling his matchless 
scholarship with his extraordinary accomplishments, the professors 
in their address to him at the close of the controversy, have be- 
stowed upon him the epithet of ' ADMiR.\nLE' — an appellation by 
which he will ever after be distinguished." 

" The Admirable Crichton !" echoed Ogilvy — " hear you that ! — ■ 
a title adjudged to him by the whole conclave of the luiiversity — 
hurrah! The Admirable CiiiciiTOX ! ^Tis a name will find 
:an echo in the heart of every true Scot. By Saint Andrew ! this is 
a proud day for us." 

^"■iw the meantime," said Larchant, smiling at Ogilvy's exulta- 
tions, and describing a circle with the point of his lance, " I mu.+t 
trouble you to stand back, ^Messieurs Scholars, and leave free pas- 
.Bagefbr the rector and his train. — Archers advance, and make cleav 

c2 



20 CRICHTON. 

the wav and let the companies of the Baron D'Epernon and of the 
VlcrmU de Joveuse be summoned as ^v ell as the guard of Ins ex- 
cellency, Seigneur Rene dc ViUequier. Patience, messieurs, you 
will hear all particulars anon." . 

So sayino^ he retired, and the men-at-arms less complaisant 
than their leaders, soon succeeded in ibrcing back the crowd. 



TEE RECTOR OF THE UXlVliliSlTV Ot ^AlilS. 'J\ 



CHAPTER IIL 

THE RECTOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS. 

Tlie rector rrow findinc: it hiiih time to cfive some relaxation to tlicse wortlijr 
spirits, vliicli, durinLT such a long space had been so intensely bent upon tlic 
abstrusest speculations, rose up, and saluting the divine Crichton, after he had 
made an e'.egant panegyric, or encomiastic speech of half an hour's continuance, 
tending to nothing else but the extolling of him for the rare and most singular 
gifts with whifli God and nature had endowed him, presented him with a diaiuond 
ring, and a purse full of gold. — Sm Thomas Uuquiiakt. 

As the archers advanced, and posted one of their number at 
every interval of ten paces, the scholars drew back, and, with 
almost military precision, formed themselves into two solid bodies. 

A profomid hush of expectation reigned throughout their lines.- 
Each cj-e was directed towards the embrowned archway of tlie 
Academy, but not a word was uttered. All remained in postures 
as motionless as those of the statues of Philippc-le-Del and Jeanne 
de Navarre his spouse (the foundress of the institution), who looked 
from their niches on the portal like mute spectators of the scene. 

Meanwhile, from out the gateway there issued such a constant 
stream of grave and gowned dignitaries, that the space between 
the two files of students was presently filled up by a moving mass 
of robes and caps. First, ilourishing his rod of oflice ; a blue wand 
plentifully besprinkled with lleurs-de-lis of gold, alternately plant- 
ing it on the ground, or elevating it in the air, with a strut and 
simper worthy of Malvolio, strode forth the clerk of the messengers, 
who bore upon his tunic the blazon of the university, namely, a hand 
<lcscending from the sky, holding a book, surrounded by three 
lleurs-de-lis, or, on a field, ozure. Glancing at the scholars with 
a supercilious smile, the herald passed on. Next came the bedels 
and the minor bedels of all Faculties, who by some accident 
were so jumbled together that it was impossible to determine or 
arrange any order of precedence. All put their best feet fore- 
most. Medicine trod hard on the heels of Theology and the 
.Arts, while Civil Law appeared most uncivilly inclined to out- 
strip all three. These bedels or grofliers were jolly robustious 
souls, bending beneath the weight of their ponderous silver maces, 
and attired in gowns of black, blue, violet, or dark red, each colour 



2i CPcICIITON. 

dcnollnp: the Faculty to "U'hicli the ■weaver pertained. To the bedels 
Fucceeded a confusion worse confounded, in the heads of the Facul- 
ties themselves, ■v\"]io strove in vain to collect together their scat- 
tered forces, or to form them into any thin^; like processional array. 

Violations of collegiate etiquette took place each instant. Here 
vras a Doctor of Theology in his black cope edged with ermine, by 
the side of a procureur of the Nations, in liis red robe of office; a 
propinquity "which the Theologian internally execrated, and openly 
resented. There a Doctor of Medicine in his scarlet cope, trimmed 
•with minever, was elbowed by a licentiate of Tlieology, who hap- 
pened to bo suppler of joint, and who was arrayed in cope of sable 
bordered with white fur. No degrees were respected. The 
Doctors of the Canon and Civil Law, who liad kept together 
during the debate, and wh.ose costume consisted of scarlet robes 
with hoods of fur, were most scandalously luistled in maintaining 
their ground against a rush of youthiul bachelors of Medicine. 

Notwithstanding all this confusion of raiments, which were so 
massed and heaped together as to present an almost rainbow variety 
of tints in the rays of the setting sun — notwithstanding the utter 
want of order wliicli occasioned much ol)jurgation on the part of 
the seniors, and not a little expenditure of patience as well as of 
ermine, by tlieir too close proximity to each other — notwithstand- 
ing all this, the whole body of Doctors, Professors, Bachelors, and 
Licentiates, were unanimous upon one point — viz. that the dispu- 
tation at wliich they had assisted had been more admirably con- 
tested than any controversy since the days of Petrus Abelardus, and 
l^erengarius, and that in vanquisliingthcm Crichton had vanquished 
the whole world of science and learning;. 

Suddenly the shrill blast of a trumjiet shook the air, and echoed 
far down the hill of St. Genevieve, The call was immediately an- 
swered by the trampling of a troop of horsemen in the distance. 
Presently the clatter of hoofs drew nearer, and a few seconds had 
not ela]:>sed ere two companies, eacli consisting of fifty archers of 
the body-guard, fully accoutred and superbly mounted, rode into 
the area and drew up in the rear of the students. Besides this 
array of soldiery might be seen the numerous retinue of Rene de 
Villcquier, composed not merely of his own lacqueys and attendants 
in their sumptuous apparel of blue and red cloth, but of certain 
armed cross-bowmen of the Gmt Royal, headed by their chevalier, 
\\\\o surrounded the governor's huge unwieldly caroche of state 
and riclily caparisoned Flanders horses. Altogether it was a gal- 
lant sight; and the scholars, though not entirely satisfied with the 
presence of so many intruders, and perhaps not wholly unawed by 
their numbers, manifested no further show of discontent. 

A pause now took place in the procession. The ibremost in ad- 
vance came to a halt, and the whole body wheeled round and 
iaced the college. Three semicircles were thus formed, of which 
the professors described the inner and tlie lesser, the archers oa 



THE RECTOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS. 23 

hoi-scback the outer and wider, and the students the intermediate 
and denser circle. Still, hoAvever, a small vacant space Avas pr*- • 
served before the portal. 

At this instant a murmur arose amongst the schoolmen. " lie 
comes, — he comes" — Hew from one to other with the rapidity of 
liglitning. Four other mace-bearers, Avalking abreast, strode deli- 
berately througli the gateway, as if they had been the only objects 
of interest, and drew up two on either side. 

The course Avas now completely unobstructed. The rector ap- 
peared. He was a man of venerable aspect and majestic mien, and 
well became the magnificent apparel — the ample stole of scarlet, 
and mantle of snowy ermine, in which, as chief of the university, 
he was clad. A sash of sky-blue silk crossed his robe, and sustained 
a sumptuous velvet escarccUc, fringed with lace and decorated with 
buttons of gold. Upon his head lie wore the square cap of a 
Doctor of Theology. 

At his side, and on his right, Avalkcd one on whom all eyes 
Avcre bent with Avondcr and curiosity. The rector and liis com- 
panion stopped Avithout the gatcAvay, Avhen, as if they Avere in- 
fluenced by some sudden and uncontrollable impulse, one lono-, 
loud, continuous acclamation buist from the ranks of the scholars. 
Nor Avere the graver members of the university silent. Even the 
Doctors of Theology lent the aid of their voices; Avhile the archers, 
'•aising thcmsclA'cs in their stirrups, lifted their helmets from their 
brows, and Avaving them in the air, increased and prolonged the 
..'lamour by their vociferations. 

James Crichton possessed an exterior so striking and a manner 
so eminently prepossessing, that his mere appearance seemed to 
act like a spell on the beholders. The strongest sympathy Avas 
instantly and universally excited in his favour. Youth is CA^er in- 
teresting; but youth so richly graced as his could not fail to 
produce an extraordinary impression. At the sight of him the 
Avholc aspect of things Avas changed. Enthusiasm, amounting 
almost to devotion, usurped the place of animosity, and all vin- 
dictive feelings resulting from Avounded pride or other petty am oy- 
ances, Avere obliterated or forgotten. Even discomfiture wore the 
aspect of victory. 

But in the demeanour of the victor no external sign of self- 
elation was perceptible. He might not be insensible to the distinc- 
tion of his achievement, but he did not plume himself upon it, or 
rather, Avith the modesty ever inherent in true greatness, appea ed 
to underrate his OAvn success. His check was slightly Hushed, and 
a smile of tempered satlsi'actlon played upon his countenance as he 
acknowledged the stunning applauses of the concourse before him. 
No traces oi" over-exertion or excitement were visible in his features 
or deportment. His broAv Avas unclouded, his look serene, his step 
buoyant ; — and, as his blight eye Avandercd OA'cr the multitude, 
there AA-as not an individual upon Avhom his gaze inomentar ly 
tested, but he felt his heart leri.' within his breast. 



24 CRICHTOX. 

The countenance of Ciicliton -was one that Phidias might have 
pourtiajcd, so nearly did its elevated character of beauty approach 
to the standard of perfection erected by the great Athenian sculp- 
tor. Chiselled like those of some ancient head of the Delpliic god, 
the features were wrought with the utmost fineness and precision 
— the contour of the face Avas classical and harmonious — the lips 
were firm, full, and fraught with sensibility, yet giving token of 
dauntless resolution — the chin was proudly curved — the nose 
Grecian — the nostril thin and haughty — the brow ample and 
majestical, shaded by hair of light brown, disposed in thick ringlets, 
after the manner of the antique* There was a brilliancy and 
freshness in Crichton's complexion, the more surprising, as the 
pallid hue and debilitated look of the toil-worn student might more 
naturally be expected in his features tlian the sparkling bloom of 
health. A slight moustache feathered his upper lip, and a short, 
pointed beard, clothed his chin, and added to the manliness of his 
aspect. 

Crichton's attire, wliich partook more of his chivalrous than of his 
scholastic character, was that of a complete gentleman of the period, 
and was calculated to display to the utmost advantage the faultless 
svmmetry of figure with wliich nature, not less lavish than art and 
science in her gilts, had endowed him. A doublet of wlaite da- 
mask, slashed with black bands of the same material, crossed by 
other bands, so as to form a sort of grating, buttoned from the throat 
to the girdle, and fitting closely to the person, revealed the outline 
of his full Antlnous-like chest, as well as his slender circumference 
of waist ; while the just proportions of his lower limbs were as ac- 
curately defined by the satin hose, similar in colour to his doublet, 
and similarly slashed, in which they were enveloped. A short 
Spanish cloak of black velvet, edged with gold lace, hung from 
his left shoulder, and descended as low as the elbow. His arms 
were a rapier and a poignard, suspended from a richly ornamented 
girdle. Boots of bull-skin, sharply pointed at the top, as was then 
the mode, were fitted upon feet that seemed almost diminutive in 
comparison with the lofty stature of the wearer. His hat was 
looped with a diamond buckle, and crested by a single green 
feather. 

To the modern observer, perhaps the triple folds of his rulF and 
the voluminous widtli of his sleeve might aj)pcar formal and redun- 
dant ; but these exuberances were then altogether unnoticed, or 
possibly regarded with as much complacency as a sleeve a (jif/ot 
might be at the present time. In soothe, despite its stillircss and ex- 
travagance, there was something picturesque and imposing in the 
court costume of Henri Trois (who, if lie liad no especial genius 
for monarchy, had unquestionably a great talent for the toilet), that 
amply redeemed its incongruities of taste. Crichton's figure, how- 

* Crichton is (lesrribed in the letter of Aldus Manutiiis to the DuUe of Sora 
elsewhere quoted, as ''yiumlc c.i slutma, dijtilv bivhdo, et d'aapetto Ldliaainiv." 



THE UECTOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS. 2.5 

ever, owed little to tlie adventitious circumstance oi dress, and in 
fact was wholly independent of it. 

As Crichtou linirered for an instant beneath the shadow of the 
archway, the rector laid his hand upon his shoulder, Avith the inten- 
tion, apjxirently, of arrestini; for a short sj)ace his furtlier progress. 
He was not, perhaps, unwiUiiiL,^ to allbrd the junior members of the 
university, who had been debarred from attending the disputation, 
a momentary opportunity of noting the striking personal appear- 
ance of one, whose name would long be associated with its annals, 
or it might be that he was influenced by some ulterior motive. 
Whatever occasioned the delay, it was a matter of gratulation to 
the scholars, who renewed their applauses in conse([uerice. 

" By the rood !" exclaimed the Sorbonist, " I am glad they have 
come to a pause. Wc were out in our reckoning, Don Die^-o; this 
Crichton is a perfect knight of romance, a Bayard as avcU as a 
Politian. Was there ever such a combination of qualities? I can 
scarce credit my senses when I look at him. Why, he hath barely a 
beard upon his chin, and yet to vanquish all our reverend doctors! 
Shame and confusion to them, and glory and renown to ////«." 

" Humph !" muttered Caravaja, " Will he pass by us, thiidc 
3'ou ?" 

" I know not," returned the Sorbonist, " let us, if possible, get 
nearer. Methinks old Adrien is making up his mouth to a 
speech. He deserves to be hooted for his pains — the toothless 
mumblcr ! But we will licar what he lias to say. Perhaps he mav 
make out a good case. Our Scot, I see, is in the fore ranks, and 
shouting loud enough to split our eai's and his own lungs. Peace, 
in front, I say ! Keep him in view', my hidalgo, or we may lose 
lilm in the confusion." 

" I will do more," returned Caravaja, " I Avill dog him like his 
own shadow\ Cuerpo ! he 'scapes me not, rely on it. Canst thou 
not aid me to approach him ?" 

" i\Iy elbows are at your service," replied the Sorbonist, " bravely 
done ! We have effected a passage with more ease than I antici- 
pated, thanks to thy sharp bones. By my faith, we are in the very 
nick of time. Look at the Seigneurs d'Epcrnon and Joyeuse. 
They are accounted the handsomest, as the}'- are the bravest of our 
king's court; and yet, certcs, peerless cavaliers though they be, they 
bear no comparison with this northern luminary." 

" You ow^n it !" cried Ogilvy, Avhom the speakers had ap- 
proached ; " you admit my countryman's superiority — I am satis- 
fied. Let not our quarrel go further. How say you. Sir Spaniard, 
will you refuse me your hand? I was hasty, and reck'd not what I 
said. We will drown the remembrance of our brawl over a stoop 
of claret. I would willingly drink a cup to the health of our ad- 
mirable Crichton." 

Ogilvy stretched out his hand. Caravaja, however, hesitated to 
accept it. " By the cinders of St. Anthony!" he muttered, "the 
tivilo must take its course." 



26 cuiciiTOX. 

" St. Anthony fovercnd I" w]ii>:pcrcd tlie Sorbonist. " A cup of 
claret shed in the tavern is better tluui blood spilt in the d/iclo. 
Besides," he added, in a still lower key; " that need be no hind- 
rance to the subsequent arranp;emcnt of the affair, if you sec 
ilttino-. I warrant me, you will readily find new i^rounds for offence. 
ISwallow thy indignation," he continued, aloud, " and take the hand 
of the valiant Scot." 

" l^ien," said Caravaja, apparently convinced by the reason- 
ing of the Sorbonist ; " I assent. We will com potato to the healtii 
of'' The Admirable Crichton,' since such is the epithet by whicli 
lie is henceforth to be distinguished." 

" Enough," said Ogilvy, grasping the hand of the Spaniard ; 
*' quit not my side in the press — or meet me anon at tlic Pme 
Apple." 

" Conclude me there already," returned Caravaja. 

IMeantimc, all the more distinguisiied auditors of tlie disputation, 
including the Governor of Paris, the ambassadors, tlie Vicomtc dc 
Joyeusc, and the Baron d'Epcrnon, who, with some others (ushered 
forth by the grand master of the College of Navarre, Doctor Launoi, 
and escorted by the two principals of dialectics and philosophy), 
had followed close upon the steps of the rector, Avere drawn up in a 
small phalanx beside them, and appeared to await their further 
movements. Amidst this group, the stately figures and magnifi- 
cent accoutrements of the two favourites of the king stood out 
conspicuously. Both were esteemed the ilower of the chivalry of 
tlicir time, and botli were equally remarkable for their gallantry, 
their good looks, and reckless courage. Jean-Louis de Nogaret 
dc la Valette, Baron d'Epcrnon possessed many brilliant qualities. 
To his vigour and address, Henri was subsequently indebted for 
the preservation of his throne; and to him might be traced the ulti- 
mate overthrow of the Guises, whom he bitterly hated, and uni- 
formly opposed. D'Epcrnon still wore a suit of sables in memory 
of liis brother-in-arms. Saint Megrin, assassinated by order 
of the Duke of INIayenne, on suspicion of an amour Avlth hU 
sister-in-law, the Duchess of Guise. His mourning, however, 
■vvas of the most costly description, and his black mantle was em- 
broidered with the cross of the Holy Ghost in orange-coloured 
velvet, passmented -.vith silver, of which newly-instituted order, 
he, as well as his companion, was a knight-commander. Joy- 
eusc Avas radiant in orange-coloured satin, and velvet of the 
most dazzling hues. Nothing could be more splendid than 
]us attire, unless, perhaps, it was that of Rene de Yillequier, 
■who, being also a Knight Commander of the Holy Ghost, was upon 
this occasion bedizened in all the finery of its full paraphernalia, the 
doublet and hose of silver tissue, and the sweeping mantle of 
black velvet bordered Avith fleurs-de-lis of gold and tongues of 
llamc intermingled Avith the royal cypher. From the necks of all 
tlncc, suspended by a blue riband, hung the decoration of the lesser 
order, a small elaborately chased cross and dove of silver. 



THE KECTOU OF THE UNIVEKSITY OF PAli'S. 27 

Amongst this group also were to be seen tlic ALbe do Brantoma 
and the poet Konsard. Brantomc liad a piercinir eye, a thin 
visage, and a nose slightly aquiline. Immense moustnehcs cl(jthed 
his long u])pcr lip, but his lolty brow was almost entirely destitute 
of liair. There was nuieli of the courtier in his manner, but liis 
smile was sarcastic, and a vein of irony might be detected even 
in his most flowery compliments. A sneer was habitual to his lips, 
and his eye, though full and keen, was enclosed witliin lids of a 
pinkish hue and blear expression, sulhciently indicating the liber- 
tinagc of his character. His attire was in the court liishion. His 
doublet was of a deep blue, shislicd witli white, the colours of 
!Margucritedc Valois, Avliose miniature he wore attaclied to a chain 
of medallions. He bore, also, the order of St. Michael, tlicn, 
liowever, in great disrepute, and called le Collier a toiite bete. The 
Abbe de Brantome was then ii man of middle age, somewhat on 
the wane ; and ]us frame appeared prematurely withered. His 
shoulders were bent, and his legs shrunk within his hose. His look 
was sliarp, suspicious penetrating; and his general manner that 
of a shrewd and accurate observer. 

ArfQ, and perhaps the life of sensuality he was known to have 
led, liad indeed committed sad havoc upon the once w'ell-favoiued 
person of tlie poet Ronsard. He was no longer the beau Page 
Avhose manner fascinated James of Scotland, and, perchance, his 
Queen. Nor was he what he sung of himself, Avheu, near his 
fortieth year, he said — 

" Trcnte et sept ans passez, ct encore n'ai-je atteint 
3)"ans, iii de maladic, et en toutes Ics sortcs 
]\Ies nerfs sont bien tendiis, et mes veines bien fortes ; 
Et si j'ai le teint pale et le clieveu grison, 
Jles membres toutcfois sont liors de saison." 

He now complained both of ill hcahh and years. Such locks as 
remained had become " sable silvered." His tint of skin was dull 
and deadly pale; and, so grievously tormented was he witli his old 
enemy, the gout, that he was compelled to support his frame, at 
least on the present occasion, upon a crutch. Nevertheless, though 
gross of person, the countenance of the poet was handsome and 
intelligent, and, except when an awkward twinge crossed it, ex- 
pressive of extreme good humour. 

" Methinks, my dear xVbbe," said Ronsard, looking around 
with some uneasiness, and addressing Brantome, "it were scarce 
wise to have called together this tumultuous array. Our Cicsar 
may be crowned in the Capitol while Ave are sacrificed at his 
oxation. I am too well acquainted with the force of the poet's 

words — 

iMonstrari digito et dicier ' hie est' — 

as occasionally exemplified towards me by the students, to desire 
any further illustration of their abilities in my own person." 

*' You have changed your tunc since the reception of your last 



28 CRICHTOX. 

masque, brotlicr bard," said Chicot, -vvlio had forced himself, im- 
pcrcoived, amonirpt them. " The?c same scholars, I remember, 
were once the only patrons of the Muses. Now tiiey Inivc lost 
their discrimination. But ^ivc yourself no trouble: you will pass 
unnoticed this time, depend on't, gossip. Even I, you see, for a 
jnarvcl, have escaped attention." 

" Then, of a surety, I will ])ut myself under thy escort," said the 
poet, seizing the arm of the jester. " It was the abandonment of 
foUv that liatli brought me into disrepute. Thou shalt helji me to 
amend. But wliat hath brouglit one of thy calling into the haunts 
of wisdom, my merry gossip?" 

" "Wisdom and folly arc nearer ahin than you suppose," returned 
Chicot; " and fools wiio have soared to a greater height than I can 
ever aspire, have been caught within these owl-roosts. 1 like a 
line sight as well as my neighbours; and though I care not to be 
bespattered with a sliower oi' nim and Htr/a/is, or sit out a twelve- 
lioui-s' bout of rhetoric and philosophy, where, if one man hath not 
all tiic talk to liimself, he, at least, doth his best to silence his com- 
rades, I am mightily pleased to come in, as it Averc, for the last act 
of a dull comed3% and to enjoy a laugh at the veteran stagers who 
have been driven oif the boards by a youthlul actor, who, though 
he hath spent but a titlic of the time in the service, understandeth 
their crai't better than themselves." 

" ]Iave a care, sirrah," said Brantome; " thou art within hear- 
ing of James Crichton." 

"James Crichton will acquit me of flattery, then," rejoined 
the iester. " I am one of those who speak truth behind a man's 
back, and falsehood to his face, and care not to avouch it. Pierre 
de Bourdellle, a word in thine ear! Thou wearest thy mistress's 
colours on thy pourpoint, and her miniature at thy neck, but she 
hath another image than thine at her heart. I'ake a ibol's counsel, 
and forget her." 

Brantome reddened with anj^er; but Chicot, who had all the 
galling pertinacity of a gadfly, continued, 

" You who are so well versed in history, seigneur, will assuredly 
rccollei't the tradition of the lair queen, who lounded this old pile, 
and whose statue graces its doorway, how, above all her courtly 
train, she smiled upon tlie scholar Buridan ; and ]iow, within her 
bower iipon the Seine, she — but you mind the tale, I see — mc- 
thinks we might find a modern parallel to that ancient legend. 
After all, Jeanne de Navarre was but a fickle jade, and ]ilaycd her 
lovers scurvy tricks. Ha! ha!" And bursting into a loud laugh, 
the jester fiew to the side of the Vicomte de .loyeuse for pro- 
tection. 

" Well encountered, cousin D'Arques," he said ; " our dear 
Henriot needed thy presence at the fair of Saint Germain this 
morning. Iladst thou or D'Kpernon been with him, the insult he 
brooked Avould not ha\e passed unnoticed." 



THE RECTOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS. 29 

*' What insult do you allude to?" asked the viconite, ea'/erlv. 
*' Let lue hcav it, that I may yet avenge it !" 

" 'Tis a matter of little moment," returned Clilcot ; " you si mil 
Icnow anon — that is, Avhen your escort draws up to the "gate\v;iy. 
It relates to yon graceless students, who have been studying court 
fasiiions rather than scholarly discourse ; and liaving plucked a 
leaf out of your books, have twisted it fool- fashion round their 
necks, as you perceive." 

" I observe tliem," replied Joyeuse. " 'Tis an insolent device 
of the Guise or his faction. I Avould brain the knaves, but it were 
idle to bestow a thought on the puppets wliilc the charhitan show- 
man is to be met with " 

" Our gossip, Henriot, thought otherwise," snid the jester, 
"when these varlets roared within ear-shot of him, ' a la fiuLe on 
connoit le venu /' " 

" Mort-Dieu !" exclaimed Joyeuse. " What ho ! there, Captain 
Larchant ! Summon my company of archers, and give me my 
horse! To the saddle, D'Epernon, and bring up thy quaiantc-citnj. 
AVe will disperse this rabble rout! We will bind them hand and 
heel — scourge them to the bone — slay in case of resistance ! — to 
the saddle, 1 say !" 

" Moderate your choler, Joyeuse," said D'Epcrnon, holding back 
the vicomte, and addressing him in a low tone. " You will only 
incur his majesty's displeasure by involvingyourself in a broil with 
the University, and gladden the hearts of the Guisards and the 
Leaguers, who would rejoice in your rashness. The present is not 
fitting season for retaliation. We will find siuTr means of ven- 
geance." 

" I would spurn the canailh beneath my charger's feet," replied 
Joyeuse, " but bo it as you will. The rector, I know, is as jealous 
of his privileges as the Guise of his duchess, and we miglit not, 
perhaps, have suflicient plea of justification. Let him hang the 
knaves himself, and I am satisfied. 'Twill save the provost marshal 
a labour." 

" All in good time," replied D'Epcrnon, "and his conference 
with Crichton concluded, the rector appears inclined to address 
his caii alumni. I trust in terms of sullicicnt reprobation." 

The rector, who had, apparently much against Crichton's in- 
clination, detained him in earnest conversation at the portal, now 
turned towards the scholars, intimating his intention of addressing 
them. The clamour ceased as soon as his gestures were understood. 

"Messieurs scholars of the University of Paris," he said, "you 
have already learned, I doubt not, that your most erudite doctors 
«nd professors have this day sustained a defeat; a defeat, how- 
ever, which, while it reflects no disgrace on the conquered, 
enhances the glory of the victor. In the whole circle of science 
and learning James Crichton hath approved his supremacy, and 
we wiUingly surrender to him our laurels. May he long continue 



so CKICIITOX. 

to wear tlicm, and may his career, the dawn of which is so brilliant, 
be cquaUy iilorious at its close ! Like the great poet Dante he 
came liither unknown, l^ike Dante he dcpartcdi with a reputation 
which will be blazed throughout all the schools of Europe. In 
earnest of the profound admiration which, in common with all the 
principals of the university, I enteitain for his transcendant abilities 
and matchless scholarship, in their names and in my own name, in 
^■our behalf and in that of every member of the university by 
■whom learning is reverenced, and with whom genius is held sacred, 
I would tender lor his acceptance, as a mark of our esteem and 
veneration, this ring; which I trust he will not disdain to wear 
upon his person as a trophy of the conquest he has this day 
achieved, and in remembrance of the university he has vanquished. 
And that every member of the university may participate in this 
expression of our sentiments towards the Admirable Crichton, I 
liave taken this public opportunity of their manifestation. Scholars 
of Paris, have I not your approval and concurrence ?" 

A thunder of applause succeeded the rector's oration, and a thou- 
sand hurrahs responded to his appeal. All eyes were now turned to 
Crichton, who, it was evident, only awaited a cessation of the cla- 
mour to address the assemblage in his turn. Silence was instantly 
commanded; and scarce a breath was drawn as he spoke, so intent 
were all upon catching each syllable that fell from his lips. 

" When the l^hojnix of his age," began Crichton, in a voice distinct 
and musical, "and the favourite of the jNIuscs, Picus of Mirandula, 
was proffered all the honours of the Ivoman School, he declined them, 
saying that he felt his own unworthincss, and that he had acquired 
more distinction than was his due in having obtained a hearing at 
their hands. In imitation of the conduct of this illustrious prince, 
though with far less claim to the same honourable note, I would 
say that I neither deserve nor desire further distinction than I have 
gained. Fortune has already iavourcd me beyond my deserts. I 
have engaged in amicable strife with men Avhose intellectual supe- 
riority 1 am ready to acknowledge, and who, if I have worsted 
them in argument, have been foiled solely because I made a better 
choice of weapons, and happened to be the more skilful in their use. 
I am not blinded by self-esteem. I do not attribute my victory 
to other than its right causes. Like most of the great events of 
life, its issue has been the result of chance, which has upon tins 
occasion declared itself in my fiivour. Were the contest to bo 
renewed on the morrow, I might be placed in the position of my 
opponents. Courtesy to a stranirer, and consideration for his youth, 
have restrained my adversaries from putting forth their strength. 
Some such feelings must have had their inlluence. Grant, how- 
ever, that i have triumphed. You have bestowed upon me your 
applause. I am fully requited. Trophies of victory whicli may 
be wrested from me as soon as won arc of little avail. Better 



Tin-: RECTOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS. 31 

men may :i})pcar — Piuics hdhet Sparta liiasida vidlorcs. AJy 
ambition lias u hundicd goals, which it would lain reach. 

" ^ragmiin iter intciulo, sed dat luihi gloria vires." 

" LivcCrichton ! Live the Adnuraljlc Cilchton I — Enfje Optime! 
Kvge! i5'//ye /" shouted 1 he scholars. 

Crichtoii gracefully saluted the assemblage and would have re- 
tired, if he had not been withheld by the rector. " You must per- 
force accept this gem," said the latter; " the gifts of the University of 
]*aris are not wont to be slighted," and taking a brilliant diamond 
ring from his forchnger, and loosening the velvet cscarcclle from 
Ills sash, Messlre Adrien d'Ambolse presented them to Crichton. 

" I may not decline your ollcr," replied Crichton, reluctantly re- 
ceiving the prolFercdgem, " since you thus press it upon me, though 
I i'eel how little I merit it. The ring I shall prize, but as to the 
contents of the purse, you must sufTer me to dispose of them as I 
shall see fitting." 

" The pui:se is yours; do with its contents what you think proper," 
said the rector. 

Crichton removed the ring, and taking forth the crowns of 
gold with which the cscarcclle was filled, threw them amongst 
the crowd of scholars. A violent commotion ensued, during 
v>-hich many of the students broke through the lines and ap- 
jMoached close to the persons of Crichton and the rector. One of 
these, a youth, who for some space had held his green jnantle be- 
fore his liice, now rushed forward, and prostrating himself before 
Crichton, threw down a garland of twisted bay-leaves at his leet. 

" Disdain not my oflering, Seigneur Crichton," he said, in a low 
and timid voice, " simple though it be, and all unworthy your ac- 
ceptance. I will myself wind it round your brows, if I receive your 
gracious permission to do so."" 

" Retire, thou forward youth," said the rector, gravely. " This is 
presumption." 

" I pray you excuse him," said Crichton, " the compliment is too 
flattering to be declined, and, let me add, the mode in which it is 
conveyed is too graceful to be unwelcome. I accept your wreath, 
young sir, and beg you to arise. But v/hcrefore," he added, 
with a smile, " did you imagine I should come olF victorious? 
Surely there was nothing to warrant such a conclusion. And had 
I returned ingloriously, this garland would have been wholly 
thrown away." 

The youth arose, and fixed his dark eyes full upon Crichton's 
countenance. " AVhatever the Admirable Crichton shall undertake, 
in that he will excel all men," he said. "With him to engage in 
a. conflict is to obtain a victory. I was assured of his success." 

" Your looks are sincere, and I will not distrust your words," re- 
plied Crichton. '" Your flice resembles one I have seen, thouj^li 
where I cannot call to mind. Are you of these colleg(;3 ?" 



32 CRICIITOX. 

" lie is one of tlie Gclosi, siv," said Oixilvy, who, together with 
Cnravaja and the SorboJiist, liad forced liimself into the vicinity of 
Cricliton. " Be not deceived by his honest look, as I have been. 
Hence, youth, and take thy nininnierics -with tliee." 

" One of tlie Gclosl !" exclaimed Crichton. " Ha ! now I remem- 
ber the features. ''J'is tlie youth I have seen so oft. But whv 
nvert thy head, gentle boy? I have said nothing, I trust, to wound 
thy feelings ?" 

The Geloso appeannl crimsoned with shame. *' Tell me," con- 
tinued Crichton, "what may mean tliat masked llgure whom I have 
seen for e\xT lioveii ng nigh thee in thy walks? nay, that seems like 
thy shadow at the Hotel do Bourbon. Is it a device of thine own 
to attract curiosity, young sir? If so, I can tell thee thou hast 
succeeded. Even tlie royal Henri has noticed the singularity of 
the figure." 

"Have you, likewise, remarked that mask, signer?" replied the 
Geloso, with an expression of uneasiness ahntjst amounting to ter- 
ror. " I have often thought it a trick of my own imagination. But 
you have seen it likewise!" 

'• I have," replied Cricliton ; " but methinks you answer evasively. 
I thought more of sincerity dwelt in those earnest eyes. Your 
present action is but, I fear, an artifice to win attention." 

So saying he turned from him. The Geloso attempted to 
reply, but retired abashed. Ogilvy Avas about to thrust him back, 
but jiercelvlng that the youth had shrouded his face with his 
mantle, and voluntarily withdrawn himself, he desisted. 

There Avas something in the manner of the youth that struck 
Crichton; and his feelings reproached him with undue severity to- 
ivards him. Laying his hand upon his shoulder, he addressed a 
lew words to him in a more kindly tone. 

The Geloso raised his eyes. The black orbs were filled with 
tears. He looked with a blinded gaze on Crichton, and thence at 
the hand which he still suffered to remain upon his shoulder. Sud- 
denly he started. He pressed his hand across his eyes. He pointed 
to Crlehton's finger. " The ring!" he exclaimed. " Did you not 
place it there?" 

Surprised at the youth's emotion, and at the inquiry, Crichton 
looked at the finger upon which he had scarcely a moment ago 
placed the gift of" the rector. The ring was wanting. 

Unable to account for this extraordinary occurrence, and not 
without some suspicions of the youth himself", Crichton fixed a 
cold scrutinising glance upon him. 'i'he Geloso shuddered slightly 
at the expression of his glance, but quailed not beneath it. " He 
caimot liave done it,'"" thought Crichton. " I'alsehood could not 
dwell in looks so guileless." 

At this instant there was a further rush amongst the scholars. 
Ogilvy and the Geloso were forcibly propelled against Crichton. 
A Icnife was seen to glitter in the air. From its position it seemed 



AX ENGLISH BULL- DOG. 3? 

to be grasped by the hand of Ogilvy. For an Instant the steel 
Avas suspended over the head of Crichton. The Geloso saw it. 
Uttering u loud ciy of warning, he I'lin^w himself in the way of 
tlie blow. The blade deseended. The arms of tlie youth were 
entwined round Crichton's neek. In an instant he found hiinsell 
deluged in blood. 

With Ciichton to draw his sword— to sustain the almost in- 
animate body of the Geloso, was the work of an instant. 

" This is the assassin !" he shouted. And with the hand that was 
still at liberty, and with a force that seemed almost superhuman, 
Jie grasped the throat of the paralysed Oginy. 



CHAPTER IV. ■ 

AN ENGLISH BULL DOG. • ^ 

As sure a dog as ever fought at liead. — T.tus AnJiwii its. 

A CllY arose amongst the scholars that Crichton had been assas- 
sinated, and such was the confusion that prevailed in his vicinityr 
that for some space the truth or falsehood of the report could not 
be ascertained. 

The crowd was fearfully incensed. They demanded tliat the 
assassin should be liiven up to their vengeance. Yelling", trroaninf. 
uttering threats and imprecations, tliey pressed forward — at the 
sides, in frunt, in all directions. The archers, stationed as a foot- 
guard around the doctors and professors. Avere incontinently carried 
off their legs. The principals of the colleges immediately beat a 
retreat, and betook themselves for refuge to the hall of the institu- 
tion they had so recently quitt<^d. Affairs assumed a very ominous 
aspect. Bludgeons were waved in the air; blows were dealt indis- 
criminately, and many a pretended random stroke wiped off' old 
scores Avith some rigid disciplinarian Avho had not been sufficiently 
alert to effect his escape. In vain did the Rector strive to check this 
rising storm. His voice, Avont to be listened to Avith awe, was 
unheard or unheeded amid the tumult. 

" Los aux Ecoles !" shouted the scholars, pressing forward. 

" Los aux Ecoles !" cried Chicot, Avho, safely ensconced within 
the gateway, eyed the raging mob at a distance. " 1 never hear 
that cry but I think of the screaming of a pack of gulls before a 
tempest. Mischief is sure to be brewing." 

" Their cursed croaking resembles that of the frogs in .Aristo- 
phanes," said Ronsard ; " Avould it might end in erocitation ! I 
prophesied evil from the moment I beheld this rabble." 

" I trust you Avill rather approve yourself V(Jtes in its poetic thnix 
its prophetic sense," rephed Brantome "I own my mind mis- 
gives me." 

" Mcthinks, my lord," said Rene do Yillequier to the Rector, " it 
Averc Avell to nip this riot in the bud. .Some lives may else be 

D 



34 CUICHTOX. 

lost. Sec — they approacli the assassin — tlicj seize liim — they drai^ 
him from the grasp of Crichton. Mort-dieu ! my lord, they w'Ai 
tear him in pieces — this must he previ.-nted, avc must not stand by 
and sec outrage hke tliis ccmmitted." 

" The butcheis!'' c-liouted Joyeuse. " Crichton himself Avill he 
endangered. By my hahdom ! I ^vill bring down my archers upon 
them !— " 

" Stay, my lord, an instant, I implore cf you," said the Rector, 
*' my presence will restrain tlieir violence. I will go amongst them 
mysell^ — they daie riOt disobey my mandates.'"' 

And accompanied by the grand master of tlio College of Na- 
varre, the Koctor forced iiis way to\va'<is the principal scene of strife. 

" (jive them this I'urther chanct," said D'Epernon to the 
vicomte, who was chafing like :i liigh-mettled steed with im- 
patience. '• If they heed not. their Kector then — " 

" Los aux l^colcs," repHed Chicot, Avith a laugh. " We shall 
have a pleasant specimen of their chivalry anon. By my marotte, 
they are in no mood to listen to a dissertation now." 

" 'Tis a waste of time,"' cried Joyeuse, " forbearance is tlirown 
awav. When the king's majesty is not lield sacred by these felon 
scholars, how can their Rector expect obedience from them"? To 
my side, Larchant — en avaiit T And drawing his sword, ond 
attended by the captain of the guard, the vicomte flung himself 
headlong into the press. 

Intelligence that Crichton was unhurt somewhat abated the 
frenzy of the midtitude. Still they were vehemently excited. 
Ogilvy had been dragged from Crich ton's grasp, and Avas threatened 
witli instant immolation. Deprived of utterance by the choaking 
gripe of Crichton ; stunned by the butlets of the students, 
it was only in this perilous extremity that he recovered his power 
of speecli. With a force that could only have been given liim bv 
despair, he burst from their hold and shouted to Crichton for aid. 
He was instantly retaken, and his cries drowned by a roar of 
mockery from the ruthless mob. 

"Call on Crichton for protection I" shouted Caravaja, who had 
been a prominent instrument in assailing the unfortunate Scot, 
and who indul<2;ed in a savage reiolcliiii; at his situation. " As 
well might the serpent sue for protection to the heel it hath bitten, 
as thou implore succour from him thou Avouldst have slain. But 
thv countryman, tliou scest, turns a deaf ear to thy plaints — 
ha! ha!" 

*' Surely mine ears deceiAcd me," said Crichton, who, with 
his hroidered keichief was busied in staunching the wound of 
th(; Geloso, and who had only caught this latter exclamation of 
the Spaniard. " Can it be that the assassin is countryman of 
mine?" 

" 'Tis even so, Seilor Crichton," replied Caravaja. " To his 
eternal infamy be it spoken." 



AN ENGLISH BULL-DOG. 3,5 

" Hcarmc, noble Ciicliton!" shouted Ogilvy, Avhom the Spaniard 
vainly endeavoured to silence. " Tliink nic not guilty of this Ibul 
offence. I care not for death, Lut I would not die dishonoured. 
I would not perish charged with a deed whicli my soul abhorreth. 
I am no assassin. I am Jasper Ogilvy, of liull'our." 

" Hold !" exclaimed Crichton, consigning his yet inanimate 
burthen to the care of a bystander, and pressing towards Ogilvy, 
** let me speak with this man. Give me some token that 1 may 
know tliou art he whom thou callest thyself Thy voice brinus 
back by-gone days ; but I can discern nought of Jasper Ogilvy m 
those blood-stained features." 

" You would not know my visage, were it freed from its stain," 
returned Ogilvy. "We both have grown to manhood since we 
met ; but you will call to mind a moonlight cruise upon the lake 
of Cluny, years ago, when a noble youth was saved from perishing 
in its waters. To me the recollection of that deed hath been ever 
sweet; to-day it hath been proud. Let me but establish my truth 
■with you, honoured sir, and these hell-hounds may do their 
■worst." 

" You have said enough; I am satisfied, more than satisfied," 
.replied Crichton. " Messieurs, release this young man. He is 
wholly guiltless of the crime laid to his charge. 1 ^Yill answer for 
him with my life." 

The scholars replied with a laugh of incredulity. 

" We have only his bare word for his innocence," replied the 
Bernardln. " Appearances are sadly against hiin." 

" This knife was within his vest when we dragged him from the 
Seiior Crichton," added Caravaja, holding up an ensangviincd 
blade. " Por los Revelatloues de San Juan ! this, methinks, is 
proof unanswerable." 

A volley of execrations answered this appeal to the passions of 
the multitude. 

" Thou llest," cried Ogilvy, struggling to set free his hands; 
■*' that poignard is thine own ; my dirk hangs at my girdle — would 
it were now within my grasp !" 

*' Produce the weapon, then," said Caravaja. And he thrust 
his hand into the Scot's torn doublet. " Ha !" exclaimed he, sud- 
denly, what have I found ? Por nuestra Seiiora ! ^tls the diamond 
ring, with the cipher of the university. He is a robber as well as 
an assassin." 

A sudden light seemed to break upon Crichton. 

" Let the accuser and the accused both be brought before the 
Hector," he cried. 

A murmur arose amongst the scholars. 

*' He would shield his countryman," they vociferated; '* we are 
satisfied of his guilt." 

"But you are not to constitute yourselves his judges," replied 
Crichton, sternly. " Deliver him to the proper authorities; let 

l> 2 



30 cnicnxoN. 

tliat Spaniard, wlio stands forth liis accuser, be secured; and I an: 
satisfied."" 

" Miudity well!" returned Caravaja. "All I get for my ex- 
ertions in seizing the assassin is to be accused of the crime myself. 
But if you arc so readily gulled by your countryman's subterfuge, 
Sefior Crichton, my comrades are not so easily imposed upon. Hijo 
di Dios ! they know me too well to suspect me of any such 
enormity." 

" The scholars of Paris are apt to take the law into their own 
hands upon occasions like the present, Avhere the guilt of the 
ollender is manifestly established," said the Sorbonist. " It is the 
part of their privileges to adjudicate their own causes, and they 
are always willing to abide by the consequences of their own de- 
cisions. We have sentenced this man to run the gauntlet of the 
schools, and he shall not escape. Wherefore do we delay, comrades?" 

" Ay, wherefure ?" rejoined Caravpja. 

" Beware," shouted Crichton, in a voice of thunder, " how you 
proceed to iurther acts of violence. ^ly respect for your university 
has thus long withheld me ; but I will not stand by and see out- 
rage committed." 

" I am with you," said the English student, Simon Blount, 
advancing towards him, and still followed by his huge bull-dog, 
" Your countryman shall sufler no wrong, while I have staff to 
wield, or blade to draw in his defence. And as to the merits of 
his case, I have as little doubt of his innocence, as I have assurance 
of yon cut-throat Spaniard's guilt. But in any case, he shall not 
be put to death without judge or jury. What, ho ! Druid," added 
he, glancing signilicantly at his dog, " it will be time to slip thy 
muzzle in case these curs show their teetli." 

At this juncture, the liector and the Doctor Launoy made their 
appearance. 

" Hear me, my children," said the liector, in a loud voice, 
"justice shall be dealt upon this Scot. Deliver him into the 
custody of the sergeant of the guard now in attendance upon me, 
and I pledge myself to the instant examination of his case. What 
more can you require ? By your threatened violence, vou will 
only add one crime to anotlier, and increase the scandal you have 
already brought upon the university." 

Crichton conferred an instant with the Rector, who apparently 
acquiesced in the propriety of the suggestion made to him. 

'' Disperse at once ; and let each man seek his respective 
college," continued Adrian D'Amboise, with some severity. 
" Sergeant, advance, and seize upon the persons of Jasper Ogilv}-,. 
of the Ecos^ais, and Diego Caravaja of the college of Narbonne. 
Messieurs Scholars, give him your aid. Ah! do you hesitate? — 
is it possible that you venture to disobey the paternal injunction of 
the father of the university — what frenzy is this?" 

A sullen murmur ran through the battahon of the scholars ; anxl 



AN ENGLISH BULL-DOG. 37 

Biicli was tlieir tlireatcnlng aspect, that the sergeant of tlic guard 
hesitated to obey the cominand of the Rector. 

" Why should we respect his mandates ?" muttered the Sor- 
bonist. " 'Tis phxin we are but hghtly considered at his paternal 
hands. Let tlie Father of the University tell us why his Children 
were excluded from the disputation this morning, and we will then 
perpend the propriety of compliance with his rc(jucst.'^ 

" Ay, let him answer that," said the Bernardin. 

" 'Twould shrewdly perplex him to do so," returned Caravaja. 
** By the perdition of the world ! I will surrender myself to no 
man living, sergeant or rector, Scot or Englishman ; and to show 
them how little I regard tlieir threats, if no other can be found to 
smite this starveling bravo, my hand shall deal the first blow."" 

Caravaja raised his knife with the intent to strike. At that In- 
stant, however, he was seized by a nervous grasp, and hurled 
backwards with such force, that, muttering an oath, he fell 
heavily to the ground. Crichton, for it was by his hand that 
the Spaniard had been prostrated, threw himself amongst the ranks 
of the scholars with such irresistible force, that their united efforts 
were imable to withstand him. Shaking oiF Ogilvy's captors, he 
placed a poignard widiin his grasp, and, drawing his own sword, 
calmly awaited the further assault of the students. 

Rugged and resolute as the bull-dog at his heels, Blount fol- 
lowed closely in his rear. Confining himself to the warding off a 
few blows, aimed at Crichton, he at (irst dealt none in reliun ; but 
he could not long act upon the defensive. A rude bulIL-t on the 
head aroused his ire. He then laid about him Avith such good- 
will and determination, that an opponent dropped for every blow 
of his cudirel, which was not a vine-wood staff, but a huire Kniilisli 
crab-stick, seasoned, knotty, and substantial. The miglit of twenty 
threshers seemed to reside in Blount's single arm. Sconces were 
cracked by him with as much ease as a boy ibr pastime would beat in 
pieces as many gouixls. The Sorbonist ventured to oppose his estoc 
against the Englishman's club. The sophister, however, had now 
a more difHcult thesis to maintain than any he had hitherto de- 
fended. His postulate was etfectually blanked by Blount's knotty 
rejoinder. Yielding to the weighty blow, the supple vine-staff 
fled from his grasp, spinning throuuh the air to a considerable 
distance, while the arm that sustained it, shattered by the stroke, 
sank powerless to his side. 

Meantime, Ogilvy and Crichton were not left unmolested. 
Placed back to back, both stood in postures of defence. Uttering 
frightful yells, and brandishing their staves, the scholars furiously 
commenced the assault. Caravaja, who had regained his Icet, was 
amongst the foremost of the assailants. 

" By Saint James of Compostella !" he roared, " 1 will wash out, 
in blood, the stain he hath put on our academies, and on myself, 
liive way; look to thyself, proud Scot." And pressing forward, 
he made a desperate thrust at Crichton. 



38 CRICIITON. 

Caravnja -was no contemptible swordsman ; but lie had to do witli 
an antagonist unequalled in the art oi' selt'-delcnce. His thrust was 
parried'with infinite dexterity, and after the exchange of a lew 
lierce and rapid passes, his long Toledo was twisted irom his giasp, 
and he lay at the mercy of his adversary. Crichton, however, 
forbore to strike ; but dismissed his foe as one unworthy of his 
steel. Gnashing his teeth with rage, Caravaja sought a new wea- 
pon ; and encouraging each other by shouts and cries, the scholars 
still pressed madly on. 

One amongst their number, of colossal stature, noted amongst 
his brethren lor extraordinary atldctic feats, and rejoicing in the 
Ivabelaisian sohriqiut of Loupgarou, advanced deliberately towards 
him. He wielded a bar of iron, and while Crichton was engaged 
on all sides, he discharged a tremendous blow full at his head. 
The ponderous weapon descended, but Crichton had ibrcseen the 
stroke and averted it, not, however, without some loss. Such was 
the force of the blow, that his sword blade, ihough of the best 
tL-mpered steel, was shivered at the hilt. 

It was now that Ciicliton's great personal strength, and remark- 
able activity, stood him in admirable stead. "Without allowing 
his !T:i£jantic antagonist time to repeat his blow, he sprang forward 
and"«>^rappled him with an energy that shook his Herculean frame 
TO its foundation. The Antaius of the schools reeled. Yov the 
first time he had met Avith his match. Locked in Crichton's gripe, 
T^oupgarou could neither disentangle his right arm, nor bring his 
luiwieldy powers into play. He could scarcely even draw breath, 
and his brawny chest heaved like a labouring mountain. 

Confident of tlie result of the strife, and unAvilling to deprive 
their champion of the entire honours of conquest, the scholars sus- 
pended further hostilities against Crichton, and directed their at- 
tacks upon Ogilvy and Btount. Abandoned by his comrades, 
Loupgarou was ashamed to roar for aid ; and experienced some 
such "qualms as fell to the share of his namesake when struggling 
within the clutch of the redoubted Pantagrucl. Like a tower 
shaken from its equilibrium by the blast of the miner, he tottered 
on liis base, and with a concussion heard above the din of the 
fray, he fell to the ground, deprived of sense and motion. 

Snatching the bar from the relaxed grasp of his adversary, Crich- 
ton was about to rejoin- his comrades, when his attention was 
suddenly drawn to a new quarter. Hearing his own name called 
npon, as he thought, by the voice of the Geloso, followed by a loud 
shriek for help, he strove to force his way in the direction of the 
sound. 

Ogilvy, meantime, found an unexpected and most eflicient ally 
in the Englishman's dog, Druid. Galled by the fierce_ and per- 
tinacious assaults of his enemies, Blount suddenly slipped the 
muzzle of the savage animal, and he rushed at the scholars. Blount 
directed his attacks, and cheered him on. Blows availed nothing 



COSMO RUGGIERI. 39 

against the toiigli hide of the hardy animal, and served only to in- 
cense him. He raged amongst them like a wolf in a lamb-p:isture. 

Fain would the students have taken to their heels, but retreat 
was impossible. Those behind pushed forward the ranks in front. 
Slirieks and exeerations evidenced the devastation of the relentless 
pursuer. His teeth met in the legs of one, in the arms of another, 
in the throat of a third. 

A space was quickly cleared around Blount and Ogilvy by their 
staunch partisan. With his back on the ground — his face shielded 
by his hands to protect himself from the teeth of the dog, by wliora 
he had been pinned to the eartli, lay the prostrate ibrm of tlie Ber- 
nardin. Planting his heavy paws upon his neck, and sprawlin"^ 
over the body of the half-dead scholar, Druid upturned his glowinu; 
eyeballs to his master, as if to inquire whether or not he should 
complete his work of destruction. It was a critical moment ibr the 
Bernardin. 

Just then, however, the clatter of swords, the trampling of steeds, 
and shouts of "Joyeuse, to the rescue!"' announced that the vi- 
comte had readied his company of archers. With a swoop hke 
that of an eagle upon a flock of meaner fowl — and with his 
charger rearing into tlie air, Joyeuse dashed amongst tlie multitude. 

On the other hand came the halberdiers of the Hector and the 
lacqueys of Rene de Villequier witli bills and partisans ; and, fur- 
thermore, the crowd Avas invested to the riglit by the well disci- 
plined Qz/«7<7??fe Cunj, under the command of the Baron D'Epcrnon. 
Thus menaced on all sides, the scholars found themselves in an 
awkward predicament. At first there was a murmur of " Down 
with the minions! — Down with the Gascon coi/pf^jonrts f" but 
these cries were speedily silenced. A few strokes from the blunt 
edges of the swords of the guardsmen, and their staves were thrown 
to the ground in token of submission. 

CHAPTER V. 

COSMO RUGGIERI. 

Icy pros, dist Epistcmon, denioure Her Trippa, vous syavez comment par art 
d'Astrologie, Geomancie, Chiromaiicie, et aultres de pareille farine, il predict 
toutes choses futures ; conf'orons de vostre aflaire avec lui. De cela, respondit 
Panurge, je ne S5ay rien. — Rabelais. — Fantugruel. — Liv. III. 

The by-stander to whom Crichton committed the inanimate 
Geloso, when he rushed to the assistance of Ogilvy, received his 
charge with an eager readiness, that almost appeared as if he had 
anticipated the event. Shielding his burden Avith his arms, and 
unwilling, it Avould seem, to attract further attention, he endea- 
voured to extricate himself from the crowd. 

He was a little old man, of singular and inauspicious appearance, 
dressed in a flowing robe of black taffeta, lined with flame-coloured 
silk, and edged with sable fur. In lieu of doublet and hose, he 



40 CRICIITOX. 

wore a rlcli gown of crimson velvet, fastened round the waist with 
a silken cord, in the which was stuck a costly purse, embroidered 
with the arms of Catherine de Medicis. A collar of medallions, 
graven Avith cabalistic characters, hung over his shoulder, and upon 
liis head he wore a small scull- cap of purple velvet. He bore 
neither ai'ms nor device of anv sort beyond the blazon of the Queen 
Mother. His forehead would have appeared venerable from its 
height, baldness, and innumerable wrinkles, had not his black 
scowling brows given it a sinister and portentous look. His temples 
were hollow and sunken; his cheeks emaciated; the colour of his 
skin was sallow and jaundiced, and its texture like that of shrivelled 
])archment. His nose was high and aquiline, tufted between the 
<'yes with a clump of dusky hair; and the Avhole expression of 
his features was crafty, suspicious, and malignant, ^^'hen erect, 
liis stature miudit have been loftv, but his heitj;ht was now 
dwindled to insignificance, by his stooping shoulders and contracted 
spine. His distorted limbs were concealed from view by the arnplo 
Iblds of his drapery ; but his joints had been wrenched from their 
sockets, and but ill restored, during his confinement in the Bastille, 
where he had been incarcerated and tortured for supposed practices 
of sorcery, during the reign of Charles IX. 

Cosmo Ruggicri, the forbidding personage described, — by birth 
a Florentine, by vocation a mathematician, alchemist, nay, even 
bard, as may be gathered from the Anajp'aniutufjrophie of Nicolas 
Clement Treleau, Secretary to the Due d'Anjou, where he is eu- 
logised as " Florentinum, mathematicum, et poetam lectissimum ;" 
— officiated as chief astrologer to Catherine de JNIedicis, by whom 
he was brought to Paris. It was to the inlluence ot the Queen 
^lother that he owed his deliverance from the rack and the 
dungeon; his escape with life; his subsequent advancement to court 
liivour under her third son Henri, for whose accession to the throne, 
it was said, Indeed, he had paved the way by ihi- removal of his 
brothers, Francis H. and Charles IX., and by whom, latltudinarian 
amd heretical, it" not wholly heathenish and abominable as his tenets 
were known to be, he was advanced to tlie ecclesiastical dignity 
of Abbe of Saint Mahe, in Brittany. It was to tlie protection of 
Catherine's powerful arm that, although surrounded by open and 
secret foes, he was enabled to pursue his mysterious career unmo- 
lested ; and it was to her he was' indebted lor the wondeiful state 
information he possessed. 

In return lur these obligations, the stars were nightly consulted 
lor her by him, and on all emergencies Catherine had recourse 
to his counsel. Kiiggierl was blindly devoted to her will, and 
mainly instrumental in the execution of her hidden projects and 
machinations. 

Kuggleil, however, did not stand alone. To such an extent did 
the practice of judicial astrology prevail at the time, that the 
number of professors in the science was estimated at tlilrty tliou- 



COSMO RUGGIEEI. 4 1 

sand; a calculation almost incredible, if the number of dupes ne- 
cessarily required for tlieir support be taken into consideration. 

Be this as it may, Ruggieri llourished. But then it was whis- 
pered, that he had another and more terrible source of lucre. Tlie 
slow and subtle poisons of Florentine origin, whose treacherous 
effect was manifested in the gradual decay of the victim, were said 
to be brewed by him. The blood that nightly bathed the couch of 
Charles IX. was supposed to be the consequence of one of these dia- 
bolical potions; and sucla was the dread entertained of his villanous 
<3ri]gs, that a cup of wine would have fiilien from the grasp of the 
boldest bacchanal, if it had been thought to be medicated by Cosmo 
Ruggieri. 

By the side of the astrologer was a dumb Afri(;an slave of the 
imost diminutive size and fantastic configuration, who had the re- 
putation of being his familiar; and strange as was the appearance of 
the sorcerer, that of his page avos many degrees more grotesque. 
Hideously deformed and hunchbacked, Elberich was so short in 
comparison witli his width and girtli, that, when moving, liis squat 
rotundity of figuie looked like a rolling ball of soot, in which, in 
place of eyes, two flaming carbuncles had been set; and when mo- 
tionless, he appeared like a black, bloated baboon. 

Aided by his dwarf, from whose contact all recoiled with dis- 
gust, Ruggieri had btit little difficulty in making good his retreat; 
and having t!;ained the shelter of a flviufr buttress of the collejre 
Avail, in the angle of which he was secure from interruption, he 
turned his attention to the restoration of his charge. 

As he removed the black and clustering ringlets, fallen in disorder 
over the features of the Geloso, Ruggieri could not help being 
struck by their exceeding loveliness. The cheek had indeed lost 
the Avarm suffusion that, like a glow of sunshine on a snoAA-y peak, 
had lit up its bright southern complexion; but the face Avas not 
less beautiful; and Ruggieri perused its lineaments Avitli the rap- 
ture of a virtuoso. He peered into every line Avith increasing 
wonder. It was not so much the harmony and regularity of the 
youth's features that struck him Avith astonishment, as the sofcness 
of the skin, and the polished Avhiteness of the throat, on Avhich the 
azure veins Avere traced like AA-andering threads. These Avere Avhat 
chiefly excited his admiiation. He grcAV so much absorbed in 
contemplation of the countenance, that he AvhoUy neglected to 
apply the phial of pungent spirit, Avhich he held extended in his grasp. 

Throwin" back the hair as far as it Avould admit, Rug<>:ieri ex- 
amined more narrowly the snowy forehead of the Geloso. Thence 
his glance Avandered to the face Avitli rencAved surprise. The eyes 
Avere closed; but the dark orbs could almost be seen through the 
thin lids. Then, those long silken lashes — that dark and pencilled 
brow — those nostrils, fine and thin — those lips so delicately carved! 
The astrologer Avas lost in amazement. Taking the small Avhite 
hand that hung listlessly at the youth's side, he opened it, and 



42 CKICIITOX. 

intend}' pcTusod its lines. A shade came over his countenance as 
lie pursued his study. 

" Spirit of Sambethe!" he cxclaimod, "can this bo? Can I have 
been so lon<^ in error? Can the lieavenly influences have so long 
deceived their votary ? — Impossible ! True, tlic planets have 
of late assumed malevolent aspects — menaclnfr luo with ill. Sa- 
turn hath rule "svithin the Cliamber of Deatli. Tlic Lord of the 
Third House -was combust and rctrosiade Avitlun the Eleventh, j)rc- 
saging peril from the hand of a stranger. Tliis day, this hour, is 
pregnant with calamity. I foresaw ]ny danger, but I foresiiw like- 
wise the means wlicreby it miglit be averted. Within my patli 
stands Crichton. He is the foe by whom 1 am threatened. This 
day links his liite Avith mine, and with tliat of another. That 
other is mv safeguard — that otlicr is witliin my arms. One of us 
must perish. A thick curtain hangs between mo and the event. 
Curses on my own imperfect skill, wliicli will only enable nie to see 
so far, and no iarthcr. But I may ward off" the stroke." 

And he again returned to the scrutiny of the Gelesc's counte- 
nance. " Wherefore is it," he continued, musingly, " that as I gaze 
upon these beautiful features, a thousand i'orgotten fancies should 
be awakened within my bosom? This face, though lovelier far, 
recals to me the image of one long since buried in oblivion — it re- 
cals dreams of youth, of passion, fever, delirium; of a deed of 
which I will not even think. Who is this youth? or lather, unless 
mine eyes are wholly sightless, or dim to auglit save tlic midnight 
glories of the heavens, who is this " 

The reverie of th.e astrologer was here interrupted by a slight 
convulsive attempt at respiration on the part of the Geloso. Hug- 
gieri applied the phial, and, with a trembling hand, proceeded to 
unclasp the youth's <loublet to give him greater freedom in breath- 
ing. In removing tlie folds of the blood-stained linen, the 
heaving bosom of a young and lovely I'cmale was revealed. His 
eye glistened through its iilm. " It is as I suspected," lie muttered 
— " a girl in masquerade attire. iNIost probably the fool liath 
lost her heart to Crichton — if so, slie will be a useful agent. 
I have need of such an one in my designs upon him. Ha! what 
have wc here? — an amulet — no, by Hermes, a small key of gold, 
of antique fashioning, attached to a chain of the same metal, which, 
from its exquisite workmanship, I judges to be Venetian. Ah, fair 
maiden, I have here, no doubt, a clue to your history, of which I 
may avail myself hereafter ! By your leave, this key is mine." 

And little scrupulous as to the means of accomplishing any 
object, liuggicri, without hesitation, unlkstened the chain, and 
was about to commit it to the custody of his pouch, when lis 
was alarmed by a monitory signal from his sable attendant. 

The sound uttered by the dwarf rescndilcd th.c hissing of a 
startled snake. Indeed, the vocid peiwcrs of the wretclied creature 
only ranged between gibbering and sibillation. By the- former he 



THE MASK. 43 

oxpresscd his rejoicing, by the latter his fears. The astrologer well 
knew how to interpret the present boding noise. Followmo- the 
direction of the dwarf's red and glowing orbs, he cauo-ht sio-li o{ 
a figure, upon which the angry mannikin was glowering, pufhno-, 
and spitting like an owl disturbed by some prowling specimen ol 
ythe furry tribe. The figure was masked, and mullled within the 
folds of a lar^e sable cloak; and ere lluggieri could thrust the 
chain of gold into his girdle, the intruder was by his side. 

CHAPTER VI. 

THE MASK. 

Don Garcia. — Qu'est-ce alors 
Que ce mas(iue? — Teuez, le voila. — ^Victor Hugo. Hemanl. 

" Be not alarmed, father,'.' said the mask, addressing Ruo-o-ieri, 
I am a fi"'ond." 

"What assurance have I of that?" returned the astrolo"-er, 
doubtfully. . " Your speech is fair, but your guise and de- 
portment are not calculated to inspire confidence. We are not now 
in Venice, Signor Maschera ; neither is this the season of Carni- 
val. The good citizens of Paris deem the mask but an indifierent 
excuse for intrusion ; and I have been long enough amongst them 
to acquire some of their foolish notions on this head. Your par- 
don, signor, if I misconceive you. Much treachery has made me 
distrustful." 

" You arc in the right to be cautions, father," replied tlie mask ; 
" distrust becomes your years and character ; yet, methinks, the 
science you profess should enable you to detect a friend from a 
foe." 

*' I read not men's looks beneath a vizard, my son," replied 
Ruggicri, " that were, indeed, to sec tlirough a glass darkly. 
Let me behold your features, and I will tell you whether or not 
you are a friend." 

*' You wrong me by your doubts, father," replied the mask — 
" that I am well known to you, you shall have ample assurance 
presently ; and that I have some claim to the service 1 am about to 
require at your hands, you will then, I doubt not, admit. Mean- 
time, as secrecy is my object, and as the disclosure of my features, 
or even of my name, would only be attended with risk, you 
will, perhaps, suffer me to preserve my incognito." 

"Assuredly, my son," replied Ruggieri, who had now regained 
his confidence, " I have no desire to penetrate your mystery. 
Were it an object with me, I could readily gain information. 
What do you require of me?" 

" Before we proceed," returned the mask, " I pray you, father, to 
accept this purse as an earnest of my sincerity. It will give you a 
clearer insight into my character than even the display of my fea- 
tures." And as he spoke, he thrust a well-lined purse into the 
liands of the astrologer, who received it, nothing loth. 



44 CRICIITON. 

" Yoii have said well, my son," lie returned ; " this is a 
Miediuni throuirh which I clearly dlstinfjuish the false from^ the 
true friend. How can I assist you? Whatsoever comes within 
the scope of my art is yours to command." 

'* In a word, then," returned the mask, " I love — " 

" All ! I understand," replied iiugnieri, signilicantly, " you love 
without requital." 

•' Precisely so, father." 

" And would subdue the heart of her for whom you sigh. Is U 
not so?" 

The mask nodded assent. 

" Doubt not its accomplishment. Be she chilly as Cancasean snow, 
I will enrragc to create a llanic within her bosom that shall burn 
with an ardour fiercer than that created by the cestus of Venus." 

" Swear to me. you will do this." 

" By Orlmasis ! she shall be yours." 

" Enough — I am content." 

*' Tell the damscFs name and dw(tlling — 7* 

" Ni'itlier are needed — she is here." And the mask pointed to 
the Venetian girl. 

*' .Tabamlah !" exclaimed the surprised astrologer. 

" Nay, I know all," pursued the mask. " Plead nut ignorance. 
I witnessed the discovery you made." 

*' And — and you love lier — '' 

*' Lovelier I"echoed the mask — " Hear me, father," he continued, 
with impetuosity. ''You, Avho are of our fiery land, need not be 
told with what fierceness we Italians love. With all the ardour of 
overwhelming passion I pursued this damsel. She was deaf to my 
entreaties. In vain I used every blandishment, every artifice — in 
vain lavished gifts upon her that might have won a princess. All 
my ellbrts were inellectual. For me she had no smile. Nay, more, 
the fury of my suit atlrighted her. Indlfierence grew to iear, and 
fear to hate. Hate in some bosoms is akin to love, but not in 
hers. She fled my sight. Stung by resentment, 1 ibrmed plans, that 
had they not been foiled in execution, must liave placed her witli- 
in my power. By some means she became acquainted with my 
projects, and sought safety in flight. Her disappearance added to 
my torture — I was frantic. While plunged in this despair, I re- 
ceived intelligence that she had flown to Paris. Thitlier I repaired 
— traced her — saw through her disguise — hovered round her dwell- 
ing — haunted her like lier shadow, in the hope that chance would, in 
the end, befriend me. It lias befriended me when least expected. 
The moment has arrived — she has iallen into your power — no 
further obstacle exists — ehe is mine.'' 

And the mask would have seized upon tlie ir.animate girl, if 
lie had not been withheld by the astiologer. 

" One obstacle yet exists, my son," said Ruggleri coldly; "yoi^ 
have a rival." 



THE MASK. 45 

" A rival !" cclioed the mask. *' Name him !" 

" For whom did she wreathe that garland ? For whom en- 
danger lier life?" 

"Ha!" 

" For Crichton !" 

" Perdition seize him ! But he loves her not — knows her not — 
—they must meet no more." 

"Take back your purse, signor,'* said Ruggieri; " I cannot aid 
you in this matter." 

"How?" exclaimed the mask — " Have I not your oath?" 

" True; but 1 knew not wliati swore." 

*' 'Tis binding, nevertheless. That is, if aught can be bindin"- 
on a conscience supple as your own. What interest can you have 
in this maiden ? Arc your services already purchased by this 
accursed Crichton, or do you hope to make a better market witli 
him ? ' 

" Put no further affront upon me, signor," returned Ruggicri. 
*' I am not easily appeased, as you Avill learn, if you provoke my 
anger. I am no friend to Crichton, nor is this maiden auglit to 
me. Beyond the accidental discovery of her sex, and what you 
yourself have told me, I am wholly ignorant in all relating to her; 
but fate has thrown her upon my protection, and to violence like 
yours I will never betray her. Take back your purse, signor, and 
trouble me no longer." 

"Away!'' exclaimed the mask. "Think not to impose \ipon 
me by these idle pretences. Why should I stoop to solicit Avhcn I 
can command ? A word from me — and thou art plunged Avithin a 
dungeon, — whence not even Catherine's mighty arm can accom- 
plish thy deliverance. Of all men living, liuggieri, thou hast 
most cause of dread of me ; but of all agents of iniquity, I have 
most need of thee, therefore thou art safe; but tremble if thou 
disobeyest me. My vengeance is swifter and more certain than 
thine own.'* 

" Who, in the devil's name, are you that talk thus ?" inquired 
the astrologer. 

" Were I the devil himself, I could not occasion you more dis- 
quietude than I should were I to reveal myself," replied the mask. 
" Be satisfied, and seek to know nothing further of me." 

The haughty iniperiousness of tone suddenly assumed by the 
mask was not without its eilect upon the astrologer ; but he strug- 
gled to maintain a composed demeanour. 

" What if I still refuse compliance ?" he demanded. 

The mask whispered in his ear. The astrologer started, and 
trembled from head to foot. 

" I am content," he said, after a pause. " Command me as you 
see fitting. My life is at your disposal." 

" I do not require so much,"" returned the mask, scornfrJly. 
"Deliver up the girl. Yet stay, I am not unattended here. Hast 
thou no place of refuge, to which thou couldst convey her ?" 



46 ORICHTON. 

" I have," replied Riigsiicri, after an instant's reflection ; " if it 
be your pleasure, I ^vill convey her to the mj^stic tower, near the 
Hotel de Soissons, whither alone her majesty, Catherine de jNIedicis, 
and I have access. There she can remain concealed, till I am 
acquainted Avith your furtlier wishes. But can' it he that she hath 
reluscd your suit ? There must be witchcraft in the case. You 
may be spell-hound, noble signer. The Emperor Charlemagne wa^ 
similarly enslaved to a foul hag — and now I mind me of a 
strangely- iiishioned key, which I discovered upon her bosom. 
Perchance the charm resides in that. It may be a talisman of 
potent virtue. I will put it to the proof. In any case we must 
have a counter-enchantment." 

" As thou Avilt," interrupted the mask, " be tliat thy business. 
Ha ! she stir.- — quick, we lose time." 

For some moments before it was remarked by tlie astrologer and 
his companion, the return of animation had been perceptible in 
the Venetian girl. Heaving a deep sigh, she opened her larqe 
and languid eyes, and fixed them upon Ruggieri and Elbericli ; 
the former of whom was bending over her, at the instant of her 
restoration to consciousness, Avliile the latter sustained her Avithiu 
his grasp. In this crouching posture, with liis unbared, yellow 
arms, twined around her person, the hideous dwarf resembled a 
messenger from Eblis, sent to bear her to perdition. The objects 
before her looked like visions in a dream. In vain did Ruggieri 
raise his finger to his lips ; she neither comprehended her own 
situation, nor perceived necessity for silence. Just then her wan- 
dering gaze chanced upon the mask, and with a wild laugh she 
pointed to the dusky figure, and muttered some incoherent 
ejaculations. 

" Av\ay," exclaimed the mask, " about it quickly. Why listen 
to her ravings ? Remove her to the tuiTCt." 

"That voice!" shrieked the maiden, starting to her feet, and 
sprcadinir her hand before h..r eyes, " it is — h must be he ! — where 
ami? Ha!" 

" Seize her," vociferated the mask. 

"He haunts me even while liie is ebbing," screamed the dis- 
tracted girl ; " I am dying, yet cannot escape him. Save me from 
him, Crichton — save me." And, with a wild scream, she broke 
from the grasp of" Ruggieri. 

The mask incllectually endeavoured to stay her flight. 

" ]\Iiscreants !" he cried, '• you have let her go." 

" The bird hath only iluttered forth," returned the astrologei ; 
** we can easily retake it." 

It was at this juncture that the cry reached the ears of Crichton, 
Like a frail bark amidst troubled waters, the enfeebled maid strove 
against the tunniltuous mob, who little heeded cither her plaints 
or frantic ejaculations. 

" Poor youth !" cried one of the scholars, " his luu't Jiath. turned 
his brain. Get hence, foolisliboy! Crichton huth his hands too 



THE MASK. 47 

t'ull to give fittcntlon to thy shouts. He hath more need of help 
than thou. Dost see yon tall green plume ? — It is Crichton's. 
Be advised, and venture not where blows shower thick as hail, 
and where thou mayst come in for thy share of them. Seek 
shelter in the rear." 

But the girl heeded liim not, hut still continued tc cry, 

" 8ave me, Crichton, gave me !" 

A thick battalion of scholars opposed themselves to Crichton's 
progress. " Stand aside !" he vociferated, nothing daunted by their 
numbers. And, whirling the iron bar over his head, he dashed in 
the direction of the girl. 

She beheld him approach. She saw the scholars gave way 
before his resistless ellbrts. She heard liis shout of encourage- 
ment ; and at the very instant when her bosom throbbed highest 
with hope, and when she almost deemed herself secure beneath his 
protecting arm, she felt her waist encircled by a sudden clasp. 

She looked up. 1- cr eyes encountered two dark orbs Hashing 
from a sable mask. Ilcr brain reeled. She saw no more. 

Crichton, meanwhile, pressed fiercely forward. Fresh (llfficultics 
wei'e thrown in his path — fresh ranks obstinately opposed tliem- 
selves to his progress ; but all wore at length overcome, and he 
reached the spot where he beheld the Geloso. It was A'oid. A 
roar of mockery from the students testified their satisfiction at 
]ns disappointment. " You have arrived too late to succour your 
friend," shouted a voice from out the crowd; — "he is beyond 
vour reach, and in the care of one who will not readily surrender 
him. Higados de Dios ! you are foiled, most puissant caballero, 
nor shall it be mv fault if vou do not ever lind a stumbling-block 
within your path." 

Turning towards the quarter whence the voice proceeded, 
Crichton beheld the retreating figure of Caravaja. " By Saint 
Andrew%" he murmured, glancing fiercely round, " I would give 
all the laurels I have this day Avon to effect tliat poor youth's 
deliverance. Curses upon these brawling scholars! It were a 
labour of Hercules to pursue the quest amidst a scene cf such 
confusion ; and yet I would fain continue it if I saw a chance of 
success. Why did Ruggieri, who so eagerly accepted the charge 
of this wounded boy, sufier him to incur such peril? The old 
astrologer shall render me an explanation of his conduct." 

Crichton's further self-comm.union was cut short l)y the shouts of 
the archers and the trampling of their steeds. After a brief, but 
ineffectual, resistance, as before stated, the scholars threw down 
their arms, and, shouting for quarter, lied. Crichton was left alone. 
No sooner did Joyeuse, Avho was careering among the crowd, 
perceive him, than he reined his charger by his side. 

" Now Heaven and our Lady be praised," exclaimed the vicorate 
^aily, "you are unhurt. Seigneur Crichton. By my blazon, it 
nad, indeed, been a blot upon the lair page of chivalry, if its 
brightest minor h.ad perished amid a rascal rout like this. T(jte- 



4S CRICnTON. 

DIcu ! if the Lord Rector reprove not his froward children, our 
6cr2jcants shall take the task from his hands, and give him a lesson. 
But sec, your page is at hand ; your charger paws the ground. 
Ah, Criciiton ! brave steed — fair page — both pledges of a royal 
lady's favour; — you arc twice fortunate!" 

" Thrice fortunate, Joyeuse, in a brother-in-arms who flies to 
my rescue in extremities like the present," returned Crichton, in 
the same lively tone as his companion, vaulting at the same time 
into tlie saddle of a superb charger in rich housings, which was led 
towards liim by a page, mounted upon a milk-white palfrey, and 
bedecked in doublet of white satin and velvet mantle of deepest 
azure, the colours of ]\Iarguerite de Valois. " JNIethinks," he 
added, smiling, " this hard-fought field ia at length our own; 
and vet, after enacting more wonders than ever were achieved 
by the doughtiest cliampions of Romance — Tiistan or Launfal, 
Huon or Partlienopcx, when struggling against the powers ol 
sorcelrie and darkness — it moves me to tears to tlunk in what 
light esteem my exploits will be held by preux chevaliers like 
youi'sclf, who think there is no honour to bo won in such 
perilous conflicts. Trust mo a legion of swarthy gnomes, with 
the fay Urganda at their head, were more easily vanquished 
than these disloval varlets. I have now encountered this University 
alike in hall and fi(;ld; disputed it with them by rule of rhetoric, 
and by rule of fence; and will freel}' admit that I prefer the 
"weapons of the principals to those of their disciples, and plume 
myself rather upo!i my conquest, if conquest it be, over these hard- 
headed, cudgel-wielding neophytes, whose stubborn brains were 
more difficult to be convinced than their renowned and learned 
seniors. But it is time to bestow a thought upon my luckless 
countryman, the original cause of all this scene of discord. I think 
I discern him and his staunch ally, amid the thickest turmoil. 
Forward, Joyeuse, I must speak with them." 

A few bounds of his steed brought Crichton beside Ogilvy 
and Blount. The latter, perceiving that the fray was at an 
end, called ofl" his doj; from the Bemardin, but findinsj that 
his intimation was not attended to by the stubborn animal, he 
seconded the hint with a heavy blow of his crab-stick, whicli 
produced the desired eflcct, Druid quitted his hold, and with 
a surly growl plumped down at his master's feet. 

*' VVe meet to-morrow, then, Ogilvy," said Crichton, "and such 
service as I can z'cnder, you may command. Meantime, you shall 
suffer no further molestation. iNIonsieur le Vicomte, hath he 
your safe-guard?" 

" He has," replied Joyeuse. " The brave Scot shall have a 
post amongst my company of archers, if lie choose to barter 
his gown of gray serge for a steel breast- plate, lie will not bo 
the first of his countrvmen who hath found the change to liis 
advantage." 

" I will reflect upon your offer, my lord," replied C-'gdvv, with 



THE MASK. 49 

cliavactcristic caution. " ^Meantime, my best thanks arc due to 
you lor tlic proposal." 

"As you please, sir," replied Joycuse, haughtily; "nor arc your 
acknowledgments due to ine, but to the Seigneur Crichton. To 
him alone you are indebted lor my oiler." 

" He knows not what he declines, Joyeuse," returned Crichton. 
"I will reason with him on the morrow. And now," he con- 
tinued, *'I would desire better acquaintance with your valiant 
comrade, whom I judge to be an Englishman." 

" I am so," returned Blount, " but I deserve not to be 
called valiant. Had you bestowed the epithet on my dog 
the term might not have been misapplied — on me 'tis wholly 
thrown away. Druid hath some pretensions to A-alour — he will 
never disgrace the soil from which he sprung — nor will his master, 
for that matter. But since you have honoured me Avith your 
notice, worthy sir, let us join hands upon our new-struck friend- 
ship, if I be not too bold in assuming such a feeling on yotu" part 
to me, and you shall find, if you need them, that in Simon Blount 
and his dog, for I must not except Druid, who is part and parcel of 
myself, and indeed the b(.'St part, you will have two followers upon 
whose faith you may rely. Audacter et Jideliier is my device." 

" And a cordial and constant one it is," replied Crichton, as he 
warndy returned the pressure of the Englishman"'s huge hand. 
*' I gladly embrace your offer. Come to my hotel with Ogilvy 
on the morrow, and neglect not to bring with you my new and 
trusty follower." 

" Doubt not that," returned Blount ; " Druid and I are in- 
separable." 

Further conversation was interrupted by the sudden arrival of 
Chicot, who, contrary to his wont, had a somewhat serious coun- 
tenance. 

"Ah! my gay gossip," said Crichton, "why that portentous 
look? hast thou lost thy bauble in the fray?" 

"Far worse than that, brother droll,"" returned Chicot, "I have 
lost my reputation. Thou hast lairly won my cap and bells, and 
shall have tlicm by pre-eminence of wisdom. But bend down thjf 
lordly neck to me, 1 have someAvhat for thy private hearing." 

And approaching Crichton, the jester breathed his intormation 
in a low tone. 

" W' hat !" exclaimed Crichton, who appeared struck with surprise 
at Chicot's intelligence, *' art sure this Geloso is ?" 

" IIuslil" muttered the jester, "who is now the fool? Would 
jou betray the secret:" 

" And it was the mask who seized her?" asked Crichton, in a 
whisper. " Whose features doth that vizard hide?" 

"I know not,'' replied Chicot, "it may be the Balafre, or the 
Bearnais, for aught I can tell. But this I will venture to assert, 
that it is neither my gossip, Henriot, nor thou, nor I, nor even the 

G 



50 CKTCIITOX. 

Sciirncur Joycuse; I will not ?ay as much for tlie Due d'Anjou, 
^vllom pcrclianco it iticy be." 

" l)Ut lvuufj:ierl, thou ?iiyst — " 

" Was with him. I beliekl him and his d\\ari" Elbeiieh. Both 
lent assistance to tlie mask." 

" He is gone, thou say est?" 

" I "will seek the astrologer in his tower, and compel liim to 
some explanation of this mystery," said Crichton. 

"That tower is the kennel ot' the she-wolf CMiherlne — take heed 
what you do. ]\lany a liand has been thrust intc a cage, tho 
bearer whereof would have gladly witlidrawn it unscathed. But 
as you will, fools are leaders, wise meii receders." 

"Adieu, Ogilvy!" said Criciiton; "remember our appoint- 
ment of the morrow. Joyeuse, our rendezvous is at the I'ete to- 
night. — Au rcvoh-r 

So saying, Ciichton plunged spurs into his horse's sides, and, 
followed by his page, rode swiftly down the Montagnc Sainte- 
Genevievc. Chicot shrugged his shoidders. 

" Knight-errantry is not wholly extinct, I perceive," he muttered. 
i\Iy gossip, Crichton, is born at least half a century too late. He 
should have llouiishcd in the good old times of Triboulet, and the 
first Francis. He is caught at once by the silken meshes of this 
dark-haired syren. What will Queen Margot say if this new 
adventure reach her jealous ears ? But I must to the Louvre. 
This scholastic brawl will divert Henri's spleen. And as I descend 
this Parnassian sleep of Saijite-Genevieve, to beguile the time I'll 
invoke the muses in honour of— 

TEE ad:mieable scot. 

A song 1 11 write on 
Matchless Criciiton; 
In wit a bright one. 
Form, a slight one, 
Love, a light one! 
"Who talketh Greek witliufc 
Like great Busbequius; 
Knoweth the Cabala 
"Well as iMirandola; 
Tate can reveal to us. 
Like wise Cornelius ; 
Eeasonetli like Socrates 
Or old Xenocrates; 
"Whose system ethical, 
{Sound, dialectical, 
Aristotelian, 
Pantagruelian, 
Like to chameleon, 
( hoppeih and changeth, 
Everywhere rangetli 1 
"Who rides like Centaur, 
PreacI es like Jfontor, 
Drinks like Lj-^us, 
Sings like Tyrticus, 
IJcads like Bu'laeus, 



HIE COURT OF HENRI III, 5^ 

Vaulteth like Tuccaro, 
Paintetli like Zuccliero, 
l-)iceth like [Spaniard, 
])aiiceth like Lrallianl, 
Tilts like Orlando, 
Does all man can do I 
Qui pu/Hi'i riubiles 
Imniiiwrubihs, 
Aiiiiit a III (i/j ill's 
Atijue Jieyiiiiim 
JSavuirie dicinam ! 
AVliosu rare ])rosj)erity, 
Grace and dexterity, 
Courage, temerity, 
IShall, lor a verity 
Puzzle posterity ! 

**Ough, ougli," gasped the jester, "I am fairly out of brcatli 
—as old Marot sings, ' en rimant bien souvent je m'enrime.' ^ 



BOOK THE SECOND.— CHAPTEIl I. 

THE COURT OF HENRI TROIS. 

Les peiiples pipes de leur mine, 
Les voyant ainsi s'enfermer, 
Jugeoient qii'ils parloient de s'arme 
Pourconqiicrir la Palestine. 
Et toutefois leiir entreprise 
Etoit le parfum d'un collet ; 
Le point coupe d'une cliemise 
Et la figure d'un ballet. 
De leur nioliesse lelliargique, 
Le discord sortant des enters, 
Des maiix que nous avons soufferts 
INous ourdit la toile tragi(juc. 

Malherbe. 

On the same night that the event previously narrated occurred, 
high festival was held within the Louvre, by its effeminate and 
voluptuous sovereign, who assembled upon the occasion the 
wliole of his brilliant court, then without a rival in Europe, either 
for the number and loveliness of the dames who frequented 
it, or for the bravery and gallantry of the youthful chivalry, by 
which it was graced. To Henri Trois the lighter amusements 
of the revel, the ballet, and the masque, were as captivating as the 
more manly sports of the chase were to his brother and prede- 
cessor, Charles Neuf, of execrable memory. His fetes were 
sumptuous and frequent — so frequent, indeed, that the chief part of 
his time w^as occupied in the arrangement of these magnificent 
spectacles. The sums lavished upon the marriage-feasts of his fa- 
A-ourites, were enormous : the royal coflcrs were often drained by 
his inordinate extravagance ; and, Avhile the state groaned beneath 
the weight of the burthens constantly imposed upon it, the un- 
bridled licence that reigned at his orgies occasioned scandal and dis- 

E 2 



52 CRICHTON. 

content tlirougliout the reputable portion of tlic community, of 
Avliich his enemies were not slow to take advantage. 

Two years bcibre the period of which we treat, Henri gave zn 
entertainment to his brother, the Due D'Alent^'on, at which the 
ladies assisted, " vestues dc verd, en habits d'homme, a moitie nues, 
et ayant leurs cheveux epars comme epousees."* The cost of this 
banquet exceeded a hundred thousand liancs ! In December, 1576, 
as we learn from the Journal of his reign, he went en masque to the 
Hotel do Guise, accompanied by thirty princesses and ladies of the 
court, richly attired in silks and silver tissue, braided with pearls 
and gems of price ; and such was the confusion that prevailed, that' 
the more discreet part were obliged to retire, by reason of the 
licence of the maskers ; lor, as it is significantly observed, by 
Pierre de I'Estoile, " could the walls and tapestry have spoken, 
they would have, doubtless, found many pleasant particulars to 
connnunicate." Subsequently, in 1583, upon Shrove Tuesday, 
attended by his favourites, masked like himself, Henri rushed into 
the streets, Avherc he committed such frantic and unheard-of 
lollies and insolences, that he was publicly reprimanded the next 
day by all the preachers in Paris. 

Louise de Lorraine, or De Vaudemont, his queen, a princess of 
amiable but feeble character, entirely without ambition (on Avhich.. 
account she was selected as a statable spouse to her son by the crafty 
Catherine de Medicis, ever apprehensive of a rival near the throne), 
and possessing the negative merit of passive submission, oftcred no 
opposition to the wishes of her royal husband, though she took little 
part in his festivities. Her gentle existence was divided between 
her oratorv, her garden, the establishment of confrcrics, and other 
religious institutions, and the retirement of a secluded apartment ; 
her dally occupations were embroidery, or the perusal of her book 
of prayer ; her attire was of the simplest material, fnshioned chiefly 
•of woollen cloth ; and, though her complexion had become deathly 
ipale, she refused the aid of rouge. Her immediate attendants 

:and ladies of honour, were recommended to her regard, rather by 
their ])iety and decorum of conduct, than for any other dazzling 
qualllieations. Of tins queen, many pleasing traits are narrated — 
one, in particular, of a reproof conveyed to the flaunting and over- 

•dressed lady of a president, to whom, in the unpretending garb she 
had adopted, she was wholly unknown. But taken altogether, her 
nature was too easy and acquiescent, and her frame of mind too 
infirm, to promote in any way the welfare of the kingdom, or to 

. accomplish the reformation of tlie monarch to whom she was united. 
That she found rather sorrow than happiness in her exalted station, 

. can scarce be doubted ; indeed her woes have been thus embalmed 

.in verse, by the Jesuit Lc Moine : — 

Son esprit fiit gene dans la couclie royale; 
La couronne liii fiit iinc cliaine fatale, 

• Journal de Henri IIL— Mai, 1577. 



THE COURT OF IIENHl III. 53 

Le Louvre nne prison, le trone iiti t'clKifaud 
I'.rigc pour montrerson toiirinciit de plus limit. 

But, pcrliapp, the severest of her afflictions consisted in her being 
denied the blessing of children. 

The position which Louise de Vaudemont should have occupied, 
was assumed by the queen-mother, who amply supplied whatever 
might be wanting in her daughter-in-law. In her hands, her sons 
were mere puppets ; they filled the throne, while she wielded the 
sceptre. Hers was truly, what it has been described, " a soul of 
bronze, or of iron." Subtle, secret, INIachiavelian — tlie " l*nnce" 
of the plotiing Florentine was her constant study — her policy 
worked in the dark: none could detect her movements till they 
weic disclosed by the results. Inheriting many of the nobler 
qualities of the Medicis, her hatred was implacable as that of the 
Borgias ; and, like that dread race, her sclicmes were not suffered 
to be restrained by any tics of affinity. Kumour attributed to her 
agency the mysterious removal of her two elder sons* from the 
path of the third, who was unquestionably her favourite; and she 
was afterwards accused of being accessory to the sudden death of 
another, the Due d'Alen9on, who perished at Chateau-Thierry, 
from smelling at a bouquet of poisoned flowers. 

The court of Henri Trois numbered three hundred of the love- 
liest and most illustrious damsels of the land, a list of whom will 
be found in the pages of Brantome, who falls into raptures in 
describing the charms of this galaxy of beauties, proclaiming them 
to be little short of goddesses, and declaring that the palace which 
they enlightened was " un vray paradis du monde, escole de 
toute lionnestete ct vertu et ornement de la France." Now, how- 
ever, we may differ from the vivacious chronicler of the " Dames 
Galantes" in our estimate of the homiest eti et vertu of the ladies 
in question, remembering, as we do, the adventure of the Demoi- 
selle de Limeuil with the Prince de Conde, and the libellous 
verses which it occasioned, we are quite satisfied, that his en- 
thusiastic admiration of these- dames was fully warranted by their 
personal attractions. In later times the sparkling court of our own 
Charles II. did not boast so much beauty as that of Henri III. 

Surrounded by this fair phalanx, Catherine felt herself irre- 
sistible. As in the case of the unfortunate Demoiselle de Limeuil, 
she only punished their indiscretions when concealment was im- 
possible. An accurate judge of human nature, she knew that the 
most inflexible bosom was no proof against female blandishment, 
and, armed with this " petite bande des dames de la cour," as they 
were called, she made use of their agency to counteract the plans 
of her enemies, and by their unsuspected influence, which extended 
over the whole court, became acquainted with the most guarded 
secrets of all parties. The profound dissimulation that enveloped 

* See vliat Tlmanus says, upon tlie post mortem examination of Cliarles IX. 
lib. Ivii,— er causa uicoqiiild reptrti livores. Tlie end of Charles vas, indeed, 
awful ; but its horror -would be increased, if we coulJ be assured that his 
excruciating pangs -were occasioned by his mother. 



O-i CRICIITOX. 

licr conduct, hns left the character of" Catherine a problem which the 
histoi-ian would in vain attempt to solve ; and equally futile would 
in his endeavours to trace to their hidden sources the springs o! 
all her actions. Blindly superstitious, bigoted, yet sceptical, and, 
if her enemies are at all to be believed, addicted to the idolatrous 
worship of false gods ; proud, yet never guilty of meanness ; a fond 
■wife — an Italian woman, yet exhibiting no jealousy of an incon- 
stant husband ; a tender mother, yet accused of sacrificing three of 
her sons to her ambitious views ; a rigid observer of etiquette, yet 
not unfrequently overlooking its neglect ; fiery and vindictive, yet 
never roused to betray her emotions by any gesture of impatience, 
but veiling her indignation under a mask of calmness, her sup- 
posititious character and actions were a perpetual contradiction to 
each other. 

Catherine's was a genius of a high order. No portion of her time 
was left unoccupied. She was a lover of letters and of men of letters, 
a cultivator of the arts, and the most perfect horsewoman of her 
time. To her the ladies are indebted for the Introduction of the 
pommel in the saddle (female equitation being, up to that 
period, conducted a la planchette), a mode which, according to 
Brantome, she Introduced for the better display of her unequalled 
symmetry of person. 

If Catherine Avas a paradox, not less so was her son, Henri III., 
whose youth held forth a brilliant promise not destined to be 
realised In his riper years. The victor of Jarnac and Montcontour 
— the envy of the warlike youth of his time — the Idol of those 
whose swords had been fleshed In many battles — the chosen monarch 
of Poland — a well-judging statesman — a fluent and felicitous orator, 
endowed with courage, natural grace, a fine person, universally 
accomplished In all the exercises of the tlltlng-yard, the manege, 
and the hall-of-arms — this chivalrous and courageous prince as soon 
as he ascended the throne of France, sank Into a voluptuous lethargy, 
from which, except upon extraordinary occasions, he was never 
afterwards aroused : his powers of mind — his resolution — his cou- 
rage, moral and physical, fading beneath the enervating life -of sen- 
suality In which he indulged. 

Governed by his mother and his favourites, who were Cathe- 
rine's chief opponents, and of whose over-weenIng Influence she 
stood most In fear ; threatened by the Due de Guise, who scarcely 
deigned to conceal his' bold designs upon the throne ; distrusted 
by the members of the League, of which he had named himself chief, 
and who were, for the most part, Instruments of the Guise ; dreaded 
Huguenots, to whom he had always shown himself a relent- 
less persecutor, and who remembered Avith horror his cruelties at 
the massacre of Salnt-BarthelemI, of which dismal tragedy he 
has avowed himself a principal Instrument; opposed by the Pope, 
and by Philip II. of Spain (his brother-in-law), both of Avhom were 
favourable to the claims of Guise ; with Henri of Navarre In the 
icld, and his brother the Due d'Alengon disafrcctcd ; fulminated 



THE COURT OF HENRI III. 55 

against by the Soibonne ; assailed by one of its doctors, in a 
pamphlet endeavouring to prove the necessity of his de[)osition ; 
Henri, with his crown tottering upon his head, still maintained an 
exterior of the same easy indiflerence, abandoned none of his plea- 
sin-es, or his devotions (lor devotion with him took the semblance 
joi amusement — and the oratory and the ball-room were but a step 
asunder — the mass and the masquerade each the division of an hour) 
— turned a deaf ear to the remonstrances of his counsellors, and 
could only be awakened, like the Assyrian monarch, from his lux- 
urious trance, when the armed hand was put I'orth to grasp his 
sceptre. Then, indeed, ior a brief space, he showed himself a king. 

It is not, however, wiih this portion of his reign that we have 
to do ; but with that in which this Sybaritic prince was altogether 
sunk in indolence and dreamy enjoyment. 

On the night in question, he had gathered together, within 
his gorgeous halls, the loveliest and the proudest of his capital. 
Catherine de Medicis was there witl; her brilliant bevy of beauties. 
Marguerite de Valois, the i'air Queen of Navarre, then in her seven- 
and-twentieth summer, and glowing in the noontide w^armth of her 
resplendent charms, was present, attended by her train ; nor were 
the gentle Louise de Vaudemont, and her demure and discreet 
dames of honour absent. All that Henri's court could boast, of 
grace, wit, youth, beauty, or distinction, were assembled. 

Perfumes exhaled from a thousand aromatic lamps ; fragrant 
exotics, Idled the air with sweets ; nuisic, soft and low, breathed 
from a band of unseen minstrels; lofty plumes Avaved to the cadences 
of the melody ; small elastic feet twinkled in the varied elastic 
movements of the figure — now atttmed to the rapid whirl of the 
bransle — now to the graceful and mt'jestic pauses of the Spanish 
pavane, or to the grave, slow, and dignilied deportment of the 
Italian pazzameno. 

It was a masked fete, and all, save the monarch and a few 
of his privileged followers, wore the vizard. The costumes were 
endless and diversified, but chosen rather with a view to display the 
person of the wearer to the best advantage in a guise different from 
his Avont, than with that bizarre taste which characterises a 
carnival. Bright eyes, not less bright that they were seer 
peeping like stars through the dusky loopholes of the pretty 
velvet mask called the louret de 7iez, which gave additional 
piquancy and effect, when none was needed, to the ruby lips and 
polished chin of the wearer, rained their influence around. Of 
all favourers to flirtation, commend us to the mask. Beneath its 
shadoAv a thousand random darts may be shot that would fall point- 
less, or never be aimed at all wxre it not for the friendly covering. 
Blessings, therefore, upon him that invented the mask, wdio 
has thereby furnished the bashful and timid lover with a shield 
to fight under. 

. The splendid company dispersed throughout the long suite of gilded 
saloons — listening to the ravishing notes of a concert of harmonious 



55 CTtlCIITON. 

voices — ffatlievin;; round tlic tables wliere vast sums were lost at tric- 
trac, primero, and other f'orp;ottcn c-aniesofhazard — pausing" beneath 
a scented arcade ol" flowers — loiterinii- within the deep embrasure of 
a tapestried window, or partaking of the sumptuous banquet set forth 
■within the "Teat hall of carousal. The laugh and the jest -were 
loud and high ; the love speech and its response faint and low. 

Amidst the glittering throng might be discerned a group who 
had laid aside their masks, and who held themselves slightly aloof 
from the proceedings of the assemblage. jMore mirtli, however, 
might bo observed amongst his party than otherwise. 'Ilielr 
laughter ',vas heard above the conversation ; and few were there, 
whether dames or seigneur?, who passed in review before them, if 
their gait or features could be detected, but were exposed to a galling 
fire of raillery and sarcastic remark. 

One amongst their number Avas treated with marked deference 
and respect by the others; and it would a])pear that it was lor his 
amusement that all these witticisms were uttered, as, whenever a 
successiul hit was made, ho bestowed upon it his applause. A 
man of middle height, slender figure, with a slight stoop in the 
shoulders, he had a countenance charged with an undefinal)le 
but sinister expression, something between a sneer and a smile. 
His features were not handsome ; the nose being heav}^ and clubbed, 
and the lips coarse and thick ; but his complexion was remarkable 
for its delicacy and freshness of tint; neither Avere his eyes deficient 
in lustre, though their glances were shifting, suspicious, and equi- 
vocal. He wore short moustaches curled upwards from the lips, 
and a beard a la royale tufted his chin. From either ear depended 
long pearls, adding to his eficminate appearance, while, in lieu of 
plumes, his black toquet, placed upon the summit of his head, and 
so adjusted as not to disturb tiie arrangement of his well-curled 
hair, was adorned with a brilliant aigrette of many-coloured gems. 
Around his neck he wore a superb nacklace of pearls, together 
with a chain of medallions intermingled with ciphers, from which 
was suspended the lesser order of the Saint-Esprit radiant with 
diamonds of inestimable A-alue. In fact, the jewels flaming froni 
his belt, the buckles, ' and the various fastenings of his mag- 
nificent attire, were almost beyond computation. On one side 
this girdle sustained a pouch filled Avith small silver flacons 
filled Avith perfumes, together Avith a sword Avith rich hilt and 
velvet scabbard, and on the other, a chaplet of death's heads, 
Avliich, ever mindful of" a vow to that eflect, he constantly carried 
about Jiis person, and Avhich indicated the strange mixture of reli- 
gion, that, together Avith depravity, Avent to the composition of the 
Avearer's character. Adorned Avith the grand order of the Saint- 
Ksprit, and edged Avith silver lace, iiis chestnut-coloured velvet 
mantle, cut in the extremity of the mode, Avas a full inch shorter 
than that of his companions. His rufi' Avas of ampler circum- 
ference, and enjoyed the liappicst and most becoming don de la 
roto/idc. i'itting as close to the figure as loops and buttons coulJi 



THE- COURT OF IIEXRI III. 57 

make it, his exquisitely worked ami slashed ponrpoiut sat to a 
miracle, not less studied Avas the appointment of the balloon-like 
hose, swelling over his reins, and which, together with the doublet, 
■were of yellow satin. 

Far be it from us to attempt to portray the exuberant splendour 
of his sleeve ; the nice investiture of tlie graceful limb, with the 
hose of purple silk, or the sharp point of the satin shoe. No piirc 
of his fittire was left unstudied, and the tltf/aiit of the nineteenth 
century may aspire in vain to emulate the finished decorative taste 
ot the royal exquisite of the sixteenth. 

Henri HI., for it was tlie monarch whom we have endeavoured 
to describe, conferred, as before stated, iafinltc attention upon the 
minutito of the toilet, and caried his consideration of dress some- 
what to an extreme. Upon the solemnisation of his espousals with the 
Queen Louise, so much time was occupied in the arrangement of 
hinself and his spouse for the ceremonial, that mass could not be 
eel brated until five o'clock in the evening; and the Te Deum was 
in consequence neglected to be sung, an omission which Avas re- 
garded as a most unfortunate augury. Of his personal appearance, 
moreover, he was excessively vain ; and so anxious was he to pre- 
eeive the delicacy and freshness of his complexion, and the smootli- 
n ss of his skin, that durinfj the night he always wore a mask, and 
gloves prepared with unguents and softening pastes. Few ladies 
of his court could compete with him in the beauty and smallness 
of his hand ; a personal grace whieii he inherited Irom his mother, 
and Avhich was enjoyed in common with him by Marguerite de 
Valois. 

Upon the present occasion he had withdrawn one glove, of silk, 
woven with silver tissue, and pinked with satin, in colours of Avhito 
and incarnadine; and suffered his small and snowy lingers, loaded 
with sumptuous rings, to stray negligently through the luxuriant 
cars of a little lap-dog, sustained by the jester Chicot, who stood by 
his side. Of dogs, Henri Avas so passionately fond, that he gene- 
rally drove out Avith a carriage lull of the most beautiful of the 
species, and took possession of any others that pleased his fancy in 
the course of the ride. Of his forcible abduction of their fiiA'ou- 
rites, loud complaints Avere made by the nuns, the convents being 
the best canine store-houses, in the days of this great "dog-fancier," 
and frequently resorted to by him for fresh supplies. 

Scarcely less splendidly equipped than their sovereign, Avere the 
courtiers stationed around him. Upon the right of Henri, Avho 
supported himself upon the shoulder of his chief A'alet, Du Halde, 
was placed the portly person of the Marquis de Villequier, sur- 
named " le jeunc et le ()ri>s^^ though noAV laying little claim to the 
former epithet, near to Avhom Avas his son-in-law, D'O., superin- 
tendent of the finance, occupied in the childish amusement of the 
bilboquet, then in vogue Avith all the courtiers, in consequence of 
their monarch's partiality for it. Even the gallant Joyeuse, and 



58 CRicirroN 

the stately D'Epernou disdained not to indulge in this fiivoloug 
pastime; and both of them carried long silver sarbacanes in theii 
hands, Avith uhich, like the modern Italians at a carnival, they 
occasionally pelted the masquers Avith conl'ectionery and sugar- 
^ilumbs, displaying infinite quickness of aim. 

Kngaged in converse Avith D'Epernon, -was Francois D'Epinay 
do ISaint Luc, Baron de Crcvecoeur, another lavourite of Henri, 
and equally distinguished Avith his companions for a courage, 
■which, in its wild and lierce display, amounted almost to ferocity. 
Saint Luc was accounted the handsomest man of his time, and 
universally obtained the epithet of le beau. Many pages and 
lacqueys, in the sumptuous liveries and emblazoned array of their 
lords, were in attendance. 

" Joycuse," said the king, addressing the young vicomtc, in a 
soft and melodious tone, '• canst inform me whose lovely face lurks 
beneath yon violet mask ? — for lovely 'tis, or else the lips and throat 
belie it — there, within the train of her majesty, our mother — 
thou scest whom I mean ?" 

" I do, sire," re{.lled Joyeuse ; " and I quite concur in your 
majesty's opinion, that the lace must be divine which that envious 
mask shrouds. The throat is superb, the figure that of a Venus. 
But as to the angelic owner, though I Hatter myself I am sufli- 
ciently acquainted with the dames of her majesty's suite, to ofler a 
correct conjecture as to nine out of ten of them, let them be ever so 
careiully disguised, I own I am puzzled by this fair incognita. Her 
gait is charming. Vive Dieu ! with your majesty's permission, I 
will ascertain the point." 

" Stay," said the king. " 'Tis needless. Saint Luc will resolve 
our doubts at once ; 'twas she Avith Avhom he danced the pavane. 
How name you your fliir partner, baron?" 

" I am equally at a loss Avith yourself, sire, as to her name," 
replied Saint Luc, " my etlbrts Avcre in vain to obtain a glimpse of 
the features, and Avlth the tones of the voice I Avas AvhoUy unac- 
quainted." 

" INIadame la baronne may Avell be jealous of her handsome hus- 
band," said the king, smiling, (the baroness, according to the 
memoirs of the time, Avas " bossue, laide et contrefaite et encore 
pis,'' ii Avorse can be avcU conceived); " but if thou. Saint Luc, hast 
lailcd in making an impression upon the fair rmknoAvn, Avhich of 
us shall hope to succeed? It cannot be, though the figure some- 
Avhat resembles hers, the Demoiselle de Chastaigneraye, or the lair 
La liretcsche, Villequier would be able to peer through any dis- 
guise she might assume; nor Surgcres, Konsard's divinity, nor 
ieligni, nor Mirande — j\[ort-dieu I — not one of them is to com- 
pare Avith her. She floats in the dance, as if she moved on air." 

" You appear interested, sire," said Saint Luc, smiling, to shoAV 
his superb teeth, "are Ave to infer that the damsel may plume 
herself upon a royal conquest?" 



THE COURT OF nENItl III. 59 

" The damsel liath already made another conquest, upon wlilcli 
she has more reason to plume herself," said Chicut. 

" Indeed !" exclaimed Saint Luc. " Who may that be?" 

" Nay, it refers not to thee, beau Francois," returned the jester, 
^*Thou, like our dear Henriot, art the victim of every passing 
glance; and neither of ye are a conquest upon ^vhich a damsel might 
especially congratulate herself. Now, lie whose love she liath won 
is one of whose homage a damsel might be proud." 

"Ha!" exclaimed the king, "thou art in the secret, I perceive. 
Who is the damsel, and which of my gentlemen is her admirer ?" 

"All appear to be so, sire," returned Chicot ; " but were I to 
point out the most devoted of her admirers, I should indicate your 
majesty's jester ; if the most audacious, Saint Luc ; if the most 
fickle, Joyeuse ; if the most grave, D'Epernon ; if the most over- 
weening, D'O ; if the most bulky, Villequicr ; if the most impe- 
rious, your majesty — " 

" And the most successful, thou shouldst add," interrupted 
Henri. 

" No," replied Chicot. " In love affairs kings are never success- 
ful. They have no bonnes fortunes." 

" Wherefore not?" asked Henri, smiling. 

" Because their success is due not to themselves but to their 
station," returned the jester, " and is therefore whollv unworthy 
of the name good fortune. Can it be termed a triumph to obtain 
that which may not be refused?" 

" My ancestor, the great Francis, found it otherwise," returned 
the king. " He at least was tolerably successful, even in thy sense 
of tlic word." 

" I doubt it," replied Chicot. " And so did my ancestor Tribou- 
let. Poll ! kings are always detected. Did you ever find it other- 
wise. Henriot?" 

*' I shall not make thee my confessor, compere," said Henri ; "but 
what wouldst thou say were I to hazard the experiment in the case of 
yon fair unknown ? What wager wilt thou hold, that I do not 
succeed eti masque .?" 

" Never throw away the best card, gossip," returned the jester, 
*'that were poor play, indeed. Approach her eu roi, if you would 
be assured of triumph. Even then I have ray doubts. But I Avill 
stake my sceptre against yours that in the other case your majesty 
is foiled." 

" I may put it to the proof anon," rephed the king, " I am not 
accustomed to defeat. Meantime, I command thee to disclose all 
thou knowest concerning the damsel in question." 

" All I know may be told in a breath, gossip." 

" Her name ?" 

" Esclairmonde." 

" A fair be2;innin2:. The name likes us well — Esclairmonde do 
— jrivc me the surname?" 



60 CRICHTON. 

" Lc dlable in'emportc I tlieiv I am at fault, sire — she has no sur- 
name." 

"' Sang-Dieu ! be serious, eompere." 

" By your lather, the great l^intagruel — an oath I never ejaeu- 
latc Avithout clue reverence — I swear to you, sire, I am serious. The 
lovely Esclairmonde hath no patronymic. She hath little occasion 
to consult the herald for her escutcheon." 

" How, sirrah ! and one of the attendants on our mother?'' 

" Pardon, sire. You require information — and I am literal in 
niv replies. Tliere is a trilling mystery attached to her birth. Es- 
clairniondc is an orphan — a Huguenot." 

"A Huguenot!" exclaimed the king, with an expression of 
disgust, and hastily crossing himself. " Paidieu ! thou must be in 
error." 

"The daughter of a Huguenot, I should have said," returned 
Chicot. " ^io one would look for heretics in the train of her 
inost Catholic ]\I?ijcsty, Catherine de Medicis. They -would lice 
from her as the fiend from holy water. Martin Luther or John 
Calvin haA^e few disciples within the Louvre." 

*' Heaven forbid!" ejaculated the monarch, fervently grasping 
his chaplet of mort-hcads. " 'Tis strange," he added, after a nio- 
nient's pause, " that I have never before heard of this girl, or of her 
story. Are vou sure yoxi arc not amusing us v\ith some silly fable?'* 

" Does I\Iadame Catherine trust you with all her secrets, gossip?" 
demanded Chicot. " I trow not. But attend tome, and you shall 
have the stoiy of Esclairmonde in the true style of a chronicler. 
Immured ■within her chamber, carefully watched by her Majesty's 
attendants, suffered to hold no intercourse with any of the palace, 
and above all no communion with any suspected of heresy, Es- 
clairmonde until within tliese lew days has led a life of entire 
seclusion. AVlioever her father may have been — and that he was 
of rank, and a veritable Huguenot, cannot, methinks, be doubted — 
he perished by the edge of the sword at the day of Saint Bartlielemy, 
of blessed memory. While yet a child she was placed within the 
hands of your royal parent, by whom she hath been reared in the 
true Catholic and Apostolic faitli, and in the manner I have 
related." 

"Mort-Dieu ! the tale is cuiious," replied the king; "and I now 
remember somewhat of the details thou hast given, though they had 
long since escaped my memory. I must see and converse W'ith the 
fair Esclairmonde. Our mother hath not used us well in neglecting 
to present the damsel to us." 

" Your royal motherhath usually good reason for her actions, sire, 
and I will answer lor it in the present instance she had the best of 
motives for her apparent neglect." 

" Beshrew tliy ribald tongue, sirrah,'* returned Henri, laughing; 
•* I have yet, however, another question to put to thee. Have a 
care thou answercst it not lightly. Of what particular cavalier 



THE COURT OP HENRI III. Gl 

natli Escluirmondc made conquest? Of ^vlllcll of these o-cntlcmcn? 
lake no heed of their glances, but reply m ithout fear." 

" I should not fear to speak, were it to any of them that I 
alluded,'' replied Chicot ; " but it was not so. Let thc?e gentlcuicu 
withdraw a few paces, and thou shalt learn thy rival's name." 

At a gesture Irom the king the courtiers retired to alittle distance. 
— " ^Tis Crichton," said Chicot. 

*'Crichton !"' echoed the king in surprise — "the peerless — the 
Admirable Crichton, as he hath this day been surnamed — who hath 
vanquished our university in close conllict — he were indeed a rival 
to be feared. But thou art wrong in naming him, gossip. Crichton 
is ensnared within the toils of our sister of Navarre, and she is as 
little likely to brook inconstancy as any dame within the land. 
We arc sale, therefore, on that score. Besides, he hath no thought 
of other beauty. A-propos of Crichton, it now occurs to me that 
I have not seen him to-night. Will lie not grace our festival? 
Our sister M arguerite languishes in his absence like a pining floweret, 
nor will she force a smile for Brantomc's sprightliest sally, or Ron- 
sard's most fanciful rhapsody. What hath become of him?"' 

" I am wholly ignorant, sire," replied the jester. " He started 
at full speed from the College of Navarre after our alTray with those 
disloyal s'jholars, ces bons rustres, as mine imcle Panurge Avould 
call them; several of whom, as I already informed your majesty, are 
safely lodged Avithin the Grand-Chatelet awaiting your disposal. 
But what hath since befallen him I know not, save that he may by 
accident have thrust his hand into the hornet's nest." 

*' Thou speakest in riddles, compere," said the king, gravely. 

" Here cometh one shall read tliem for you, sire," returned 
Chicot: " One more learned than Q^dipus — Lc Ramoneur d'Astro- 
logie — you will hear all from him." 

" Ruggieri!"" exclaimed the king. " Is it indeed our astrologer, 
or hath some masker assumed his garb?" 

" A circumstance not very likely," replied Chicot, " unless the 
wearer has a flincy for being poignarded by accident, as will, in all 
probability, be the case with Ruggieri, provided he escape the stake. 
What hath happened, father?" asked the jester, surveying Rug- 
gieri with a malignant grin. " Are the stars overcast — is the moon 
eclipsed — or hath a bearded comet risen in the heavens ? — What 
prodigy hath occurred? Have thy philters failed — are thine images 
molten — or hast thou poisoned a friend by mistake ? — Hath thy 
dwarf eloped with a succuba or salamander — thy gold turned to 
withered leaves — thy jewels proved counterfeit — thy drugs lost 
their virtues? — By Trismegistus, what hath gone amiss ?" 

" Can I have an instant's speech with your majesty?" said Rug- 
gieri, with a profound obeisance, and disregarding the taunts of tho 
jester. " What I have to say imports you much." 

*' Say on, then," replied the king. 



fj2 riMCIITOX, 

Ruggieri looked at Chicot. Henri waved liis hand, and the 
jester rehictantly withdrew. 

" I warrant nie it is to speak of Crichton and the Gclosa that 
the accursed old owl hath quitted his roost," lie muttered. " Would 
1 could catch a syllaLle of his speech. INlcthinks I am afflicted 
with a more than wonted deafness, or the cralty knave hath prac- 
tised tlic art of talking in an under-key to some purpose. His 
majesty looks wonder-stricken, yet not displeased. He smiles ; 
Avhnt pretended secret can the lying old miscreant have to make 
known?"' 

Henri, meanwhile, listened with evident surprise to the com- 
munication of Ruggieri, but oflered no interruption beyond an 
occasional exclamation of astonishment, accompanied by a slight 
shrug of the shoulders. As the astrologer concluded, he mused 
for a moment, and then addressed him. 

*' I have observed that mask, Ruggieri," he said, smiling, " at 
the Hotel de Bourbon, but little thought whose visage it shrouded. 
Mort-dieu! thou hast let me into a pretty confidence. I have 
sufficient, methinks, to answer for in my own indiscretions, with- 
out making myself responsible for those of others. However, this 
young galliard shall have my assistance. Hath he seen the Due de 
Nevers ?" 

" No, sire," returned Ruggieri ; *' and whatever may betide, 
into whatever perils his youth and hot blood may lead him, I im- 
plore your majesty to maintain his secret and afford him your 
protection." 

"Fear not. You have our royal word. Corbleu! I delight 
in mysteries and intrigue of all kinds, and will lend him a helping 
hand with pleasure. He is a youth after my own heart, to engage 
in such a madcap frolic. I am charmed with his story, yet I own 
I can scarce comprehend how a player-girl like this can occasion 
him so much trouble. Our actresses are not wont to be so hard- 
hearted — ha, ha, especially to one of our masker's consequence — 
eh, Ruggieri ? This is new, methinks." 

" There is magic in the case, sire," replied Ruggieri, myste- 
rlotisly ; "he is spell-bound." 

" iSIary JMother 1" said the king, crossing himself devoutly. 
"Shield us from the devices of the evil one! And yet, Ruggieri, 
I must own I am somewhat sceptical as to these imaginary temp- 
tations. ISIore witchcraft resides in the dark eyes of that Gelosa 
than in thy subtlest compounds. But from whatever source her 
attraction originates, it is clear that the charm is sufficiently po- 
tent to diive our mask to his wits' ends, or he would never have 
committed such extravagancies in her pursuit." 

" Sire, 1 have now fullilled my mission," returned Ruggieii. "I 
have put your majesty upon your guard against what may be urged 
by Crichton. Have I your permission to depart ?" 

" Stay I" said the king, " a thouirht strikes me. Du Haldc,** 



THE COURT OF IIEXIII III. 03^ 

lie exclaimed, motioning to tlie cliief valet, '* say to the queen, our 
mother, that we would confer an instant with her; and add our 
request that her majesty will, at the same tiuie, take an opportunity 
ol prcsentini^ the l)emoisellc Esclairmonde.'* 

L)u Halde bowed and departed. 

" 1 have my mystery, likewise, IiUgo;ieri ; and, sinfjularly 
enough, this Criehton is in some way mixed up with it. For the 
Ijrst time this evening I have discovered that a beauty of the first 
order has been nvutured within the Louvre, whom no one knows, 
but with whom Criehton is in love. Scarcely have I reeorered 
Irom the surprise into Avhich I have been thrown by this incident, 
Avhen thou comcst to tell me that the pretty Italian singing boy, 
with whose canzonettas and romances I have been so much de- 
lighted, and who has been the life and soul of our comedies, turns 
out to be a girl in masquerade, Avho, pursued by an ardent lover, 
iiings herself into Crichton's arms. What am I to think of all this, 
knowing, as I do, that this very Criehton is the favourite of our 
sister Marguerite, who for him has abjured all her old amourettes, 
and who watches over him with a jealous frenzy like a first passion ? 
What am I to think of it, I say ?" 

" That Venus smiled upon his nativity, sire," replied Ruggieri, 
"with a profound inclination of his head. " Little is due to him- 
sell^ — much to the celestial influences — he is predestined to success. 
By Nostradamus ! 'tis fortunate for your majesty that you are not 
placed in a siuiilar predicament with our mask. Had your affec- 
tions been fixed upon the same damsel with Criehton, I fear even, 
your chance, sire, Avould have been a slight one." 

" Sang-Dieu !" exclaimed Henri, " they are all of one opinion. 
These are Chicot's sentiments exactly. Mark me, Ruggieri. As 
concerns Esclairmonde I have my own designs. In this matter of 
the Gelosa, thou and thy mask may calculate upon my counte- 
nance. In return I shall require thy assistance should any unforeseen 
obstai^les present themselves in my own ease. As to Criehton, we 
will leave him to the vigilance of our sister Marguerite, A hint 
will suffice with lier. Slie will save us a world of trouble. In affairs 
of gallantry we shall see Avhcther even the Admirable Criehton can 
cope with Henri de Valois." 

Ruggieri shrugged his shoulders, "'Tis vain to struggle with 
the stars, sire, Che sara, sara." 

"But tlie stars say not that Esclairmonde shall be his, eh, 
Ruggieri?" 

" His destiny is a proud one," replied Ruggieri; "that, at least, 
they have foretold." 

At this moment Du Halde approached, announcing Her Majesty 
Catherine de Medicis, and the Demoiselle Esclairmonde, 

Both were unmasked. 



64 CRICHTON. 



CHAPTER IL 

E S C L A I R M O N D E. 

L;i Rcyne-Mtre avoit ordinairement de fort belles et honorables filles, aTec 
lesquellcs tous les jours en son antichanibre on conversoit, on discouroit, on devi- 
soit, tant sagemeut et taut niodestemei t que Ten u'eust os6 faire autrenient. 

Bkaniome — Dames IHustres. Discours JI. 

Henri IH., though perfectly heartless, was the politest monarch 
in tlie woilJ. With all the refined courtesy of manner, therefore, 
for which he was so eminently distinguished, he gracefully advanced 
towards Esclairmonde, and, as she tendered to him her homage, 
he gallantly raised her hand to his lips, and with his most captiva- 
ting smile, proceeded to eulogise her beauty in those soft periods of 
adulation which kings know so well how to turn, and no king 
better than Henri; exerting himself so well to relieve her embar- 
rassment, that his efn^rts were not long imsucccssful. To a 
monarch's attention, indeed, few female hearts are insensible. 

Surprised at the sight of Ruggieri, for whose unbidden appear- 
ance at the fete she felt unable to account, and who in vain, by 
simdry significant gestures, sought to convev to her some notion of 
liis errand to the Louvre, Catherine de ]Medicis, ever suspicious 
of her confidants, could not, or Avould not, be made to comprehend 
his hints ; but regarding him with a look of displeasure during 
the brief ceremonial of presentation, she motioned him aside, so 
soon as etiquette permitted, and proceeded to question him as to 
the cause of his presence. Seeing his lynx-eyed mother tfius 
occupied, Henri, not slow to profit by the opportunity which 
her present distraction afforded him of assailing the heart of her 
lovely maid of honour, proffered Esclairmonde his hand, and gently 
drew her towards the deep embrasure of a magnificent window 
where they might converse unobserved. 

Though not habitually sincere in his expressions of admiration, 
Henri, on this occasion, must be acquitted of any attempt at dissi- 
midation. He Avas greatly struck, as indeed, he could not fail to 
be, with the loveliness of Esclairmonde. Accustomed to the blaze 
of beauty by which his court Avas encircled ; with a heart little sus- 
ceptible of any new emotion, and with a disposition to judge some- 
what too nicely each attribute of female perfection, he could not 
help admitting, that not oidy were the charms of Esclairmonde 
without parallel, but that there was no point either of her coun- 
tenance or person, or what was of equal importance in his eyes, of 
her attire, which his critical eye did not pronounce to be faultless. 

Alas! how inadequate are mere words to convey a notion of 
the beauty sought to be portrayed. The creation of the poet's 
fancy fades in the evanescent colouring he is compelled to employ. 
The pen cannot trace what the pencil is enabled so vividly to depict: 
it cannot accurately define the exquisite contour of the face, neither 
can it supply the breathing hues of the cheek, the kindling lustre 



ESOLAIRMONDE. 65 

of tlie oyc, the dewy gWs of the ilp, or tlie sheen of the huh; hf 
it black as the raven's wing, glowing as a sunbeam, or fleecy as 
a summer cloud. The imagination alone can furnish these details. 

Imagine, then, features moulded in the most harmonious form of 
beauty, and chiselled with a taste at once softened and severe. The 
eyes of a dark deep blue, swimming with chastened tenderness. 
An inexpressible charm reigns about the lips; and a slight dimple, 
in which a thousand Cupids might bask, softly indents the smooth 
and rounded chin. Raised from the brow so as completely to dis- 
play its snowy expanse, the rich auburn hair is gathered in plaits 
at the top of the head, crisped with light curls at the sides, orna- 
mented witli a string of pearls, and secured at the back with a 
knot of ribands ; a style of head-dress introduced by the unfortu- 
nate Mary Stuart, from whom it derived its name, and then 
universally adopted in the French court. The swan -like throat is 
encircled by a flat collar of starched muslin edged with pointed 
lace. Rich purple velvet of Florence, constitutes the material of the 
dress, tlie long and sharp boddice of which attracted Henri's atten- 
tion to the slender shape and distinctly defined bosom of the lovel3( 
demoiselle. 

In passing, it may be remarked, that the rage for the excessively 
attenuated waist was then at its highest. Our tigSit-laced grand- 
mothers were nothing to the w^asp- shaped dames of the court of 
Catherine de Medicis. Fitting like a cuirass, the corset was 
tightened around the shape till its fair wearer, if her figure hap- 
pened to exceed the supposed limits of gracefulness, could scarcely 
gasp beneath the parasite folds, while the same preposterous sleeve 
which characterised the cavaliers of the period, likewise distinguished 
the dames. ^Nor had Esclairmonde neglected due observance of 
this beauty-outraging mode, or despite her personal attractions she 
would scarcely have found favour in her sovereign's eyes. Those 
prodigious coverings of the arms were stuffed out, and sustained 
by a huge pile of wool, and were of such amplitude and width 
that they would easily have contained three or four of our mo- 
dern sleeves. Edged with pointed lace, starched like that of the 
collar, a ruff of muslin completed the gear of the arm. Around 
her neck was twined a chain of bronze medallions, and a single 
pear-shaped pearl descended from the acute extremity of her 
stomacher. 

Tall and majestic in figure, the carriage of Esclairmonde was 
graceful and dignified ; and as he contemplated l:er soft and siuiny 
countenance, Henri thought that, with one solitary exception, he 
had never beheld an approach to Its beauty. That exception was 
Mary of Scotland, whose charms, at the period when she was 
united to his elder brother, Francis the Second, had made a lively 
impression on his youthful heart, some sense of which he still re- 
tained, and Avhose exquisite lineaments those of Esclairmonde so 
much resembled, as forcibly to recall their remembrance. There 

F 



6G CRICHTOX. 

was the same sleepy languor of tlie dark, blue cyo — tlic sp.me in- 
eillible sweetness of smile — the same pearly teetli displayed by the 
smile — the same petit nez retrousse (that prettiest of all fcmiuine 
features and well meriting La Fontaine's acUniration — 

Nez troussc, c'est un charme encore selon inon sens, 
C'eii estmcme un des plus puissans — 

though perhaps it may evidence a slight tendency to coquetry on 
the part of the owner) the same arched and even brow — in short, 
there were a hundred traits of resemblance which Ilenri was not 
slow to discover. In a few minutes he became desperately in love; 
that is as much in love as a king could be under the circumstances, 
and moreover such a blast king as Henri. 

" By Cupidon ! belle Esclairmonde," he said, still retaining pos- 
session of her hand, " I am lialf disposed to charge my mother with 
leze-majeste in so long denying me the gratification I now experi- 
ence in welcoming to my masque the loveliest of my guests. Mort- 
Dieu ! ardent admirer as she knows I am of beauty, her majesty's 
omission savours ot" positive cruelty ; nor should I so readily over- 
lo(jk the fault, did not my present satislliction in some degree 
reconcile me to the previous disappointment." 

" Your majesty attaches more importance to the circumstance 
than it merits," returned Esclairmonde, gently endeavouring to 
disengage her hand. *' Flattered as I am l>y vour notice, it is an 
honour to which I had no pretension to aspire." 

" In i'aith, not so, fair demoiselle," replied the king. " Reauty 
has a claim upon my attention to which all other recommendations 
are secondary. I were no true Valois were it otherwise. You 
will not refuse me your hand at the banquet,"" he added, in a lower 
tone, and with an emprcs^ainent of manner which could not be 
•.listaken. 

'1 he colour mounted to Esclairmonde's cheeks. 

" Sire!" she returned, with a thrill of apprehension, "my hand 
is at your disposal." 

" But not your lieart?" asked the king, in an impassioned Avhisper. 

Esclairmonde trembled. She saw at once the danger of her 
position, and summoned all her firmness to her assistance. 
" Sire !" she replied, with her eyes fixed upon the ground, and in a 
tone which struggled to be firm, " my heart is not my own. It is 
devoted to another." 

" Mort-Dieu !" exclaimed the king, unable to control his displea- 
sure. " ^'ou avow it — you love — " 

" I said not so, sire." 

" How ! — and devoted to another?" 

** 1 am betrothed to Heaven; my destiny is the cloister." 

" Is that all?" said Henri, recovering his composure. " I half 
suspected there were other ties that bound you to eartli. But a 
cloister — no, no — this must never be, mignonne. No mo- 
nastery sliall entomb so liiir a ^aint, while I can hinder it. Such 




ViThm'mI] "F F/^f'lfl i riTKvnrlp to TJpnpi TTT 



ESCLAIRMONDE. 67 

gifts are not lightly bestowed, noi- should tiiey be heedlessly 
thrown away ; and I shall fulfil a duty in preventing such an iin- 
molation at the shrine of mistaken zeal, as would be your impri- 
sonment in a cloister. If the resolution proceed from the queen 
mother, my authority shall be interposed to restrain lier intentions, 
for, by our lady ! I cannot believe that you, child, have any such 
dissatisiiiction with the world as to wish to withdraw yourself from 
it, "when its gayest prospects are opening before your view ; when 
your path is strewn with flowers, and when all the chivalry of 
JFrance, with their monarch at their head, are eager to contend for 
your smiles."" 

" It is your royal mother's will that I accept it," replied Esclair- 
mcnde, timidly glancing at Catherine de Medicis, who, still 
engaged in deep conference witli the astrologer, was too much 
absorbed to observe her look. " From her majesty's resolves there 
is no alternative. She will dispose of me as she sees fitting." 

" But not without my concurrence," returned the king. " Mort- 
Dieu ! — her majesty triiles with the sceptre till she fancies it is her 
own hand that sways it. I must convince her to the contrary. 
How she can entertain a notion so absurd as to think of burying 
one of the loveliest of her attendants within the gloom of a con- 
vent, passes our comprehension. Had it been our Queen iSIadame 
Louise de Vaudemont, wlio ever carries a missal within her gibe- 
cierc, I could understand it; but that our mother, who, though zea- 
lous as ourselves at her vespers and masses, has no particular fana- 
ticism, should contemplate an act so preposterous, seems unaccount- 
able. jNIorbleu ! she must have some motive." 

" Her majesty has no motive tave zeal in the cause of her re- 
ligion." 

" So it may appear to you, mi^nonne; but our mother's reasons 
lie not on the surface. Be they what they may, you need no longer 
apprehend her interference. Unless prompted by your own incli- 
nations, you will never utter the vows which will bind you wholly 
to Heaven to the neglect of all on earth." 

" Upon my knees, sire," replied Esclairmondo, "would I thank 
you for tlie precious boon you promise me, would thanks suffice; 
but I feel they would not. I cannot misunderstand your looks. 
Gratitude, devotion, loyal afiection towards your majesty will ever 
influence my bosom ; but not love, except such as a subject should 
ieel towards her sovereign. My life, my destiny is at your disposal; 
but seek not my heart, sire, which is neither mine to bestow, nor 
yours to solicit." 

*' If not your own," said Henri, somewhat maliciously, " to 
whose keeping have you intrusted it ?" 

" The question is ungenerous — unworthy of your majesty." 
"You need not answer it, then," returned the king; "the 
rather," he added, wdth a meaning smile, " that the secret is mine 
already. J^ ew whispers brcatlied within these walls fail to reach 

F 2 



65 CUICIITOX. 

my eavs; nor were tliose of the Admirable Cricliton so low as (/> 
escape our attention. Nav tremble not, child, I betray no con- 
fidences. There is one person, however, against whom I must put 
you upon your guard. You know her not as well as I do. Fate 
grant you never may." 

" To whom does your majesty allude ?" asked Esclairmonde, 
with an expression ot" uneasiness. 

" Have you no suspicion ? Does not your heart prompt you? — 
I' It^ith, you are not so much taken with this Crichton as I imagined, 
or else, wliich I can scarcely believe, you have little jealousy in your 
composition." 

" Oi" wliom would your majesty have me entert-iin a feeling of 
jealousy? Against wliom would you put me on my guard?" 

" Whom you see yonder— the star queen of the revel, round 
whom all the lesser orbs revolve, — who attracts all within her 
spheie, and who sheds, as such stars generally do, her rays on all 
alike?" 

" Your majesty's sister, the Queen of Navarre ?" 

"Precisely; and it is of her I council you to beware." 

" I do not understand your majesty." 

" jNIort-Dieu ! that is strange. You do not mean to say, 
that, in alluding to Crichton's amourette Avith the Queen of 
Navarre, we tell you any thing new. Why, the whole court 
rings, or did ring, with it; for, in fact, the scandal is somewhat 
stale, and no one now concerns himself about it. Our sister 
changes her gallants so often that her constancy is the only thing 
that excites a moment's marvel. A short while ago it Avas Mar- 
tigues — then La Mole — then le heau Saint Luc — then Mon- 
sieur de Mayenne, ' hon compofjnoit , f/ros et. gras,^ as our brother 
Llenri of Navarre calls him — then Turenne, a caprice — then 
Bussy d'Amboise, a real passion. After Lussy, appeared Crich- 
ton, who, having disarmed D'Amboise, till that time deemed 
invincible, became the reigning fiavourite — making the grand 
corollary to these pleasant premises. So the affair stands at pre- 
sent. How long it is likely to continue, rests Avith you to de- 
termine. IMarguerite Avill never brook a rival; and can you suffer 
him you love to be the slave — the Avorshippcr of another ?" 

" 1 knew it not. And does he — does the Seigneur Crichton — 
aspire to her affections?" 

Henri smiled. 

" He has deceived you," said he, after an instant's pause, during 
Avhich time he intently Avatchcd the workings of her countenance. 
*' Revenge is in your power. His perlidy demands it. The game 
is irv A'our hands — play off' a king against his queen." 

" 5s'ever." 

*' The cloister, then, aAvaits you." 

*' I will die rather. I am of the reformed faith, sire." 

*' Damnation I" ejaculated Henri, recoiling, telling his bead;^ 



ESCLAIRMOXDE. 69 

and sprlnklinf^ himself with perfume from one of the flacons at liis 
girdle; "a Huguenot, Mort-Dieu !—! shall expire — a heretic in 
our presence ! It is an affront to our understanding — and the girl is 
so pretty, too — Diable ! ' Indulgentiam absolutionem et remissionem 
peccatorum tribue, Domine !' " he continued, devoutly crossino- 
himself; "I am stricken with horror — pair! * Ab omni phantasia. 
et nequitia vel versutia diabolical fraudis libera me, Domine !' " 
And he recited another paternoster, performing a fresh aspersion, 
after which he added with more composure: " Luckily, no one has 
overlicard us. It is not too late to recant your errors, liecall those 
silly words, and I will endeavour to forget them." 

" Sire," replied Esclairmonde, calmly ; " I cannot recall what I 
have asserted. I am of the faith of which I have already avowed 
myself a member. I reject all other creeds save that which I believe 
to be the truth. In that I will live — in that, if need be, die." 

" Your words may prove prophetic, demoiselle," returned Henri, 
with a sneer ; " are you aware of the peril in which this mad avowal 
of your opinions might place you?" 

" 1 am prepared to meet the doom, whi'.-h in the same cause, 
made martyrs of my father and all my family." 

" Tush ! 3'ou heretics are ever stubborn. This accounts for your 
non-compliance with my wishes. However," he muttered, " I shall 
not give up the point thus readily, nor for a scruple or so in point 
of conscience, baulk my inclinations. Besides, I remember I have 
an indulgence from his Holiness, Gregory XHL, providing for 
a contingency like the present. Let me see, it runs thus : for an 
affair with a Huguenot, twelve additional masses per week, to be 
continued for three weeks; item — a rich coffer for the Sacristy of 
the Innocents; item — a hundred rose-nobles for the Ursulines, and 
a like sum for the Hieronimites; item — a procession with the 
Flagellants ; and then I have the condonation of his Holiness. 
The penance is light enough, and were it more severe, I would 
■willingly incur it. 'Tis strange — a Huguenot perdue in the 
Louvre — this must be inquired into. Our mother must be in the 
secret. Her mystery — her caution — proclaim her acquaintance 
with the fact. I will inquire into it at my leisure, as well as in- 
vestigate all particulars of this girl's story. A Huguenot ! Mort- 
Dieu ! From whom," he added, aloud to Esclairmonde, "did you 
derive these abominable doctrines, demoiselle?" 

" Your majesty will excuse my answering that question." 

" As you please, mignonne. This is neither the time nor the 
place to enforce a reply. Your story and your conduct alike per- 
plex me — but, time will unravel the affair. Now mark me, 
demoiselle. As yet I have approached you as a humble suitor, de- 
sirous in that capacity to win your regard. I now resume the king, 
and remind you, that your life, your liberty, your person, are at 
my disposal; nor shall I forget the interests of your soul, in which 
good office I may call in the assistance of some of my most zealous 
ecclesiastics. If my measures appear harsh, you may thank your 



70 CRICHTON. 



own perversity. "My wisli is to be lenient. OVeJienee is nil I re- 
quire. Till midnight, therefore, 1 give yon to rcllect. On the 
one hand, you will weigh m\ iiivour, my love — lor I still love you; 
on the other, Crichton's inlidelity, a cloister, perchance a darker 
doom. Make your own election. Alter the banquet I shall expect 
an answer." 

" i\Iy answer will still be the same," returned Esclairmondc. 
At tliis moment, a loud clapping of hands was heard at the fur- 
tlier end oi" the hall, and the music replied to the acclamations in 
loud and joyous strains. To Esclairmondc the notes sounded wild 
and dissonant, and the laughing buzz of" gaiety pealed like the din 
of" some infernal concourse. Tiie glittering saloon and its gay and 
ever-changing throng of" masks and revellers vanished from her 
sight, and before her, like a ghastly vision, rose the cowled inqui- 
.^itors, the stern and threatening judges, the white-robed sisterhood, 
in Avhose presence she seemed to stand witli hair nnbound, and 
with a thick black veil thrown over her face ! She shrank as for 
protection, and rccovi-rcd her senses only to encounter the libertine 
gaze of Henri. 

Again the music sounded joyously, and the torches of the branslc 
being lighted, the giddy dancers passed them in aAvhirl of flame. 

" j\Ia foi, we lose time here," said the king. "Not a word, 
<]enioiselle — as you value your life or his, of our converse, to 
('richton — should he still, as is not unlikely, make his appearance 
at our revel. — Resume your mask and maintain your composure. 
Soh, 'tis well." 

Though scarcely able to command liersell", Ksclairmonde, in 
compliance with the king's request, placed her violet-coloured mask 
upon her face, and yielded, not without a shudder, lier liand. 

As they issued from the recess in Avhicli their conversation had 
:aken ])lacc, the jester Chicot advanced towards the monarch. 

" What wouldst thou, gossip ?" said Henri. " Thy wise 
countenance is charged. Avith more than its usual meaning." 

" A proof I am neither in love nor drunk, compere," replied 
Chicot ; " as in either case our family resemblance becomes the 
stronu;er, your niaicstv beinrc alwavs either the one or the other, 
and not unf"requently both. The su]:)erabundance of my meaning, 
therefore, you will lay to the charge of my sobriety and discretion." 
" l>ah I — this jesting is ill timed." 

" Then it is in keeping with your majesty's love-making." 
" Ijc silent, sirrah, or say what brings thee hither !" 
" What sliali be done to the man whom the king delighteth to 
lionour ?" 

" And Avho is the man, gossip ?" 

" He who threatens, more than Henri of Lorraine, or Henri of 
Navarre, or Philip of Spain, or, despite the Salic law, your royal 
mother to depose you, sire — see how your loyal subjects quit your 
fide. If your majesty decline the ofllce, permit the Demoiselle 
Ksclairmonde to offer him welcome." 



ESCLATRMOXDE. 71 

" Ha ! I Login to comprehend thee. It is the Admirable Crich- 
ton ■whom thou "wouldst announce." 

" I took the precaution to warn your majesty of his comin"-, as I 
■would apprise a friend of a jealous husband's return."" 

"Crichton!" exclaimed Esclairmondc, roused from lier stupor 
by the mention of the name ; "he here ! May I crave your per- 
mission to rejoin her majesty ?" 

" By no means, mignonne," replied Henri, coldly; " I Avould 
not deprive you of the pleasure of -witnessing my interview witli 

this phccnix of schoolmen. You will, therefore, remain near me 

and neglect not," he added, in a tone only calculated for Esclair- 
monde's hearing : " the caution I have given you. You shall 
have proof enough of his inconstancy anon. Mcssei"-neurs," he 
added, aloud, addressing the lords in attendance; "approach. The 
victor of the university is at hand. It is not often that it lidls to 
a king's lut to number a scholar amongst his courtiers. You may 
remember, messeigneurs, at our last jousting, I foretold Crichton's 
distinction, and promised him a boon. To-night I will redeem the 
royal pledge. Joyeuse, bid her Majesty of Navarre attend upon 
me. To lier, no doubt, my welcome will possess peculiar interest. 
Madame, my mother, if your conference be ended with Hug^-ieri, 
your presence will lend additional grace to the reception. Be 
seated, I pray you. I would welcome the Admirable Crichton as 
a king should welcome him." 

Seating himself upon a richly-ornamented fliutcuil, brought by 
his attendants, Henri was instantly encompassed by his courtiers, 
■who formed a brilliant semicircle around him. 

Catherine de Medicis, whose conference with the astrologer had 
been long since ended, remarked Henri's attention to Esclairmondc 
"with some dissatisfaction. Accustomed, however, rather to encou- 
rage her son's wayward inclinations than to check them (and 
therein lay the secret of her rule ), she allowed no expression of dis- 
pleasure to escape her, but took her seat majestically by his side. 
Behind Catherine, crouched Ruggieri, uneasily shuffling to and fro, 
"with the glare and the shifting movement of a caged hyrena. 

Nearer to the king, and clinging to his throne for support, was 
placed Esclairmondc, now almost in a state of distraction. 

Chicot reclined himself familiarly at Henri's feet, with his ma- 
rotte in hand, and the monarch's long-eared, large-eyed, favourite 
on his knee, its long ears sweeping the floor. Poor Chatelard ! As 
the gentle animal submitted to his caress, Henri thought for an in- 
stant of her from whom he had received him as a sister's remem- 
brance — he thought of Mary of Scotland — of her captivity — of her 
charms — and of Esclairmonde's strange resemblance to her — and 
this brought back the whole tide of passion. " Singular, most sin- 
gular," he mused; " woidd she had been a Jewess, or a Pagan! 
There might then have been some hope of her — but a Huguenot 

— ouf r 



cA CKICHTON. 

CHAPTER III. 

IIKNUI III. 

Don Carlox. A penoux, due! rc^dis ce collier - sois fidtlel — 
Par Saint Eiienne, due, je te fais chevalier. — 

Victor IIlgo. Htrnani, Acte /!'., Scene VI. 

CricIITON's arrival at the revel had created an extraordinary 
sensation. His brilliant achievements at the imiversitj, Avliich, 
coupled -vvitli Ids gallant and chivah'ous and any tiling but scliolastic 
cliaractcr, excited universal astonishment, formed the chief topic of 
conversation, and every body expressed surprise as to the time 
when he acquired the wondrous store of erudition which had con- 
Ibunded all the wisdom of tlie land. How could he have attained 
such boundless information ? He had been at the chase, the hall 
of arms, the carousal, the fete — in sliort, lie liad been everywlicre, 
but wliere he might be supposed to be, alone and in his study. He 
had been the lile of every thing — dashing at all, and succeeding in 
all ; rejecting nothing in the whole round of pleasurable amuse- 
ment — now swayed by the smile of beauty — now attracted by the 
beck of the gamester, whose dice seemed obedient to Ids will — now 
pledging toast for toast Avith the votary of Bacchus, whose glowing 
cups seemed to have for him no inebriation. He had been all this 
and more ; and yet this reckless, heedless voluptuary, wlio pursued 
enjoyment with an intensity of zeal unknown even to her most 
ardent followers, had excelled the learned and laborious denizens 
of wisdom's chosen retreat. 

All was animation on his entrance. Tlie report flew along the 
saloon on wings, swifter than those of scandal. " He is arrived," was 
echoed from mouth to mouth. 'I'he songsters were deserted, though 
the band was Catherine's choicest Italian company — the ballet was 
abandoned, though it had only just commenced — though the dan- 
seuses were the most graceful imaginable, and a inoitit nues — the 
bransle-des- flambeaux was neglected, though the perfumed torches 
had reached the point when their blaze was to make one giddy whirl 
of many-coloured flame — the stately pavanne broke into a quick 
movement — the grave pazzameno lost all bounds — tlie commotion 
became general — the infection irresistible. Eyes, brighter tlian the 
jewels of their wearers, rained their influence upon Crichton as he 
passed, and odorous bouquets fell at his feet as if theyliad dropped 
like manna from the skies. Human nature could not rcsi^t homage so 
flattering, and the handsome Scot appeared for an instant almost 
overpowered by it. 

The same richness of taste that characterised Crichton's cos- 
tume of the morning, distinguished his evening attire. He wore 
no mask — nor, wliat was then generally adopted, a toque or cap 



HENRI III. 73 

with a panache of gay-coloured feathers — neither had he assumed 
any fanciful garb. His dress was a rich suit of white satin slashed 
with azure, the jerkin and hose fitting without a crease to the 
modelled limbs. Having divested himself of his Spanish cloak and 
plumed cap in the entrance-hall, nothing interfered with the exact 
display of his symmetrical person ; and as, with a step elastic and 
buoyant as that of a winged Mercury, he passed throufrh the 
crowded groups, he appeared like an impersonation of fabulous 
grace and beauty. 

Not a trace of the fatigue which might be supposed incident to 
his prolonged intellectual conflict, was discernible in his proud, stead- 
fast features. High emotions sat upon his lofty brow — his coun- 
tenance was radiant — and a smile sat upon his lip. With chival- 
rous and courteous grace, he returned the congratulations and com- 
pliments showered upon him, neither appearing to avoid nor yet 
court attention, but essaying to pass on to the upper end of the 
saloon. 

Presently Du Ilalde made his appearance ; and, sensible that all 
eyes were upon him, that mirror of courtliness performed his task 
to admiration. 

When Henri's intimation became known, a new impetus was 
given to the assemblage. In vain the almost bewildered l)u Halde 
raised high his fleur-de-lis-covered rod of oflice. In vain he shrugged 
his shoulders, and made the most pathetic remonstrances, and to 
remonstrances added entreaties, and to entreaties, threats. The tide 
would not be repressed ; but, like that of the scholars of the morn- 
ing, pressed forward quite resolved, it would seem, to be present at 
Crichton's audience with the king. Deference, however, for the 
royal presence withheld them from advancing too close. The royal 
guard of halberdiers, pages, and lacqueys, placed themselves in 
front, and formed a dense phalanx round the throne. 

The clamour subsided, as, preceded and announced by Du Halde, 
Crichton approached the king, and made a graceful and profound 
obeisance. The music also ceased, there being no longer any reason 
for its continuance. The distant minstrel strained his neck to gaze 
towards the royal circle, and the attendant at the refreshment-table 
took the opportunity of pledging his companions in a brimmer of 
Cyprus. 

^leanwhile, the royal group had been increased by the arrival of 
the lovely Marguerite de Valois, and her scarcely less lovely maids 
of honour. La Torigni, Fran9oise de Montmorency, surnamed La 
Belle Fosseuse, and La liebours ; the two latter of whom have 
been immortalised by Sterne. 

The Queen Louise, with her discreet dames, had just withdrawn, 
it having been whispered to her majesty that her august spouse had 
betrayed symptoms of a new passion. 

Hem-i was wholly unprepared for, and not altogether pleased 



74 CRicnxoN. 

by, tlie rapturous admiration excited by Cricbton ; but be was too 
mucb of an adept in dissimulation to suffer any symptom of dis- 
pleasure to escape bim. On tlic contrary, be received the laurelled 
scholar witli liis blandest and most deceptive smile, graciouslv 
according bim bis liand ; and, apparently not content with this 
mark of his friendship, instantly alter raising bim from his kneeling 
posture, and, cordially embracing bim. 

An irrepressible murmur of applaiise following this act of gracious 
condescension, showed that Henri had not miscalculated its effect 
upon the enthusiastic minds of the spectators. In fact, despite bis 
malevolence, lie could not be entirely insensible to the inlluence of 
the scene ; and, in common with all present, felt and recognised 
the majesty and might of mind, and its wondrous combination iu 
tlic present case with personal advantages. He knew be was in 
the presence of one of the master spirits of the age; and for an 
instant, forgetting Esclairmondo, half persuaded himself be was 
in reality the gracious monarch be was proclaimed by bis courtiers. 

There was one, lunvever, who viewed bis conduct in a different 
ligbt: but she was mute. 

*' Vive le Roi ! — Vive notre bon Ilenriot !" cried Chicot, wbo 
had withdrawn himself on Crich ton's approach, addressing the 
Viccmte de Joycuse, wbo stood near bim ; " The grande Kue 
Suict-Jacques appears to be the bigb road to bis majesty's favour. 
Henceforth, we shall all become scholars, and I may exchange my 
fool's bauble for a folio, my cockscomb for the cappa rotunda^ and 
my surcoat for the prescribed iahalili scii hovssioi lunrjce of tho 
college of Navarre. How say you? It is only a year or two since 
our dear Ilenriot took to the study of Latin in the grammar of 
Denon. It is never too late to learn ; and if the good Pantagruel 
propounded nine thousand, seven hundred, sixty-and-four conclu- 
sions, as his historian, Maitre Alcofribas Nasier, afbrmctb, why 
should not I offer a like number for controversy ':"' 

" Nay, I see no reason to the contrary," replied Joycuse. 
" Thy conclusions will, in all probability, be as intelligible and 
irrefragable as those of the sophists ; and, as extremes meet, tbou 
mayst be as near to Cricbton as the line of intersection whicb 
divides the heights of folly from the deptb of wisdom will permit. 
Meantime, pay attention to thy liege and master ; for methinks 
be is about to bestow a gift on Cricbton not unworthy of birnself 
or of the acceptor." 

And so it proved. Commanding Cricbton to kneel, Henri 
detached the lesser collar of the Saint Esprit from bis throat, and 
placing the glittering badge around the scholar's neck, unsheathed 
bis sword from its crimson-velvet scabbard, and touching bim thrice 
with the blade upon the shoulder, added, " In the name of God 
and of our lord and patron, Saint Denis, we create thee, James 
Cricbton, knight commander of the boly and honourable order of 



HENRI III, 75 

tlic Saint Espi-it j "We do not say, support its statutes and niaintain 
its splendour without spot. That were needless. The name of 
Crichton is suillcicnt to preserve its glory untarnished." 

" Your majesty has bestowed upon me a boon which I should 
have esteemed more than adequate reward for long and zealous 
service, or for highest desert," replied Crichton, rising. " But as 
I can call to mind no such service, can discern no such desert, 
I must esteem myself wholly unworthy of your distinction. This 
consideration, however, while it annihilates all fancied claim to 
i'avour, enhances my gratitude ; and we shall sec whether that 
ieeling prove not a stronger stimulant than interest or ambition. 
Devotion is all I can offer your majesty. I have a sword, and I 
dedicate it to your cause; blood, and it shall flow in your defence; 
life, and it shall be laid down at your bidding. Emulative of your 
own great deeds at Jarnac and Moncontour, beneath your banner, 
sire — beneath tlie Orifiamme of i nince, it shall be my aim to make 
the holy and illustrious order with which you have invested me, 
the proudest guerdon of knightly enterprise." 

" I accept your devotion. Chevalier Crichton," returned 
Henri. " 1 rejoice in your professions, and, by Saint Michael ! 
I am as proud of my knight as my good grandsire, Francois I., was 
of his fellowship in arms with the fearless and reproachless Bayard. 
The ceremonial of your installation shall take place on Fridav, witliin 
the church of the Augustlnes, where you will take the oath of the 
Order, and subscribe to its statutes. After the solemnity, you wull 
dine at the Louvre with the Avhole assembled fraternity of the 
knights commanders, and in the meantime, that nothing may be 
omitted, our treasurer will have it in charge to disburse to your 
uses our accustomed benefice of eight hundred crowns." 

" Sire, your favours overwhelm me." 

"Tut!" interrupted Henri, " I would not be outdone by my 
subjects in the expression of our admiration. Besides," he added, 
smiling; " my conduct, after all, may not be so disinterested as at 
first sight it would appear. Under any plea, I am glad to include 
Avithin my newly-Instltutcd and cherished Order, such a name as 
that of the Admirable Crichton — a name which reflects more lustre 
on us, than knighthood can confer upon you. Freely as it was 
made, I accept your pledge. — I may, anon, take you at your word, 
and require a service at your hands." 

" Ask my life — 'tis yours, sire." 

" Enouiih — I am well content." 

As Henri spoke, a half-stilled sob was heara, proceeding fronr, 
some one near him. The sound reached Crichton's ears, and smote, 
lie knew not why, like a presage of ill upon his heart. 

Henri could scarcely conceal his exultation. " I will no longer 
detain my guests," he said, " this audience must be dull work to 
them ; and, in sooth, I am tired by it myself. Let the ballet 
proceed." 



76 CRICIITON. 

Accordingly, the king's pleasure being made known, the musi- 
cians instantly struck up a lively strain, tlie maskers dispersed to 
conmunt upon the scene thev had witnessed, and the ball recoui- 
inenced with more spirit than bcibrc. 



CHArTKli IV. 
catiiekine de :\n:i)icis. 

Voilapoiirquoi j'ai parqiielqiie tcmjisfait conscience d't'crire cet echantillon dela 
vie et dcs actions dc Catherine de Medicis ; — ]>our ce que cette femnie est un natif 
tableau et cxemplaire d.e tyrannic en ses deportemens publics, et de toutes sortts 
de vices en ses ]ilus prives. 

1Ii;nhi EriiiNNK. Discours Mcrreillcux de la fie dc Catherine de Medicls. 

"Par la mort dleu ! mon cher Criehton," said Henri in a 
languid tone, helping himself to some of the perfumed confec- 
tionery which he carried in his escarcelle, " 1 am quite taken 
with the brilliancy and Avhiteness of your collar. I thought my 
Courtrav gauderonneurs inimitable, but your artist far exceeds 
those Flemish pretenders. I am critical in such matters, you 
know — Heaven having endued me with a taste for costume." 

" True, gossip," replied Chicot. " It is not for nothing that you 
have acquired the titles of Gauderoimeur des Collets de voire 
Femme, et Mercier du Palais." 

" Corbieu, messieurs!" continued Henri, heedless of the inter- 
ruption, and apparently struck with a bright idea, " I abandon 
for ever my pet project, the plat Sai/it Jean, and direct you hence- 
forth to assume the collar a la Criehton !" 

" Your majesty will then do manifest injustice to your own in- 
vention," said Criehton, " by so styling my poor imitation of \'our 
own surpassing original ; and I pray you not to alter the designation 
of a vestment which appears to have some importance in your eyes. 
Let it bear the name of him alone to whom the merit of the con- 
ception is due. I can by no means consent to liold honours which 
do not belon<x to me : and no one would think for an instant of dis- 
puting Avith your majesty the eminence you have so justly at- 
tained." 

"You flatter me," replied Henri, smiling; "but still I must 
retain our opinion. And now a truce to compliment. Do not let 
me detain you, mon cher, nor you, messeigneurs, I know you 
love the dance. The Navarroise is just struck up. That figure 
has always attraction for our sister Marguerite. Pray ye, solicit 
the favour of her liand." 

With a smile like a sunbeam, the royal Circe extended her hand 
to Criehton, as he advanced towards her. That smile went like a 
da;;L''cr to the heart of Esclairmonde. 



CATHERINE DE MEDICIS. 77 

" An Instant, madame," said Cricliton. " Ere I quit his majesty's 
presence I liave a suit to prefer." 

" Say on," replied Henri. 

" Were my intercession in your belialf needful, you should have 
it," said Marguerite de Valois, *' but your interest with the kinf 
our brother is greater tlian my own." 

" Still let me have your voice, madame," returned Crichton, 
*' for my solicitation refers to one of your own sex. My life was 
saved this morning by a disguised Venetian girl, and I have since 
ascertained that her life is threatened by the traitor llu"-i,deri." 

'' Traitor !" echoed Catherine de Medicis, starting to lier feet, and 
fixing a fierce glance upon Crichton — " ha ! consider well what you 
advance, messire — this pertains to me — Ruggieri a traitor! — to 
whom ?" 

" To his sovei-eign, madame — to the king, your son," answered 
Crichton, resolutely returning Catherine's gaze. 

" By Notre Dame ! this concerns me, it would seem," said Henri. 
"Nay frown not, madame. Since his reported medication of my 
brother Charles's beverage, I have ever misdoubted your Astro- 
loger ; and, to speak truth, I wonder not at Crichton's charge ; 
for the countenance of Ruggieri carries treason in every wrinkle. 
But I will not judge him unheard. But first let us know more oi 
this Venetian girl. How is she threatened by Ruggieri ?"* 

" She is his prisoner, sire," replied Crichton, •'' confined within 
the turret, belonging to her majesty, near the Hotel de Soissons. 
I have myself penetrated the turret, where I heard, moans, and saw 
her through the bars of her cell " 

"And you dared to force your way thither!" exclaimed 
Catherine — "by my right hand, messire, you shall repent your 
temerity !" 

" The girl risked her life for mine, madame, — my head shall be 
the price of her deliverance." 

" I take you at your word, messire. You shall have the girl 
if you will adventure again Avithin my tower." 

" Beware, beware," whispered Marguerite de Valois, pressing 
Crichton's hand tenderly ; " as you value my love, say no more. 
See you not, she smiles ; one step more, and you tread upon your 
grave." 

" It matters not,"" replied Crichton, withdrawing his hand from 
the clasp of the Queen of Navarre. " Your Majesty's threats," 
he added, addressing Catherine de Medicis, " will hardly deter me 
from the execution of an enterprise in which my honour is at stake." 

" Ha ! braved !" cried Catherine 

*' No, no," said Marguerite, imploringly — " He does not bravo 
you, mother." 

" I only uphold the oppressed," said Crichton. " My head be 
the penalty of my failure." 

" Be it so," answered Catherine, reseating herself. 



78 CRICHTON". 

"And en attendant, Chevalier Ciichton, you withdraw die charge 
of treason which you preferred against lluggieri ?" said Henri. 

"No, sire," replied Crichton, "I accuse Cosmo Ruggieri, Abbe 
of Saint-IMahe, of higli treason and leze-majcste, and of machina- 
tions against the state. These char";es I will substantiate airainst 
him by proof unquestionable." 

" By what proof?"" demanded Henri. 

" By this scroll, sire, set forth in alchemical characters ; unintel- 
ligible it may be to your majesty, or to any one here assembled ; 
but which my acquaintance with its cypher enables me to interpret. 
This scroll, exhibiting a scheme for the destruction of your life, 
seized within lluggieri's retreat, upon his own table, with the traces 
of his own ink scarce dried upon it, furnishes proof incontrovertible 
of a dark conspiracy against your sal'ety, of which this accursed 
astrologer is the chief instrument. Let his person be secured, sire; 
and, dilHcult of comprehension as the mystic letters of this document 
appear, I undertake to make them clear and evident as liis guilt 
is black and damning to the tribunal before which he shall be 
arraigned." 

Henri looked for an instant irresolutely towards his mother. 
Ivuggieri was about to cast himself at the King's feet, but at a 
gesture irom Catherine he remained stationary, regarding Crichton 
with a scowl of bitterest animosity. " Your boasted powers of logic, 
Chevalier Crichton," said the Queen Mother, "might have taught 
you that from unsound premises false conclusions must come. If 
you have no further proof against lluggieri than that adduced from 
this document, your charge falls to the ground." 

" INot so, madame ; this cypher implicates a higher power than 
Kuggieri." 

" It does proceed from a higher source than that of Ruggieri," 
replied Catherine. " That scroll is my contrivance." 

" Yours, madame !" exclaimed Henri, in surj^rise. 

"Question me not further, my son," returned Catherine. 'Be 
assured that I Avatch over your interests with maternal solicitude ; 
and that if I work in darkness, I have only one aim — the main- 
tenance of your glory and power. Hereafter you shall know the 
real purport of this scroll. Leave the cares of rule to me." 

" Vuero reynante, foiinina ?mperanle,'' whispered Chicot. 

" This hair-brained youth has marred one of my best-laid plans," 
continued Catherine, scornfully ; " but I pardon his indiscretion, 
for his zeal in your belialf, Henri. But let him use more caution 
in future. Zeal over much becomes officiousness, and will as such 
be punished." 

" The zeal you reprobate, madame," replied Crichton, proudly, 
** prompts me, at the peril perhaps of my life, to tell you, that even 
you are the dupe of Ruggieri. This scroll is not what you sup- 
pose it." 

"Ha!" exclaimed Catherine. 



CATHERINE DE MEDICIS. 79 

" From its tenor I am satisfied it is not tlio document lie liad 
your authority to prepare." 

" Now, by our Lady ! tliis insolence passctli all endurance," cried 
Catherine, furiously. " Henri, your sire would have hewed olF 
his best knight's spurs at the heel ere your mother's word had been 
doubted ! " 

" Do not irritate yourself, madame," replied the klni^, coolly. 
" The Chevalier Crichton's chief laidt in your eyes appears to be 
his anxiety for my safety, lor which I own I find it difficult to 
blame. With all your subtlety, you are no match for Uu£><;-icri. 
And I would willingly hear my advocate out ere I relinquish an 
investigation which appears to involve such important consequences 
to my safety." 

Catherine grew pale, but she spoke with calmness. — " Proceed, 
sir," she said, addressing Crichton, " the king wishes it, I will 
answer you." 

"To prove to you, madame," said Crichton, "how much you 
have been deceived, I Avill ask you whether it was by your autho- 
rity this image was prepared ?"" And Crichton drew forth from 
his pourpoint a small wa.xen figure representing the king. 

"Par Notre Dame de Bon Secours," stannnered Henri, growing 
white, in spite of his rouge, with cholcr and affright, " an image 
of myself — ha ! — " 

" Pierced with a poignard to the heart, sire," replied Crichton 
— " Behold where the puncture is made ! " 

" I see it — I see it," ejaculated Henri. "Ave Maria ! " 

" Sire," exclaimed Ruggieri, flinging himself at the King's feet, 
" .hear me — hear me — " 

" Away, infidel dog ! " cried Henri, spurning Ruggieri from 
him ; "thy touch is pollution." 

Exclamations of horror burst from the group immediately around 
the king. Swords flashed from their scabbards ; and had it not 
been for the interference of Catherine de Medicis, to whose knees 
the affrir>hted astrologer cluno* in mortal terror, he would have 
been slaughtered on the spot. " Back, messeigneurs ! " exclaimed 
Catharine, rising and spreading her arms over Ruggieri ; " strike 
him not — he is innocent — on your allegiance I charge you, sheathe 
your swords I " 

"Be tranquil, gentlemen," said the l<ing, who had by this time 
collected himself — " l^ar la Mort-Dieu! I will deal with this 
traitor myself. A waxen figure, forsooth! Let me look at it 
nearer. By my faith ! the knave has caught my lineaments far 
better than my sculptor, Barthclemy Prieur ! — a dagger in the 
heart — I have felt a strange pain in my side these three days. Is 
this accursed imatrc the handiwork of Ru2"u'ieri ?" 

"Undoubtedly, sire," replied Crichton. 

" 'Tis false, sire. I had no hand in its manufacture. By my 
salvation, I swear it," ejaculated tlie affrighted astrologer. 



bO Ci:iCiiTOX. 

" Tliy solvation ! " echoed Chicot, wltli a scream of" derision — 
"ha! ha! thou hast long since lost all chance of salvation! Rather 
swear hy thy perdition, miscreant abbe." 

" I Ibund it within his chamber," said Crichton. " Your ma- 
jesty will treat the superstitious device w'ith the scorn such a futile 
attempt against your safety merits. But this consideration will not 
relieve Kuggieri Irom the charge of treasonable practices against 
your life. 1 or like attempts, La Mole and Coconnas were adjudged 
to the block." 

"And on the scaffold he dies," replied the king, "if this oflence 
be proved against him. The question shall enforce the truth. 
After this, madame," continued Henri, addressing his mother, "I 
think you will scarcely seek to advocate further the conduct of your 
astrologer." 

" Were I satisfied of his guilt, assuredly not, my son," returned 
Catherine. " But what proof have we that the whole of this accu- 
sation is not a contrivance of tliis fiur-spoken Scot, to rid himself 
of a foe, for such he coni'esses Ruggleri to be?" 

" You speak the trutli, madame," cried the astrologer, "I will 
Batisfy his majesty of my innocence — and of the seigneur Crich- 
ton's motive for this accusation. Grant me but time." 

" I have said that a higher power than that of Ruggicri was 
implicated in this matter," returned Crichton. " Ihat power is — " 

"Forbear !" cried the astrologer, " lead mc to the rack; but utter 
not that name ; you know not what you would do." 

" Villain ! " exclaimed Crichton ; " you find I am too well 
acquainted with your crimes. I have read the secrets of your 
heart. I would confront you with him vou have betrayed. AVouid 
he were here to confound you with his presence !" 

" He is here," replied a masked figure, stepping suddenly fi;r- 
ward. 

"The mask!" excMmed Crichton. 

"As I live, the mask in person!" said Henri. "I begin to 
have some insight into all this mystery." 

A momentary pause succeeded, during which no one spoke. 
The mask at length broke silence. " The charge you have brought 
against Ruggieri, Chevalier Crichton," he said, sternly, "is false, 
unfounded, and malicious ; and that you have made it wilfully, 
and knowing it to be such, I will approve upon you by mortal 
combat ; to which, as Ruggieri's voluntary champion, I here defy 
you." 

"And will you undertake the felon Ruggieri's defence? Will 
you draw your sword in his behalf ?"' asked Crichton, with a look 
of incredulity and surprise. 

" King of France," said the mask, dropping upon one knee 
before Henri, " I beseech your majesty to grant me right of 
vontbiit a V ontrnnce with all weapons, and without favour against 
the Chevalier Crichton." 



CATHERINE DE :riEDIClS. 81 

Plenri hesitated. 

*' Nay, my son," replied Catlierine, " this is my quarrel — not 
Ruggieri's— i ain glad to find I have one sword ready to start 
from its scabbard in my behalf. You cannot lefuse this appeal." 
*' You have our permission, then," returned Henri. 
*' I here, then, repeat my defiance," said the mask, risin<T 
haughtily, and hurling his glove to the ground. " I cliallcnge you, 
Clievalier Crichton, to make good your accusation with your life." 
"Enough," returned Crichton, "I accept the challenge, and 
I counsel you, sir, not to throw aside your mask when you draw 
your blade in a cause so infamous. I am well content that kug"ieri"s 
fate be left to the decision of my hand. Joycuse," he continued, 
" may I calculate upon your services in this matter?" 

'* Most certainly," replied the vicomte, " but wnll not your 
adversary favour us Avith his name or title? As a commander of 
the Saint-Esprit you are aware you cannot fight with one of inferior 
lank?" 

" If I am satisfied, Monsieur le Vicomte," replied the mask, 
haughtily, " to waive that consideration, a cadet of fortune like the 
Chevalier Crichton will have little need to take exceptions. We 
rneet as equals only with our swords." 

So saying, the mask disdainfully placed his ungloved hand upon 
the hilt of his rapier. Crichton regarded him fixedly for a moment. 

" Sir mask," he said, at length, in a tone of cold contempt, 
*' whoever you may be, and I have no desire to publish your in- 
cognito, whatever blood may flow in your veins, be it derived from 
prince or peer, I hold it cheap as water in the unworthy cause you 
have espoused ; and were you base-born vassal, as I believe you to 
be honourable gentleman, and your quarrel the right, it would 
weigh more with me than noblest lineage, or proudest blazonry. 
Cadet of fortune I am, no doubt. Nevertheless, even tlie royal 
Henri might cross swords with me without defrradation. On either 
Side my ancestry is illustrious. My blood is that of the Stuart, my 
heritage, an untarnished name ; my portion, a stainless sword. In 
God and Saint Andrew I place my trust!" 

" Bravely spoken," cried Saint Luc. 

" You are satisfied of your antagonist's rank ?" asked Joyeuse of 
Crichton. 

" I will answer for him," said Ilcnn. 

The vicomte raised the glove, and thrust it in his girdle. 

" Whom may I have the honour of addressing as 3'our second, 
seigneur?" asked Joyeuse, in a tone of constrained courtesy. 

" The Duke de Nevers," replied the mask, haughtily. 

" Vive Dieu !" exclaimed the vicomte, " tliis is better than I 
anticipated. Monsieur le Due, I shall be delighted to confer with 
you on this duel." 

At the mention of his name, the Due de Nevers, a grave and 
stately nobleman, wearing the full insignia of the order of the Saiut 

G 



82 cnicnxox. 

Esprit, steppod forward, in poim^ n?toni>limont, but, after havinf^ 
conversed an instant ^\•ith the mask, he advanced, and Avith a 
formal salutation took Crichton's glove from tlie hand of the 
vicomte. 

" Mort-Dicu! inesscli^ncnr?," said Ilcnri, "I had rather the 
whole science of astrology were exterminated, together with all 
its idolatrous professors, than that you shoukl battle to each other 
upon grounds so frivolous, and for a cause so unworthy of your 
swords. However, since you will have it so, I will not oppose your 
inclinations. Let the combat take place at noon to-moriow, within 
tlie hall of arms. ]\Iy pleasure, liowever, is that in lieu of the 
duel with rapier and dagger, — which, remembering the end of 
Caylusand Maugiron, I interdict, — that you break a lance together 
in the lists. On the issue of the third course, let the astrologer's 
fate depend. I will not have the life of a valiant cavalier, or of 
one dear to me, sacrificed in this worthless dispute. Meantime, 
Kuggieri shall be placed under the safeguard of the walls of the 
Chatelet, to abide the issue of the encounter, and may God defend 
the right !" 

" I will answer for Ruggieri's attendance," said Catherine de 
INIedicis. "Let him be escorted to my turret. I will place my 
own guard over him." 

" As you please, madame," returned Henri, " but have a care 
you produce him at the lists." 

" Fear me not, my son." 

" And now, sir mask," said the king, turning round. " ]Mort- 
Dieu, vanished ! — " 

" And now for the Navarroise," said Crichton, taking the hand 
of j\Jarguerite de Valols. 

" I thought you had forgotten it," replied the queen, smiling ; 
" but let us go — I am Avcarled of this crowd. We shall, at 
least, be alone in the dance." 

And, all eyes following their majestic figures, they swept down 
the saloon. 

While this was passing, Catherine motioned Kuggieri to approach 
her. The astrologer threw himself at her feet, as if imploring 
compassion. " I Avould question thee ere thou depart," she said, 
aloud, adding in a whisper, " this combat must never take place." 

" It must not," returned the astrologer. 

" I will find means to prevent it. Give me the phial thou ha-.z 
ever with thee — the Borgia tincture." 

" That were too tardy, madame: — this potion you will lind more 
efficacious. It is the same deadlv mixture as that prepared, by your 
majesty's orders, for the Admiral Coligni, which you entrusted to 
his valet, Dominique D'Albe." 

*' No more — I will find a surer agent than that timid slave," said 
Catherine, taking the phial which Kuggieri slipped into her hands ; 
" 1 must see the mask to-night," she continued. " Give me the 



CATIIERI^-E DE BIEDICIS. 8? 

key of tlrine inner chamber in the turret — I will instruct liim how 
to come thither unpcrceivcd, by the subterranean passage from the 
Hotel (le Soissons." 

" The key is here, madame," replied the astrologer. 

" Let Ruggieri be removed," said Catherine, aloud ; " and a 
triple guard placed at the portal of our hotel. Suffer none to go 
forth, nor to enter, save at our order." 

" Your highness's commands shall be obeyed," said Larchant, 
advancing towards Ruggieri, and surrounding him with some half- 
dozen halberdiers. 

" And your devihsh schemes circumvented," added Chicot, 
gliding from the fauteuil of the queen-mother, Avhither he had 
crept unperceived ; " and, now to apprise Crichton of his danger! 
— i\Iort-Dieu ! — I tremble lest our Jezebel should find an oppor- 
tunity of ellccting her accursed designs." 

Full of apprehension for Crichton's safety, the jester was about 
to follow the course taken by the Scot and his illustrious partner, 
but he found them surrounded by such a crowd of eager spectators, 
that approach was next to impossible. Ho was constrained, 
therefore, to remain stationary. Presently, a lively flourish of 
music told that the Xavarroise had commenced ; and all the jester 
could discern Avas the tall and majestic figure of Crichton revolving 
with that of the queen in the rapid circles of the dance. Round 
after round they whirled — the music each instant increasing the 
rapidity of its movements, till Chicot's brain began to spin like the 
giddy measure he Avitnessed. 

Suddenly, the strains ceased. " Now is my opportunity," ex- 
claimed the jester, preparing to dart forward. 

At that instant he was arrested by a voice behind him. It Avas 
that of the king, Avith the hand of a masked maiden Avithin his OAA-n. 
Henri stood by his side. "FolloAvme, compere," Avhispered the 
monarch, ''I have need of thy assistance. I shall require a mask 
and domino, and a hat Avith jDlumes, unlike those I am accustomed 
to Avear. FoIIoav me !" 

" An instant, sire, " 

" Not a second I Keep near me ; I avIU not have thee quit my 
sight. Come, demoiselle," added Henri, Avith a triumphant look 
at his companion ; " vou shall now be satisfied of your lover's 
perfidy." 

Chicot did not hear the Avords ; but he saw the lady tremble 
violently, as the king dragged her on. 

" IMalediction !" mentally he exclaimed. " Escape is noAV im- 
possible ! Crichton must take his chance." 



g2 



84 ClilCUTOX. 

CHAPTER V, 

MARGUERITE DE VALOIS. 

Ah ! que le temps est bien chanse a celuy que quand on Ics voj'oit danscr tous 
deux eii la {^rande salle du bal, d'une belle accoi dance, et de bonne volonte. Si Tua 
avoit belle majeste, I'autre ne I'iivoit pas nioindre. 

Uhantomk. Dames Jllusties, Dis. V. 

Marguerite de Yalois, consort ol" Henri of Navarre, after- 
Avards Henri IV., was now in the lull eclat of" her almost inirivalled 
beauty- Smitten by her nascent eliarms, Konsard proclaimed her, 
in iier fifteenth sprinpr, Jm belle Cliaritc Vas'xthte. Xor was the 
appellation unmerited. Chiselled by the Apollonian sculptor, 
Aglaia never rose upon the view more surpassinofly lovely. Some 
of her after-admirers distinguished her by the title of Venus 
Urania; and we might loUow in their steps, liad we not been 
forewarned that such description — high-flown as it appears — 
was AvhoUy inadequate to her matchless attractions. Hear what 
the Abbe dc Brantome savs on the subject : — " Encore croit-on," 
he writes, " que par I'advis de plusieurs jamais Dccsse ne fut veue 
plus belle, si bien que pour publicr ses beautez, .ses merites, et ses 
vertus, il faudroit que Dieu allongeast le Monde, et haussast le ciel 
plus qu'il n'est !" — and he concludes his panegyric by averring, 
that by her side all the goddesses of old, and empresses, such as we 
see them represented on the ancient medals, however pompously 
arrayed, would appear little better than chambermaids — [que iJunn- 
hritres an prix d'elle !) No wonder when her chronicler sent this 
tloge for JMarguerite's inspection, she should return it, saying, " I 
i\'ould have praised you more, had you praised me less.'' 

But due allowance being made for the Avorthv abbe's warmth 
of style, which carried him a little into extremes, no doubt can be 
exist as to INIarguerite's eminent personal attractions; and that she 
ranked as beautiful amongst the beautiful, even in the age that 
produced Maiy Stuart. 

Marguerite's eyes were large and dark, liquid, impassioned, 
voluptuous, with the fire of France, and the tenderness of Italy, 
in their beams. An anchorite could scarce have resisted their 
witchery. And then her features ! How shall we describe their 
Ihscination? It was not their majesty — yet they were majestic as 
those of her mother — (grace, in fact, is more majestical than ma- 
Jcftv's self, and Marguerite was eminently graceful) — it was not 
their regularity — yet they Averc regular as the severest judgment 
might exact — it was not their tint — though Marguerite's skin was 
dazzlingly fair — but it was that expression which resides not in form, 
but which, emanating from the soul, imparts, like the sun to the 
landsca[»e, light, life, and loveliness. This it was that constituted 
■the charm of Marirucrite's lcatU-r',s.. 



MARGUERITE DE VALOIS. 85 

The Queen of Navarre's figure -u-as full and faultless ; or, if it had 
a f lult, it might be deemed by those who think embonpoint incompa- 
tible with beauty, a little too redundant. But then if you complained 
of the Hebe-like proportion of her swelling shoulders, surely the 
slender Avaist from which those shoulders sprang w^ould content you. 
The cestus of Venus would have spanned that waist; and did spun it 
for aught we know — Marguerite's fascination, indeed, would almost 
warrant such a conclusion. Her throat was rounded and whiter 
than drifted snow — " Jamais n'en fut vue," says her historian, 
"une si belle, ny si blanche, si pleine,ny si charnue." Her hands 
— the true Medici's hand — (Ronsard did well to liken them to the 
lingers of the young Aurora — rose-dyed, dew-steeped) — were the 
snowiest and smallest ever beheld — her feet were those of a fairy, 
and the ankles that sustained them, fine and fliiry-like as the feet. 

Of her attire, which was gorgeous as her beauty, we dare scarcely 
hazard a description. We shrink beneath the perilous weight of 
its magnificence. Brilliants flamed like stars thick set amidst her 
dusky tresses. Besprent with pearls, her stomacher resembled a 
silvery coat of mail. Cloth of gold constituted her dress, the fashion 
of which was peculiar to herself ; for it was remarked of her that 
she never appeared in the same gnrb twice ; and that the costume 
in which she was seen last, was that which became her most. Be 
this as it may, upon the present occasion, she had studied to please 
— and she who pleased without study, could scarce fail to charm 
when it was her aim to do so. Around her fair throat hung a 
necklace of cameos, while in one hand niignonnement engcmtele^ as 
Rabelais hath it, she held a kerchief fringed wutli golden lace, and 
in the other a Ian of no inconsiderable power of expansion. 

In accomplishments, Marguerite might vie with any queen on 
record. Gifted with the natural eloquence of her grandsire, Francis 
the First, her own Memoirs amply testify her literary attainments 
— while her unpremeditated reply, in elegant latlnity, to the Bishop 
of Cracovia, may be brought in evidence of the extent of her clas- 
sical information, proving her no unworthy descendant, as she was 
the inheritress of the kingdom and of the name, of the amiable 
and virtuous Marguerite de Valois, spouse of Henri d' Albert, King 
of Navarre, and authoress of the Hcptamcron, and of the Miroir 
dime dme Peclieresse, and suvnamed la Marguerite des Marguerites 
— or pearl of pearls. Marguerite was the friend of the arts, and 
cultivator of poesy; and if her predecessor could boast of the friend- 
ship of Melancthon and Clement Marot, she was not less fortunate 
in the devotion of Ronsard and Brantome, besides a host of minor 
luminaries. But if she had many friends and panegyrists, she had 
likewise numerous enemies and detractors; and to discover how 
busy scandal was with her reputation, we have only to turn to the 
pages of the Divorce Satiriquc, published under the name and with 
the sanction of her husband, Henri IV. 

Her life, a mixture of devotion and levity, presents ono. of those 



SG CKICIITON'. 

singular nnomalios of wh'K:li licr sex liavo occasionally fiirnislicd 
examples; and which, witliout calling her sincerity in question — 
(for ]\rarguerite, though profligate, Avas not a dissembler, like the 
rest of her famil}-) — can only be reconciled upon such grounds 
as those on Avhich Shelley seeks to harmonise the enormities, 
nnd yet continuous prayers and prostrations, of the ruthless 
Ccnci. " Religion," he acutely remarks, " in a Catholic has no 
connexion with any one virtue. The most atrocious villain may 
be rigidly devout, and, without any shock to established faith, 
confess himself to be so. lieligiou pervades intensely the whole 
frame of society, and is, accordini; to the teniper of the mind which 
it inhabits, a passion, a persuasion, an excuse, a refuge ; never a 
check." ]\Iai*gueritc, we have observed, was no hypocrite — her 
undisguised excesses attest the very reverse. With her, religion 
was a passion. One half of her existence Mas abandoned to a 
round of indulgences — the other to exercises of devotion, or to what 
would bear the name of devotion. She woidd hear three masses a 
day — line Jiuute, Ics deux atitrcs petifes* — woidd communicate thrice 
a week, and perform sundry acts of self-inilicted penance ; but this 
inordinate zeal ollered no interruption to her irregularities; on the 
contrary, it appeared to lend piquancy to them. Satiated with 
amusement, she retired to pray with renovated fervour; and she 
issiK'd IVom her oratory with a new appetite for sin. 

Witli her after-sorrows we have no concern; nor with the darker 
period of her existence, wlicn, in the touching words of the poet- 
ical Jesuit, Lemoine, she became — 

Epoiise sans ('poux, ct roine sans royannie ; 
Vaine ombre du passti, grand el noble lantome. 

Our business is with the brighter portion of her career — ere care 
had stricken her, or sorrow robbed her of a charm. 

Of the grace and elegance of Marguerite de Valois in the dance, 
Brantomc has left us the most rapturous particulars. With lover- 
like enthusiasm he dilates upon her majestic carriage, and inde- 
scribable fascinations; an' the vivid portrait he has taken of the 
lovel}'- queen (sketched at some such scene as that wc arc now 
attempting to describe) blooms, breathes, and stands before us in 
all its original beavity and freshness — a splendid "phantom of 
delight," sparkling within that gallery of high-born dames and 
gallant cavaliers Avhich he has preserved for the gaze of the world. 

AVith Crichton's supremacy in the somewhat trilling, but then 
highly estimated art which 

Teacbetb lavoltas high, and swift corantos, 

with his perfect mastership of all its difficulties — (for in those days, 
when Italy, Spain, and Germany, and almost each province of 
France contributed their quota of figures and national peculiarities, 

• I'asfiuicT. 



MARGUERITE I)E VALOIS. 87 

tlie tlancc had its clifTicultics) -with Lis unequalled possession of all its 
graces, the reader, aware of the univci-sul scope of his accomplish- 
iTients, must be already acquainted. He was accounted the most pro- 
licient in the dance at a court, eacli member of -wliich would probably 
have been considered in the same important lii^ht in any other in 
Europe. Henri HI. was passior.ately fond of the amusement, and 
largely indulged in it. In earlier days, Catherine dc Mcdicis had been 
no less partial to the dance, and Marguerite dc Valois, as wo know, 
held it in high esteem. All the courtiers, therefore, emulous 
of distinction in their sovereign's eyes, bestowed unremitting 
attention upon this accomplishment, and it was no slight merit to 
eclipse in skill performers of such consummate ability. As in 
the hall of arms, the arena of learning, the tourney, the chace, or 
other exercises in which strength or dexterity is concerned — so in 
the ball-room Crichton outstripped all competitors. From the 
inimitable " constitution of his leg," it would scern, " that he was 
born under the star of a galliard." Terpsichore might have pre- 
sided at his nativity. 

It was Crichton's remarkable spirit, displayed in one of the wild 
and national dances of his own country, then Httle known, or re- 
garded as semi-barbarian in the polite court of France, and perliaps 
seen there for the first time when he undertook it, that first at- 
tracted the attention of the Queen of Navarro towards him, and 
afterwards riveted her regards. With Crichton, it was indeed that 
poetry of motion, that inspiration of look and gesture (terms idly 
applied in these later days to the performances of the hired artist), 
called into play by th.e agency of the dance, and giving to that 
light and graceful pastime its highest and most imaginative charac- 
ter. In him, the dance was not a medium for the display of bril- 
liant and faultless execution of paces, and flourishing of limb. 
His action — his itnpersnnation, we miglit almost sav, of the melody 
by which his movements were guided — was fanciful, inspiriting, 
liarmonious, as the melody itself We question whether the 
pyrrhic, or enoplian dance of old, or hyporchematic measure were 
ever executed with more I'ervour and inspiration, or produced 
more thrilHng efiects upon the beholdeis than Crichton's perform- 
ances. The same ease — the same unconscious grace, which 
accompanied his demeanour on the parade, followed him in the 
volte, the bransle, or the pazzamcno. In each, like mastery was 
exhibited — in each were the various involutions required preserved ; 
but, change the figure as often as lie might, one expression pervaded 
ail — in that expression, unattainable by other aspirants, resided his 
superiority. 

Whether upon the present occasion Crichton felt inspired by 
the presence and acclamations of the vast assemblage — the gaze of 
which he felt was fixed upon him — or whether he was resolved 
to show how inexhaustible Avere his energies, we know not; but he 
appeared to surpass himself Such was the springy liglitncss with 



88 CRTCIITOX. 

Avliich he bounded throupli tlic rapid Navavroisc (a species of \valtz 
peculiar to the pleasant land from which it derived its name), that 
his foot scarcely seemed to touch the iloor, or if it did alight upon it, it 
■was only as Antaeus acquired fresli vigour fioni liis mother earth, to 
gain elasticity from the momentary contact. A movement so rapid 
and whirling as to have turned the heads of any less practised than 
the admirable Scot and his royal partner, brought the dance to a 
spirited and striking conclusion. 

All etiquette was forgotten. An irrepressible excitement took 
possession of the spectators — rivals and bravus resounded on all 
sides — the burnished roof of the grand saloon re-echoed with the 
plaudits, and the cflcct produced upon the courtly throng by the 
brilliant achievements of the distinguished couple, seemed to be 
precisely similar to that which results from the most electrilying 
eilects of the divinities of the ballet. 

Never had Maiguerite apj)eared so animated; even her dames of 
honour were surprised at her unusual elation. " INIon dieu ! I have 
never seen her majesty execute that dance with so much spirit since 
I first beheld it," said La Fosseuse, " when lier partner was Henry 
of Navarre, and the occasion her own espousal." 

" Her majesty has all the air of a bride now," returned La 
liebours, pensively. This fair demoiselle, whom IMarguerite inher 
IMemoirs terms '"'' une Jille. malkuum', qui ne viuimoit yxis^^ became 
siiortly afterwards the chief favourite of Henri of Navarre. It 
might be presentiment. 

'• Poll !" replied La Torigni, " I remember the night La Fosseuse 
speaks of well. By my reputation, I have reason to do so. Henri 
of Navarre was a mere lump of rusty armour compared with the 
Chevalier Crichton, who vaults in the dance as if he had stolen the 
wings of Icarus. Nor does Madame Marguerite appear insensible 
to the change. Slie look like a bride, ma foi ! you ought to knov/ 
better La Kebours. Even if she have it not, your bride is sure to 
allcct a bashfulness, and you cannot lay any excess of that sort to 
Madame Marguerite's charge at the present moment." 

"Why no," replied La Kebours, "not exactly; but Henry 
makes a charming partner." 

" As to the spirit with which she dances," continued the sprightly 
Torigni, "her nuptial ball was nothing to it. But what say you? 
You recollect that night, I dare say, Abbe de Brantome ?" 

" Perfectly," replied Brantome, wdth a significant glance, " tlitn 
it was Mars, imxo Apollo and Venus are in conjunction." 

"While ^Marguerite de Valois remained panting within Crichton's 
arms with one hand retained within his own, and her waist still 
encircled by the other — with her eyes, to the neglect of all observers, 
passionately fi.xed upon his gaze, a masked cavalier, enveloped in a 
black domino, and wearing a hat surmounted by sable plumes, 
accompanied by a dame whose features were concealed by a violet- 
coloured vizard, took up a position opposite to them. 



MARGUEKITE D£ VALOIS. 89 

"Do you note their looks ? Do you murk t'iieir carcssiuo- 
hands ?" asked the cavahcr of his companion. 
" I do — I do ?" was her reply. 
" Look again." 

*' My eyes dazzle — I can see no longer. 
" You are satisfied, then ?" 

*' Satisfied, oh ! my head burns — my heart throbs almost to 
bursting — horrible emotions possess me. Heaven give me strength 
to conquer them — prove — prove him false — prove thai — and — " 

" Have I not proved it? No matter; you shall licar liitn avow 
his perfidy with his own lips, shall behold Jiiin seal it with his 
kisses. Will that content you ?" 

The maiden's reply, if her agitation permitted her to make any, 
was unheard in the din of a fresh burst of music, which struck up 
in answer to a wave of Du Halde's wand. The grave and some- 
what grandiose character of the strain, announced an accompani- 
ment to the Pavanne d'Espagne, a dance not inaptly named after 
the strutting bird of Juno, which had been recently introduced 
from the court of Madrid into that of Paris, by the ambassador of 
Philip II., and which, in consequence of the preference entertained 
for it by IMarguerite de Valois, was, notwithstanding that its 
solemn and stately pace harmonised more completely with the 
haughty carriage of the grandees of Spain than with the livelier 
bearing of the French noblesse, now greatly in vogue amongst the 
latter. 

La Pavanne d'Espagne, which had some of the stiffness with 
more than the grace of the old mhniet de la cuiir, presented a strong 
contrast to the national dance that preceded it. In the one all Avas 
whiil; velocity, abandonment ; in the other, dignity, formality, 
gravity. Tlie first was calculated to display the spirit and energy 
of the performers ; the second exhibited their grace of person and 
majesty of deportment. 

As, in accordance with the haughty prelude to the figure — a 
slow martial strain breathing of the proud minstrelsy of Old 
Castile, interrupted at intervals by the hollow roll of the ]\Ioorish 
atabal — he drew his lofty person to its utmost height, his eyes 
blazing with chivalrous fire, awakened by the vaunting melody, 
and his noble features lighted up with a kindred expression, the 
beholder might have imagined he beheld some glorious descendant 
of the Cid, or inheritor of the honours of the renowned Pelayo. 

Advancing towards the Queen of Navarre with a grave and pro- 
found salutation, he appeared to solicit the honour of her hand, to 
which courteous request Marguerite, who, lor the nonce, assumed 
all the hauteur and august coquetry of an infanta, disdainfully 
answered by conceding him the tips of those lovely fingers which 
Konsard had likened to the rosy digits of the daughter of the dawn. 
Here began that slow and stately procession from which the dance 



00 CEICHTON. 

obtained its designation, and in which its ciiief grace consisted. 
Hand in hand they sailed down the saloon 

** Like two compaHioii barks on Cyndiis' wave," 

a prouder couple never graced those festal lialls. With a pace 
majestic as tliat of a king about to receive the crown of his ances- 
try, Crichton pursued liis course. Murmurs of admiration 
marked his steps. 

Nor was Marguerite de Valois without her share of admiration, 
though our gallantry may be called into question, if we confess that 
the meed of applause was chielly bestowed on Crichton. With the 
iair Queen of Xavarre, we have observed, tiiis dance was an espe- 
cial favourite ; and justly so, for it was the one in which she most 
excelled. In its slow measure the spectator had full leisure to 
contemplate the gorgeous majesty and resplendent loveliness of her 
person ; in its pauses, her surpassing dignity and queenly grace 
were brought into play } in its gayer passages — for even this grave 
dance had a pleasant admixture of spirit (the sunshine stolen from 
its clime) — her animation and fire were shown ; while in its 
liaughtier movements was manifested the fine disdain she hnew so 
well how to express. 

" By Apollo ! " exclaimed Ronsard, as soon as the vivats which, 
followed the conclusion of the Pavanne had died away, " the whole 
scene we have just witnessed reminds me of one of those old and 
golden legends wherein we read how valour is assailed by sorcery, 
and how the good knight is for a time spell-bound by the enthral- 
ing enchantress." 

" Certcs, la bella Alcina was but a prototype of Marguerite/* 
said Brant(jme. 

*' And Orlando of Crichton," added La Torigni. 

" Or Kinaldo," continued La Fosseuse. " He is the very mirror 
of chivalry." 

"He must have more skill than Ulysses to break the snares of 
his Circe," whispered lionsard. 

" True," replied Brantome, in the same tone. *' It was not with- 
out good reason that Don Juan of Austria said to me when he first 
beheld her peerless charms: — ' Your Queen's beauty is more divine 
than human, but is she the more likely to drag men to perdition 
than to save them ! ' " 

Turning then to the maids of honour, the abbe added aloud — 
" The mistake in all matters of enchantment appears to be, that 
your knight errant should ever desire to burst such agreeable bon- 
dage. To me it would be like awakening from a pleasant dream. 
Ah ! were there some good fairy left who would tempt me — you 
should see whetlier I would resist or seek to be dlsencliantcd ! " 

" Well, of all agreeable dances commend me to the branslo," 
eaid La Torigni, as that figure was struck up. 

"Apropos of temptation, I suppose," said Brantome ; " for 7^ on 



MARGUERITE DE VALOIS. 91 

novcv look so captivating: as when engaged in it, Si'nioni Torl'mi, 
i'or my part I envy the Clicvalier Cricliton his success in the dance 
more than his bonnes fortunes. I never could accomplish a pas^ 

" A faii.r pas, I suppose you mean, abbe," whispered Ronsard. 

" Indeed ! " returned La Torigni, " suppose you take a lesson 
now. Wliat say you to a turn in the bransle ? That is the easiest 
figure of all. Our royal mistress has disappeared -with her all- 
accomplished Scot, so my attendance will be dispensed with for 
the present. We shall be free from interruption. Never mind 
your being a little lame — the bransle is tlie best specific in the 
• world for the rheumatism. Come along. Monsieur dc llonsard, 
jour gout I know will not permit you, or I would bid you give 
your hand to La Fosseuse ; but you can at least amuse her with a 
mot, or perhaps improvise a sonnet for laer entertainment, upon the 
pretty sight we have just witnessed ; and the more you stuff it with 
loves and doves, kisses and blisses, gods, goddesses, and heroes, till 
like a cup of hydromel it overflow with sweetness, the better she 
will like it. Your hand, abbe." And, despite his remonstrances, 
the laughing Florentine dragged the reluctant Brantome to the 
bransle. 

Slowly, meanwhile, glided along Crichton and the Queen of 
Navarre. Neither spoke — neither regarded the other — the bosoms 
of both were too full ; Marguerite's of intense passion — Crichton's 
of very different emotions. He felt the pressure of her arm — the 
throbbing of her bosom, but he returned not the pressure, neither 
did his heart respond to those ardent pulsations. A sudden 
sadness seemed to overspread his features ; and thus in silence they 
wandered along, inhaling new clouds of ilattering incense from each 
worshipping group they passed. 

Their steps were followed at a wary distance by three other 
masks, but this circumstance escaped their notice. Marguerite 
thought of nothing save her lover, and Crichton's mind was othcr- 
Wise occupied. 

Anon they entered a small antichamber opening from the vesti- 
bule of the hall of entrance. This room, which was filled Avith the 
choicest exotics, and 'iUng around with cages containing squirrels, 
praTots, and other gaily plumaged birds, Avas for the moment de- 
serted even of the customary attendants. 

ISIargucrite glanced cautiously around her, and seeing the room 
vacant, applied a small golden key, wliich she took from her girdle, 
to a concealed door, in the side wall. The valve yielded to the 
touch — thick tapestry then appeared, which being raised, the pair 
found themselves within a dimly-lighted chamber, the atmosphere 
of which struck upon their senses, as they entered, warmly and 
odoriferously. A prie-dieu, cushioned with velvet, stood at the 
further end of the apartment. Before it, was placed a golden cru- 
cifix. Over the crucifix, hung a Madonna by Raphael; the glow- 
ing colouring of which admirable picture was scarcely discernible by 



92 cuiCTiToy. 

the faint liglit of die two perfume- Jistillinpf lumps su?pcncled on 
eitlier side. This room "was the oratory of the Queen of Navarre. 

Scarcely had the lovers gained this retreat when the valve was 
opened noiselessly behind them — airnin as cautiously cosed — and 
three persons who had thus stealthilv obtained admission to the 
chamber, posted themselves in silence beliind the tapestry, the folds 
of whicli being slightly drawn aside, enabled them to discern 
>Yhatever might be passing within the oratory. 



CIIAFrEil YI. 

THE O K A T O n Y. 

Mane. Tu cs jcunc, il y a heaiicoup de belles fcmmes qui te rcsjardcnt tort 
duuctment, je le sais. Entin, on se lassc d'une reine coniine li'une autre. 

Victor Hugo. Marie Tudor. 

" CinCHTOX, mon beau chevalier," exclaimed jNfarguerite do 
Valois, raising her beautil'ul iiead, and gazing Ibndly and inquiringly 
into his liice, " why are you thus silent and pre-occupied? Amid 
the prying assemblage we have quitted — witli all eyes upon us and 
all ears eager to catch our liglitcst whisper — it were well to observe 
such caution ; but here this reserve is needless. Is it that your 
quarrel Avith the queen, my mother, gives you uneasiness ? I 
cautioned you not to arouse her anger, but you were wilful, and 
would not listen to my entreaties. Catherine de Medicis is an 
enemy to be feared ; but you need have no fear of her. Dread not 
her poignards — her poisons. I will watch over your safety, and 
arrest tiie secret steel, should she point it at your breast. I v.ill 
prove an antidote against the infected chalice, should its venom touch 
your lips. Be not afraid." 

" I am not afraid, jNIarguerite. I will trust to my own arm for 
deliverance from your mother's assassins, while, for preservation 
from her poisons, I am content to rely upon forbearance from her 
banquets." 

" That were a vain precaution. The scarf you wear, the flower 
you smell, the very atmosphere you breathe, may become the agent 
of death. Even 1 might be the instrument of her vengeance." 

" You, IMarguerite !" 

" Unconsciously, but you should not fdl alone. I will save vou, 
or share your late." 

" How can 1 repay this devotion?" replied Criehton, in a tone 
as if he struggled with some deep and suppressed emotion ; *' I am 
imworthy of this solicitude. Believe me, I have no fears for my 
own safety — no dread of poisons, be they subtle as those of Parv- 
sades, or Locusta. I possess an assured safeguard against their 
baneful effects." 

'* So thought Bernardo (jirulumo, yet he perislied by the drugs 



THE ORATORY. 93 

of Cosmo dc Mcdicis. His Avas a liglit ofTence compared with 
yours. But a remedy does exist— a counter-poison. Henri and I, 
alone, possess it. I have sworn to use it only for the preservation 
of my own existence. You are my existence. You shall have the 
phial." 

" You shall not break your vow, my gracious queen. Na}^, I 
am resolute in this. For me, I repeat, your mother's Avratli has no 
terrors. If it be the will of Heaven that I must fall by the assassin's 
dagger, or by more secret means, I sliall not shrink IVom my fate, 
but meet it as beseems a brave man. But my destiny, I feel, 
is not yet fulfilled. Much remains to be accomplished. My 
aspirations, my energies, all tend towards one great end. Fate 
may crown mc with success, or crush me in the outset of my 
career. I can have no fore-knowledge, though your mother's 
starry lore would tell you otherwise — nor, it may be, free-agency. 
No matter ! My aim is fixed — and thus much of the future, 
mcthinks, I can read — I shall not perish by the hand of Catherine 
dc Mcdicis." 

" Is not your destiny accomplished, Crichton ? Are not your 
brows bound with laurels ? Have you not this day achieved more 
than man ever achieved before you? Are yon not girt with 
lioncurable knighthood ? What more remains to be performed ?" 

" Much — much — " 

" Have you not my love — my devotion — a queens idolatry, 
Crichton ? You are insatiate in your ambition, seigneur." 

" I am insatiate, or how should my desires extend bcvond this 
moment i 

" Crichton, you no longer love me. Beware — beware; I love 
you fervently, but I can hate in the same degree. I am by nature 
jealous. The Mcdicis*" blood within my veins, fires me to love with 
desperation, or to resent as strongly. As yet I only love. But if 
I discover aught to confirm my suspicions — if I find you have 
breathed Avords of passion to another, iny riA^al dies, though her 
destruction cost me my kingdom — that Avhich I hold dearer than 
my kingdom — yourself. I am a queen, and if I am Avronged, Avill 
have a queen's revenge." 

" Why this sudden frenzy. Marguerite? — Avhose rivalry do you 
apprehend ?" 

" I know not — I Avould not knoAV. I look around in dread. At 
the fete I am beset Avith fears — here I am assailed Avith new agonies. 
My life is one long pang of jealousy. Have I a rival, Crichton? 
— AnsAver me — Oh ! if I have one, let her avoid my presence." 

" Calm yourself, Marguerite. — Banish these idle fancies — " 

" Are they fancies, Crichton? — are they idle? IMcthinks I feel 
my rival's presence Avithin this chamber — here — here." 

*' Shall I chide or smile at your folly, my queen ?" 

" Again I ask you, are my suspicions groundless? Call to mind, 
jour attentions to the Demoiselle Esclairmonde — Avere they not 



94 CRicnxoN. 

sufTicicnt to awnkcn doubts as to your sincerity to mc ? 0]\ 
Crlcluon ! I have been anxious — miserable since that night; but^ 
I am easier now." 

" Right — right, sweet Marguerite — but, as you have alluded to 
lier, n^.ay I, without reviving your apprehensions, inquire whether 
Esclairnionde is at the fete to-night ?" 

" She is," replied ^Marguerite, with a smile. 

" I did not observe lier," said Cricht<jn, with affected indif- 
ference. 

" Yet she was at no great distance from you." 

*' With the queen your mother ?" 

" Witli the king my brother." 

*' With ]',im !" ejaculated Cricliton. 

" She stood by Henri's side when ho bestowed tliis decoration of 
the Saint Esprit upon you." 

" The violet mask!" 

*' You liave guessed shrewdly." 

" And she remained with the king when wc quitted the grand 
saloon !" 

Despite his efforts to control himself, Cricliton was unable to 
conceal his emotion. With sarcastic levity Marguerite replied to his 
question. " Esclairmonde, I must inform you, has, upon her present- 
ation to-night, achieved a conquest no less important than that 
of his majesty. He is evidently enthralled by her; and (jealousy 
apart) it must be owned she is sufliclently charming to warrant his 
sudden fascination. AVith Henri it was decidedly love at first sight, 
which, ridicule it as one may, is the only true love after all. Since 
she tendered her hand to the king, he has never quitted it; and 
to judge appearances, he has already made no inconsiderable pro- 
gress in her affections." 

*' Ha!" ejaculated Cricliton. 

" She will have the post of honour at the banquet," continued 
JSIarguerite, '''and will be henceforth the reigning favourite, with 
power absolute over all the court. To speak truth, I am not sorry 
for it, as it nips a rival in the bud, though the queen, my mother, 
■who, I suspect, had other intentions with the demoiselle, may not 
entirely approve of the arrangement." 

" Marguerite, I implore you to return to the fete." 

'• Crichton, you love this girl," cried jNIarguerite, furiously. 

" I Avould save her from dishonour. Hear me, Marguerite ! — 
Amid the tainted atmosphere of this court, one pure fair flower 
blooms and is seen for a moment — the next, a rude hand grasps it 
— scatters its fragrance to the wind, and levels it with the Avceds 
that grow rife around it. Esclairmonde is that flower — save her 
from the spoiler's hand. Have pity on her youth — her innocencci. 
She is unfriended — alone. Be to her a preserver, my gracious 
queen. You know what Henri's love is — that he spares' nouLdit to 
gratify his desires. Save her— save her !" 



THE OKATOIir. 95 

" For you — never — " 

•' INlistake me not — let not your jealousy confound my appre- 
}icnsion for her safety with otlier feelings, which, even if I enter- 
tained them, Avould weigh little with me in comparison with my 
anxiety for her preservation." 

" I am sure you love her. Now hear we, Crichton. My husband, 
Henri of Navarre, demands my presence. This morn a messenger 
arrived irom the camp at Pau. My reply depends on you. Will 
you form one of my escort? Say you will do so, and I will be 
myself the bearer of my answer." 

'•Marguerite, to what end should I go thltlier? I respect the 
bravery of Henri of Navarre — I admire his chivalrous character, 
his bonhommie, his frankness; but having pledged myself to your 
royal brother's cause, how can I enlist imder hostile banners '.' I 
cannot quit the court of France." 

" Do not equivocate, messire, you cannot quit Escluirmonde — 
you refuse to accompany me." 

"Torture me not thus, Marguerite; for pity's sake, if you will 
not go with me to the fete, sufler me to return alone." 

"Go." 

" Marguerite, farewell. I quit you but for an instant." 

" For ever." 

" For ever ! Marguerite, did I hear aright ?" 

*' Stay !" cried the queen, after a momentary but fearful struggle 
•with herself, "stay 1 command — entreat you — return not to the 
fete. Have pity on me, Crichton." 

" This delay is cruel — even now I niay be too late to warn her 
of her danger. Henri mav triumph if I tarry longer. Marguerite, 
J tike my leave." 

" It is true !" exclaimed jMargueritc, Avith a look of unutterable 
agony, " my frightful suspicions are conlirmed. You have never, 
never loved me — ingrate — deceiver — never — never — " 

Crichton Avould have spoken. Marguerite, however, impetu- 
ously interrupted him. " Do not forswear yourself. You cannot 
deceive me longer. Ah, Crichton ! Is it possible you can have 
forgotten — or that you are willing to forget — my tenderness ? 
Is it possible? but I will no longer indulge this weakness — leave 
me, — go — go I" 

Crichton appeared irresolute. jNIargueritc continued in the same 
vehement tone " But dare not to approach your minion Esclair- 
monde — dare not, as you value her life, breathe aught of love or 
counsel within her ear, for, by my hope of Heaven, if you do so, 
she survives not the night. Now you are at liberty to depart — 
yet stay, you shall not go hence alone. After what I have said, 
1 shall be curious to see how you will attempt to succour this dis- 
tressed damsel." 

" Mort Dieu! Margot, you shall not go far to witness it," 
sa7d Henri, thrusting aside the tupcstry, and dragging Esclairmonde 



9G CRICIITON'. 

Ibrward. *' Your own appointment, you perceive, lias not. Loon 
■without witnesses.'' 

" Henri !"' ejaculated Marguerite, sternly, so soon as she recovered 
her surprise. 

" Ksclainnonclc !" exclaimed Crichton, recoiling in astonishment 
and displeasure. 

A momentary pause ensued, during which each party regarded 
the other in doubt and silence. Tlio king alone appeared easy 
and unconcerned. He was at home in scenes like the present, 
and hummed laughingly a light air. Crichton at length spoke. 

" Is it customary, sire," he said, in a tone of irony, " with the 
King of France to play the eaves-dropper? I have heard of such 
practices in Arabian story, but the incident is new to the annals of 
your realm." 

"In love and war all ctratagems are fair," replied Henri, gaily, 
** and I have the sanction of precept and custom, if I cared lor 
cither, for my conduct. All that I desired was to satisfy Esclair- 
monde of your perfidy. Yon arras afforded us an excellent screen 
— not a word of your tttc-atcte, or of our sister's reproaches 
escaped us. 1 thank 3'ou for your good opinion of myself ; 1 thank 
you for your kind intentions in respect to Esclairmonde, and I 
thank you still more for proving yourself so satisfactorily the 
inconstant she conceived you to be. Voilo, tout, chevalier!" 

"I congratulate your majesty upon your address," returned 
Crichton. "Few scruples appear to stand in the way of your 
inclinations." 

" Pardieu ! compere," exclaimed Chicot, who formed part of the 
group, and who, with dilliculty had liitherto restrained himself 
from interference, " our gossip, Henri, is too great a king not to be 
exemjit from vulgar weaknesses. Delicacy has never been classed 
amongst his foibles." 

*' And you, Esclairmonde," said Crichton, somewhat reproach- 
fully, " you have condescended to this — " 

" Meanness, you would say," interrupted Marguerite, scornfully. 
" Give her conduct its proper term — none else will suit 
it. My heart told me she was beside us. The instinct of hate 
never deceives." 

"You have, then, overheard our converse, demoiselle?" said 
Crichton. 

" I have,'' replied Esclairmonde, blushing deeply. 

" And you arc aware of the peril in which you stand,"" added 
Crichton, looking significantly at Henri as he spoke. " One step 
more, and all is irretrievable." 

" I know it," replied Esclairmonde, distractedly. 

"Esclairmonde!" persisted Crichton, "by all that is sacred in 
your regards, I conjure you listen to my counsels — pause — reflect — 
or you arc lost for ever." 

" There is something of the Huguenot about you after aii. 




Tile OraLorv 



THE ORATORY. 97 

Cricliton," interposed Henri. "You preach in a style worthy of 
an Anabaptist, or Antinomian, and not hke the easy gaUiard I have 
liitherto supposed you. Esclairmondc is infinitely indebted to you 
for your a<j:reeable diatribe; but she has had ample time for reflection 
behind yon arras, and her choice is made. The demoiselle prefers 
a royal lover, with a heart, a court, rank, title, power, almost hall' a 
throne to oiler her, to one wlio has none of these gifts, not even an 
undivided heart to bestow. Are you answered, messirc ?' 

" Esclairmondc !" exclaimed Crichton. 

" IJeware, insensate madman !" cried Marguerite. 

" Crichton !" exclaimed Esclairmondc, suddenly extricating 
herself Irom the king's grasp, and throwing herself into his arms. 
" To yoiu' protection I cummit mysell'." 

" And with my life will I defend you," returned Cnchton, 
clasping her to his bosom. 

" I tremble no longer to avow my love : I am yours for ever. 
I will brave all. We can at least die together !" exclanned Esclair- 
mondc. 

" It were bliss to do so," answered Crichton. 

*' Confusion!" exclaimed the king, "Chicot, oiu" guard." The 
jester reluctantly quilted the oratory. 

" Be your wish gratified," exclaimed iMargucrlte, In a tone of 
bitter derision ; " perish together, since you wish it. Henri, I 
crave a boon from you." 

" Whatisit, iMargot?" 

" It Is this," replied Marguerite, kindling Into fury as she spoke: 
" that the work of vengeance may be intrusted to my hands ; that I, 
who have witnessed their transports, may witness, also, their pangs. 
I must have blood, Henri — blood — Ins blood ! Call in the guard. 
Leave me alone with them — I will see it done. It will gladden me 
to see a sword drawn." 

" I doubt it not, Margot," replied Henri, who had now re- 
sumed all the Indillerence he had previously exhibited ; " as Du 
Guast's epitaph can testify. I am In no mood for butchery. If I 
should need an executioner, I avIU call in your aid. But the sword 
is scarcely required on tlils occasion. A word will ic.;iill the Che- 
valier Crichton to his senses." 

" Be It as you please," replied Marguerite, fiercely. " My own 
particular wrong shall not pass unavengcl." 

" Chevalier Crichton," said Henri, advancing toward the Scot, 
and, fixing a steadfast glance upon him, addressing him at the same 
time in a tone of high and prince-like courtesy; " need 1 remind 
you of your voluntary proffer of obedience to my inandates ? The 
time is arrived when 1 hold It fitting to claim fulfilment of your 
pledge." 

" What do you demand, sire ?" 

" Possession of this damsel." 

H 



98 CllICIlTON. 

'* Cileliton !'' slu-R'kocl K^clairnioude, clini^iiiL;- more closely to 
jicv lover, " kill me rather than yield me to linn."' 

" I have his word," said Henri, coldly. 

"lie lias! — he has I"" exclaimed Crichton. in accents of despe- 
ration. " Take back your title — take back your honours, sire, if 
they arc to be bought by this sacrifice. Take my life — my blood 
— though it How drop by drop — but do not extort fuliilment of a 
rash promise which, if you claim, you pronounce a sentence upon 
two heads I'ar more terrible than death !" 

" I ain to understand, then, messire," returned Henri, scornfully 
regarding liina ; " that your Avord, rashly ])lighted, is not held 
binding on your supple conscience. 'Tis well. I now know how 
to proceed." 

" Would your majesty have me break these clinging arms, and 
hurl her I love senseless at your feet ? Call your guards, sire, and 
let them unloose her clasp. 1 will not oppose your mandate." 

" 'Twere better to do so," said JNIargueiite, "or I will stab the 
minion in his arms." 

" Peace," cried Henri, " she relents even now." 

" Crichton, your word is past," said Esclairmondo, " you cannot 
protect me." 

'• Mv arm is paralysed," replied her lover, in a tone of anguish. 

" \\'hen that vow was uttered," continued Esclairmonde, with 
dreadful calmness ; " I shuddered for its consequences. Nor was I 
deceived. AVho would place his dagger in the assassin's hand, and 
hope for mercy ? He to whom you pledged your knightly word 
exacts its fulfilment — and I know he is inexorable. Obedience is all 
that remains : and that yoti may, withotit remorse, obey him, I will 
voluntarily surrender myself. Think of nie no more — you must 
not think of me, Crichton — and, by the love you have professed 
for me, 1 beseech you not to attempt my rescue." 

" Did I not say she relented," exclaimed Henri, triumphantly 
taking her hand. " As to you, C'hevalier Crichton, I am really 
sorry for your disappointment ; but I trust the order you are 
graced with will, in some degree, content you for the loss of your 
mistress." 

" Well has it been said — place no iaitli in princes !" exclaimed 
Crichton, tearing the jewelled badge of the Saint Esprit from his 
neck, and trampling it beneath his feet, "their gifts, like that of 
Nessus, are bestowed only to destroy. Perish these accursed chains 
that fetter my soul's freedom, and with them perish all sense of 
obligation." 

" Grand merci !" rejoined Henri, coldly, " my favours must bo 
of little worth if they can be thus readily set aside, but I shall 
take no ollence at your want of temper, chevalier. A little rc- 
fi ;ction will make you calmer. You Scots arc apt to be hot- 
i. -aded, I have heard, and I now experience the truth of the 



THE OIIATOIIY. 99 

assertion. I make all excuses for you. Your situation is mortifyinf;^, 
but n;ive yourself" no fiu-thcr uneasiness, I will answer for the demoi- 
selle's safety. Allons ! To the banquet." 

So sayini::, lie applied a silver whistle to his lips. At the 
call, the valve was suddenly throwii o|)en, the tapestry drawn 
aside, and through the door appeared the anti-chaiuber lull of 
lights, with a file of valets and halberdiers arranged on either sulo 
of the entrance. At the same moment Chicot entered the oratory, 
A peculiar smile played on Henri's features. 

" For what do we tarrv ?" he asked, lilancins; exultini'lv^ at 
Criehtou. 

" For my guidance, I conclude," replied Chicot, stepping 
forward ; " nothing but Folly will serve to direct your majesty's 
course." 

''• Mechant," exclaimed Ilenri. And passing Esclairmonde's arm 
within his oAvn, he quitted the apartment. 

Ciic^hton stood for some moments like one suddenly stunned, 
with his face buried in his hands, lie was aroused by a light touch 
upon the shoulder. 

" Marguerite," he exclaimed, returning the gaze of the Queen 
of Navarre, with a terrible look, " why do you remain here? Is 
not your vengeance complete? You have sacrificed virtue, pure 
alfection, at the shrine of depravity — are you not content ? Do 
you remain to taunt me, or do you pant for my blood ? Take this 
dagger and plunge it into my heart." 

" No, Criehton," returned Marguerite, " I will have nobler 
vengeance. I will liberate this maiden from her tliraldum." 

" Amazement."" 

" I will free her from Henri's snares. But if I do this, you 
must swear by the Virgin who regards us," pointing to the 
Madonna, " never more tu regard her as a lover." 

Scarcely Avere the words uttered, than Chicot appeared. 

'* His majesty commands your instant presence at the banquet," 
lie said, almost breathless Avith haste. 

" Hence !" exclaimed Marguerite. 

'' Her majesty, the queen-mother — "" added the jester, in an 
under-tone. 

And as he spoke, Catherine de ]\Iedicis abruptly entered the 
oratory. 

•■•Daughter," said Catherine, "I have sought you throug-houfc 
the grand saloon. Wliy do I find you here, and thus attended.'" 

"Madame," interposed Marguerite. 

" I would speak with you alone — dismiss this gentleman," 
■continued Catherine, glancing haughtily at Cricliton. 

"Leave us. Chevalier Criehton," said Marguerite, and she 
added, in a lower tone, " remember what I have said." 

Criehton had scarcely gained the antichamber when he per- 
'Ceived Chicot. A few hasty words passed between them. 

II :i 



100 CRICHTOX. 

" And thou apprehendest the abduction of the Gclosa ?" said 
Crlchton. " The guard report, thou sayest, tliat Huggieri's tower 
has been invested by an armed band requiring her deUveranco 
to them? Dillicukics muhiply — no matter, I would be equal to 
any emergency. AVhcre is tlic mask ?" 

'' As -well might you pick out a domino in carnival time as 
discern hiin amidst yon crowd of revellers. No one noted his 
approach, nor did any one, that I can learn, witness his departure. 
For my part," added Chicot, pointing downwards, " I think he 
disappeared as another black gentleman is said to be in the habit of 
taking liis departure. Were 1 you, gossip, I would have my sword 
blessed by some holy priest ere I ventured to engage with him on 
tlie morrow, or carry a scapulary, an Agnus Dei, or other sacred 
relic beneath my pourpoint." 

"Pshaw!' exclaimed Crichton. "lie is a mere mortal foe. 
But hence, good gossip — to the banquet hall — account for my 
absence in the best way thou canst to his majesty, I will be there 
anon." 

" INIakc yourself easy on that score, gossip; I will divert his in- 
quiries — but when you do appear at the banquet, bear in mind what 
1 said respecting Catherine's kind intentions towards you." 

" I shall not Hiil to do so, and in the meantime am greatly in- 
debted to thy zeal." 

And with this he quitted the antichamber. 

Chicot looked after him an instant, and shook his head. "Sang 
do cabres !' he muttered, '* it has turned out precisely as I antici- 
pated. No good ever comes of making love to two women at the 
same time, especially when one of them has the fortime to be a 
queen. But, not content with this, tliis galliard, Ibrsooth, must 
saddle himself with a third. I wish him well of it! But if he 
get clear of all these scrapes, and escape from the poisoned 
bowl of Queen Catherine, he Avill riclily deserve his title of the 
Admirable Crichton. Corbleu ! I have never seen such a picture 
of jealous rage as our own Queen of Navarre has just exhibited 
since I beheld the Sieur la INlole devour the plumes of his hat lor 
very fury, and Clermont D'Amboise break a bottle of ink upon his 
mistress's eyebrow with which she had indited a billet to a more 
favoured lover. After all, her jealousy is absurd. She has aU-eady 
had lovers enough to content an Isabel de Baviere, or a jNIarguerite 
de Bourgogne. What says our chronicle?" And Chicot hummed 
the following ditty :— 



THE ORATOUT. 101 

illargucn'tc* 
L 

ivlargiicrite, with parly wiles — 

Marguerite 
On light (.haritis ;.nd D'Antragiics smiles — -f* 

AJ argot, Maigiierite. 
Older grown, she t.ivours then, 
Smooth Maitigiies.iJ: aiui hlurt'Tiirerine. 

'J"he latter but a f'oolisli w5. 

AJargot, Marguerite en bas.'^ 
But no more these galhards please, 

Maigiieiite. 
Softly sues the gaUaut (iuise, 

Margiit, Marguerite. 
Guise succeeds, like God of war. 
Valiant Henri of Navarre ; 

Better stop, tiian further go, 
Margot, ^largueiite en haut. 

II. 
Loudly next bewails La Mole,] 

Marguerite, 
On the block his head must roll, 

Margot, Marguerite. 
Soon consoles herself again. 
With Brantome, Bussi,*! and Mayenne,** 

Uoon companions groa et j:raSf 

Margot, AJarguerite, en has. 
^^ ho shall next vour shiine adore. 

Marguerite? 
You have but one lover more, 

Margot, Marguerite! 
Crichton come^—ihapnux, the wise. 
You may well your cmiquest prize ; 

Bevond linn you cannot go, 

Margot, Marguerite en haut. 

Chanting these libellous strains as he went, Chicot slowly sought 
the banquet-hall. 

Scarcely another moment elapsed Avhen Catherine de Medicis, 
and Maruuerite, issued from the oratory. The features of the 
latter were pale as death, and their expression was utterly unlike 
that wliich they habitually wore. Catherine was unmoved, majes- 
tical, terrible. " Must it indeed be so, mother?" asked Marguerite, 
in a broken voice. 

* A catalogue of Marguerite's various amourettes will be found in the Eivorce 
Satirique, published under the auspices of her consort, Henri IV. More than half, 
however, are, most probably, scandal. 

t jNIarguerite was then of the tender age of eleven. 

t Colonel-General of the French infantry. Brantome has written liis iloge. 

§ 'i liis refrain is attributed to the IJuchesse de Guise. 

II The Sieur La jMole, surnamed " /.e Baludin de la Cour ;" beheaded by Charles 
IX., it is said, from jealousy. Mollis Vita, MolUor interitns. 

^ Bussi D'Amboise. — Fornios Vcncrig furiosi Mortis alunmiis. 

** The Due de MaAcnne, brother to the Due de Guise. 



J02 CRICIITON. 

" It 77iust,'' replied Catlierinc, Avitli deep emphasis. " Henri 
will, no doubt, as he is wont, carouse till dawn. By that tinn> the 
drauprht -will have done its duty. But if he survive, jNIaurcvert 
.and Ids band will await Cricliton's coming forth from the Louvre, 
and will complete the work. Shrink not from thy task. Our 
honour is at stake." 

They then separated. Catherine rejoined her attendants, 
and took the direction of the hall of entrance. Marguerite almost 
mechanically returned to the grand saloon. 

As Catherine j)ursued her course, she perceived a masked figure 
single itsell" irom the crowd at her approach. Its stature was that 
of Cricliton's challenger — tlie plumes were his — the sable cloak in 
all respects the same. Catherine paused. The iigure paused like- 
wise. " 'Tis he !" thought the queen-mother, and she despatched 
one of her pages to bid him to her presence. 

" What would your highness with me?" said the mask, advancing 
with a profound and courtly salutation, and addressing Catherine 
in Italian. 

" I was not deceived," thought Catherine; " it is the voice. I 
have sent for you, signore," she added, in a bland and gracioiis 
tone, and addressing the mask in the same language, "in order 
to express to you ere I quit the fete, the lively sense of gratitude 
I entertain for the important service you have rendered me. 
Assure yourself, your zeal shall not be overlooked. I am neither 
iniwilling, i;s Heaven be praised, I am not wholly unable to 
requite it." 

" Were your majesty aware of the natiu'e of the service I have 
rendered you, you woidd scarcely deem it deserving of your thanks," 
replied the mask. 

"Do you rate your adversary thus lightly then?" asked Cathe- 
rine, coniplaisantly. 

" I hold myself assured of conquest," 3-eturned the mask. 

" The migniard Crichton dupes liimself with like belief," rejoined 
the queen-mother, " but not with like assurance of success. The 
God of battles, I trust, will grant you victory, and enable you to 
overthrow your enemy." 

*' Amen !" returned the mask. 

" Fall back, messieurs," said Catherine, to her attendants, " I 
have much of moment to communicate to you," she added, 
assuming a more confidential manner. 

" Touching the Gclosa r" inquired the mask, anxiously — " speak 
madame." 

" Not here," replied Catherine, " non pu6 bene deliberar chi non 
e libero — I am about to return to my palace. You must not 
accompany me, nor quit the revel at the same time. Too much 
caution cannot be observed. The palaces of princes are all eyes — 
all ears." 

" Your glove, madame," interrupted the mask, stooping to raise 



THE OR ATOP. Y, 103 

tlie richly embroidered gauntlet, Avliich Catlicrlnc let full as if by 
accident. 

"Keep it," replied tlic quecn-motlier, smiling, " within its fold? 
you will find a key, the use of which I am about to explain to you. 
That glove, I may premise, displayed upon your cap, will obtain 
you admission to the Hotel de Soissons. Exchange no words with 
the attendants, but pursue your way alone. Enter the o-allery, 
Within a niche you will observe three statues. The central tigure, 
that of my lather, Lorenzo de ]Medicis, Duke of Urblno, revolves 
upon a pivot. Touch the spear within its grasp, and you will per- 
ceive a subterranean passage leading to my turret of observation. 
Apply the key I have given you to a door which will impede 
your farther progress, and you will find yourself in liug'deri's 
laboratory. An hour lience I shall expect you there." 

" And" the Gelosa?" 

" She is in my charge. Crlchton's idle boast I see Aveiglis witli 
you — but trust me neither i'orce nor stratagem Avill gain liiin 
entrance to that tower. Santa Maria ! so easy do I feel on the 
score that I will give him the girl if he finds means of reaching 
her prison." 

•' Yet he has adventured there already, madame," returned the 
mask, cagerlv, " and sliould he take you at your word, would vou 
part with your charge upon such easy terms ?" 

Catherine smiled. 

'•' Your majesty would almost appear to favour your enemy's 
designs,'^ continued the mask, jestingly. 

•' Non per amor ma per vendetta," returned Catherine, in the 
same tone. '' Crichton will never more venture there, signore, 
unless," added she, smiling, •' he come thither under ijoiir guidance. 
You shall know more of his destlnv an hour hence. INleanwhile, I 
must conclude our interview — we are observed. The banquet, 
too, awaits you. One caution on parting I bequeath you. His 
majesty hold his revels late, and it is often his custom to detain his 
guests. Should he issue his commands to close the doors of the 
oval chamber, you will find beneath the suit of hangings which 
represents Diana and her nymphs, a sliding door." 

" I understand, your majesty." 

" A rivedersi, signore." 

*' I kiss your mnjcsty's hand," replied the mask, with a profound 
obeisance. The figure then mingled with a group of revellers who 
approached them, and avIio were joyously hurrjdng towards the 
grand hall of banquet ; while Catherine, ushered forth by a con- 
course of pages and lacquej'S, entered her sumptuous litter and 
departed from the Louvre. 



101 CRICHTON. 



CHAPTER VII. 



THE ntizoAii. 



Mnffio. Oil! Ton contc dcs choses bicn etraiigcs de ccs soupers dc Borgia! 
Ascanio. Ce sunt des debauches offrcmjes, asaissomu'os d'tnipdisonnemens. 

ViCTOii Hugo. Lucrice Borgia. 

The llnck folds of the magnificent crimson hangings, heiglitencd 
■witli arabesques and flcur-de-lys of gold, that served in lieu of 
folding doors to separate the chief banqueting-hall from the grand 
saloon, had mcnnwliile, at a signal I'rom the mnjor-domo, been 
drawn aside; and the long and glittering board, arrayed Avith all 
the costly appliances of the royal feast, Avas suddenly exhibited to 
the view of the assemblage. 

The coup d'eeil was charming. Far as the eye could reach ap- 
peared walls festooned with ilowers fragrant and blooming as if tlie 
season had been latest spring. Mirrors, wreathed with Provencal 
roses, rellected the lustre of a thousand llnmbcaux, and multiplied 
the gleaming plate and star-like crystal with which the board was 
loaded. But the object on which the eye clnefly rested — not 
merely because it was the principal feature of attraction to the 
expectant guests, but by reason of its proud pre-eminence — was the 
table itself. It was a fitting place for the celebration of the com- 
bined rites of Ceres and Bacchus. Reared upon a massive platform 
— six feet at least above the floor — approached by a triple flight of 
steps — covered both as to its mimic stairs and summit, with cloths 
of dazzling whiteness {furt viiunonnemeitt dai/iasse, as wc learn from 
a contemporary authority) — this mighty table, extending the whole 
length of the vast hall, looked like a mountain of snow, or, perhaps, 
to vary the simile, like a prodigious frosted cake baked in the oven 
of Gargantua by the skilful Fouaciers de Lerne, the culminating 
point of which cake or mountain was formed by a cloudy repre- 
sentation of Olympus, in which Henri and his i'avouritcs figured 
as presiding divinities. 

A nearer approach to the table showed that the surface of its 
damask covering v.'as, according to the fashion of the court, ribbed 
in fmciful and waving plaits, so as to resemble the current of a 
stream crisped by a passing bnjcze. This stream bore upon its 
bosom a proud array of gold and silver vases, crystal goblets, and 
cups, all of rarest workmanship, and many wrought by the hand 
of th.c matchless Benvcnuto Cellini during his visit to Francis 
the First at Fontainebleau. In the words of brave Ben Jonson, 
there were 

Dishes of agate set in gold, and studded 

With emeralds, sapphiie*, hyacinths, and nihics. 

Nothing could exceed the macrnificence of the re'-/ast. 



TUE BEZOaR. 10.5 

The material of the feast was worthy of Apicius or Lueulhis. 
Every dainty that tlic most consunimate C])icure of the time could 
require, was to be met with in profusion. Fancy ran riot amid the 
countless covers, and the endless varieties of piquant viands dis- 
played on their removal. Pyramids of confectionery — piles of 
choicest fruit appeared at intervals; while, scented from afar like 
the aromatic groves of Lebanon, appeared antique-shaped urns 
steaming with the rich produce of tlie grapes of Crete, (^yprus, or 
Syracuse ; Avines being then, for the most part, drunk hot and 
spiced, or, as we should say, mulled. Here and there might be 
seen the ushers and chamberlains with their tleur-de-lys-covered 
wands of office — butlers with embossed llagons and salvers — troops 
of valets and pages — and, distributed at certain stations of the 
board, servitors, eacli with a napkin on his shouldei', and an 
enormous knife in hand, seemingly impatient for the signal of 
attack. 

Amid loud fanfares of trumpets, blended with the gentler notes 
of the hautboy and viol, Henri, accompanied by Esclairmonde, 
led the way to the banquet. The monarch, however, tarried 
not within the hall wc have described. His orgies Avere held 
in a smaller and more retired salle-a-manger, opening from 
the grand festal chamber, and separated from it by an arched 
door- way ; within which was placed a line of high gilded railing, 
an unequivocal evidence of exclusiveness on the part of the 
monarch, that called forth much sarcastic remark from his sub- 
jects ; and, amongst other pasquinades, gave rise to the following 
quatrain affixed to the ollensive partition — 

Piiisqn' Henri, roi des Francois, 
?J'en aime cjiie quatie f)ii trois, 
II i'aut quo ses trois on qiiatrtr 
Aillent ses enneniis combattre. 

To the king's private table his favourites only, and tha'r favourites, 
were admitted. Usheis of the least were stationed at tlie door with 
a list of the guests expected. No others were allowed to pass. 
Towards this room Henri now repaired, followed by a jocund troop 
of dames and revellers. He was in the most buoyant spirits, and 
descanted Avitli the greatest animation on all that passed. A sin- 
gular change seemed to have been wrought in the demeanour of 
Esclairmonde. She replied to Henri's lover-like assiduities Avith a 
vivacity bordering almost upon levity, Avhich a nicer obserA'er might 
have imputed to distraction and despair, but from Avhich Henri 
drew a iavourable augury. Her cheek Avas Hushed, and her eye 
shone Avith unAA-onted lustre. Once only, as she entered the oval 
chamber, of Avhich some rumours had reached even her ears, she 
started, and a slight shiver ran through her frame. But she in- 
stantly recovered herself. 

The oval chamber Avas a retreat (iitcd for a voluptuary. Heavy 



106 CRICHTON. 

■\vitli perfume, the atmospKere struck upon the senses of tlic guests 
as tliey entered, producinir a soft inebrlatinii' effect. Pages, equipped 
in lancil'ul attire, sustained torches, the odorous wax of wliicli shed 
a •svariu light upon the richly painted arras, charged "with the glow- 
ing legends of anti(|uity ; in which in the guise of nyin])hs and 
goddesses of old, were represented the chief beauties who had 
bloomed within the atmosphere of the Louvre. In this suit of 
tapestry the lovely Diane tie Poitiers was represented, as the god- 
dess her namesake, disporting after the chase : — in that, Venus 
Anadyomene sparkled from the sea-foam in the shape and linea- 
ments of La. 1-Jelle Peronnierc — the gallnnt Prancis, blowing his 
Avreathed conch as an attendant Triton. Here the lliscinating Pran- 
^'oisc de Poix bloomed as Egeria, Prancis appearing again as Numa 
— there the captivating IMarie Touchet, whose ana^rram '"Jo 
channe tout," so well described her, Avas given as Callirhoe ; her 
lover, Charles IX., being drawn as the hunter Eurimedon ; while 
in the last com]iartnicnt figured our bon Henri, Avho Avas repre- 
sented, strangely enough, as L^lysses surrendering himself to the 
blandishments of Circe, the features of the enchantress bearing evi- 
dent resemblance to those of his first mistress, la belle Chateauneuf. 
Upon the frescoed ceiling Avere depicted the silver fountains and 
dragon-AA'atched fruit of the Hesperides. 

The supper to Avhich Henri sat down Avas the triumph of his c/ief 
— the inimitable lierini — a cook, Avhose name deserves to be asso- 
ciated Avith that of Luther, Calvin, Knox, and other great reformers 
of the sixteenth century, the spirit of Avhich stirring age he repre- 
sents as strongly as the great Udc stamped the character of our OAvn 
time. The signal revolution Avhich took place in the science of 
cookery at this remarkable epoch may be clearly traced to the 
unwearying efforts of Berini. Comprehending the groAving AA-ants 
of his species, Avith the prescience of a true philosopher, he saw^ 
that a change must be eflected, and he accomplished it. He over- 
threw many old and tough abuses ; and if he increased the demand 
for good cheer, he did not diminish the supply. To him, amongst 
a thousand other gifts, mankind is indebted for the fricandeau, a 
discovery Avhich his biographer judiciously remarks,, required 7i/ie 
fjrande force de tcte ! Ho projected sauces so savoury that terms 
of alchemy Avere required to express their stimulative effects upon 
the system. These sauces, however, Ave regret to say, modern 
science has pronounced injurious. And, finally, he trampled down 
popular prejudices Avhich still remained in favour of the finger, 
and introduced the fork. 

The only stain attached to the memory of Lerini is, that he Avas 
an instrument of Catherine de Medicis — in other Avords, that ho 
occasionally mingled other compounds Avith his sauces than Avere 
prescribed by the recipes of his art. For the sake of so great a 
professor of so great a science avc hope this is mere scandal. No 
wonder, Avith dishes so exquisite placed before him, that a great 



THE BEZOAPw. 107 

man sliould occasionally die from indigestion ; but surely the cook 
is not to be blamed for an occurrence so very natural. Ratlier let 
us look to the goblet as the origin of ill. We have mentioned that 
the wines were at this time generally drunk mulled and spiced — ■ 
a practice which, wliile it presented abundant fiicilities for the 
■ insidious admixture of poisonous drugs, completely baffled all pre- 
cautions of tlie drinker. Leaning, therefore, to the side of genius, 
; we ai*e inclined to discredit this charge against the gifted Berini, 
; and impute the criminality of tlicse transactions to Catherine's 
cup-bearer, whose name is deservedly buried in oblivion. 

The repast, we liave said, was Berini's triumph. In conception 
— in execution it was perfect. The eye of the gourmand INIarquis 
de Villequier glistened as he gazed upon the dainty fare, llonsard 
insinuated that Avith such ragouts bel'ore him, it was easy to under- 
stand how VitcUius and Hcliogabalus exhausted an empire ; a 
remark which, luckily for the poet, did not reach the ears of the 
king. Henri, in foct, was too much engrossed by Esclairmondo 
to attend to the pleasantries of his guests. So soon as his majesty 
and the demoiselle, whom he honoured with his smiles, were 
served, the monarch graciously expressed his pleasure that tlie 
company, whom etiqutte had hitlierto kept upon their feet, should 
be seated. 

The carouse now began in earnest. The guests were few in 
number, consisting merely of some half dozen of Plenri's favourites, 
the dames of honour of Marguerite de Valois, one or two of 
Catherine's prettiest attendants, the Abbe de Brantome, and, as we 
have just hinted, the poet Ronsard. The latter, Avho was by no 
means inditferent to good cheer, as his gout testified, was trans- 
ported into a seventh heaven of delight wuth a ragout of ortolans 
with which the considerate Abbe had loaded his phite ; Villequier 
had fallen to with equal industry and zeal. Esclairmonde was 
placed at his majesty's right liand. On his left, two seat^ remained 
unoccupied. 

Behind the royal chair stood Chicot, and next to him another 
buffoon, whom we have hitherto omitted to notice: a strange mali- 
cious wight, yclept Siblot, infinitely more disliked by the courtiers 
than his companion in folly, Chicot, inasmuch as his jests were 
chiefly practical ones, and his liits for the most part made with his 
marotte. In face — in figure, and in agility, he resembled an ape. 
His head was clothed with sleek, sable, shining hair, like the skin 
upon a mole's back. His nature was so snarling and malignant 
that, when seized, he would snap and bite like an enraged cur, 
and even severest chastisement was found ineffectual to change 
or restrain his mischievous propensities. Siblot's costume only 
differed from that of his brother buffoon in its hues. Embroidered 
on the front and at the back with the royal blazon, the surcoat 
was of sable, slashed with white: his marotte was of ebony. Siblot 
was a favourite with Henri, who being a genuine lover of mischief, 



1C3 CRICnTOX. 

was diverted witli his monkey tricks; and he -vvould often lau^h 
till the tears ran down his cheeks at the confusion created by the 
butlbon amongst the grave ambassadors, the scarlet-capped eccle- 
siastics, and stately cavaliers, who attended his audiences. 

^leanwhile, the feast proceeded. Henri continued unremitting 
in his attentions to Esclainnoiule, who, though she coidd not be 
prevailed upon by all his importunities to partake of the banquet, 
maintained an exterior of perfect calmness and composure. Be- 
neath that mask of smiles was liidden acute suffering. The de- 
moiselle was, however, an object of envy to the other dames of the 
party, who attributed her indifference to the monarch's gallant 
regard to mere coquetry. 

" By my i'aith, monsieur le vicomte," said the gay Torlgni to 
Joyeuse, who was placed on her right hand, " the Demoiselle Esclair- 
monde is a finished coquette. Her coyness is admirably assumed. 
Where she can have acquired such arts I cannot imagine. But 
some people are born with a genius for their vocation — and conquest 
is hers, 1 suppose. She would have the king believe she has a 
perfect horror of his freedoms, i need not tell you that I have 
had some experience in the art of entanglement, and I declare upon 
my reputation, I could not have played the part better myself." 

"1 am quite sure of it," replied Joyeuse, " because I think liis 
majesty's attentions are not so perfectly to her taste as you might 
conceive they would be to yours. Her thoughts, 1 suspect, are 
wandering upon Crichton." 

" P> h .' " rejoined La Torlgni, " no such thing. She is not such 
a simpleton. Wiiy should her love for Crichton prevent her be- 
stowing an occasional smile elsewhere ? He is not a mirror of 
constancy, whatever he may be of chivalry ; nor Avholly insensible, 
as you know, to the supreme attractions of our royal mistress. The 
thing is quite natural." 

" Your reasoning is perfectly convincing, demoiselle." 

'' '1 he Chevalier Crichton is very well in Ins way — but a king, 
you know — "' 

" Is irresistible. You have found it so, demoiselle." 

" Y^ou are impertinent, monsieur le vicomte."' 

" A la bonne heure. You have prodigiously fine eyes, demoi- 
selle. Italy boasts the darkest eyes in the world — Florence the 
darkest eyes of Italy, and the lovely Toi-lgnl the darkest eyes of 
Florence. I pledge them in a bumper of Cyprus." 

" Your France is a nation of courtiers," replied La Torlgni, 
laughing, " and the Vicomte de Joyeuse the most finished courtier 
in Fiance. I return your pledge, monscigneur. After all," conti- 
nued the lively Florentine, in a tone half jest, half earnest, " I 
should not object to be In Kselairmonde's situation." 

*• Indeed I" replied Chicot, who happened to overhear this latter 
exclamation. 

At this moment Marguerite de Valois entered the room. Some 



THE REZOAR. J 09 

slight ceremony was observed at her appearance, but the fliir queen 
took her place at Henri's left hand, Avithout attracting- his notice. 

" Your majesty suffers from some sudden indisposition," of^served 
Brantome, in a tone of" sympathy, remarking tlie haggard looks of 
the queen. 

" No, no," returned Marguerite, " I am perfectly well. Abbe." 

*' Will your highness allow inc to recommend this coulis a la 
cardhial to youv attention " said Villcquier. " Konsard pronounces 
it thorouglily Catholic, and I were an heretic to doubt him. Suffer 
me, madame — " 

Marguerite declined the tempting offer of tlie marquis, and 
suflered her eyes to stray over the company. Crichton was not 
amongst the number. 

" Thank Heaven, he is not here !" exclaimed the queen, giving 
involuntary utterance to her thoughts, and sighing deeply as if 
some heavy oppression were removed from her bosom. 

" Who is not here?" asked Henri, turning quickly round at the 
exclamation. 

Chicot stepped suddenly forward. 

" Methlnks," said he, familiarly placing his hand upon the king's 
shoulder, " methlnks, 7iotre onclc, you arc in need of some excite- 
ment, you lack somewhat to give a fillip to your spirits— a spice to 
your wine — what can we direct you to? Shall it be a song? I 
have a rare charivari on Madame the Duchess d'Usez's third 
espousals — a Pantagruellan legend on Pope Joan's confinement 
before the conclave — or a ditty on the devil's exploit, at Pope 
Feagueland — at your service. Or if you like not this, shall I bid 
my gossip Slblot smack the rosy lips of all the coyest dames at 
table, beginning with the Demoiselle Torlgni, and afterwards cut a 
lavolta on the board itself to the blithe accompaniment of ringing 
glass? Or if a gayer mood possess you, will it please you to com- 
mand Maitre Samson to bring forth that quaint drinking cup, the 
merry devices and playful grotesques whereof are wont to excite so 
much amusement, and such mirthful exclamations from our dames 
of honour — and which cup, moreover, is so much to the fancy of 
our grave and discreet gossip, Pierre de Bourdelllc?" 

" Cousin of Brantome/' said Henri, smiling; " our jester libels. 

you." 

" Nay," replied Brantome, laughing, *' I care not to own that 
the goblet of which the knave speaks has afforded nie amusement, 
though I must, on the score of propriety, venture to oppose its 
introduction upon the present occasion.*" 

" Propriety !" echoed Chicot, derisively ; " propriety sounds 
well in the lips of the Abbe dc Brantome ; ha, ha, which of the 
three shall It be, gossip — the song, the kiss, or the cup ?" 

" A song," returned Henri, " and see that thy strains lack not 
spice, gossip, or look for no hippocras from the hands of Samson as 
thy meed." 



no CRICHTON. 

"Spice!" rcjK'atcd Chicot, Avitli a droll grimace; "my strains 
shall smack of {»imcnto itsell'." And assuming the air of an impro- 
visatore, the jester delivered hiinseli" as I'ollows: — 



ivlll-^^picc, ov a ^pcc of iHU. 

Tin; people eiuliuc all, 

'I lie iiieii-at-aims cme all, 

The i'avoiirites sway all. 

Their reverences flay all. 

The citizens pay all, 

Our j^ood king attirms all, 

The senate conlirir.j. all. 

The chancellor seals all, 

Qneen ( atherine conceals all, 

Queen Lonise instrncts all. 

Queen Margoi conducts all, 

'I'he J.eagiiers contrive all, 

'Ihe .Jacobins slirive all. 

The Lutherans doubt all. 

The ZiiiiiLilians scout all. 

The Jesuits Houtall, 

The Sorhonnisls rout all. 

Brother lleiui believes all, 

Pierre de Gondy receives all,* 

Kuggieri detlles all, 

•Mad Sihlot reviles all. 

The bilboipiets please all, 

The sarbacanes tease all. 

The Due de Guise tries all. 

Rare ('richton outvies all, 

Abbe Brantoine retails all. 

Hussy D'Aniboise assails all. 

Old Konsard recants all, 

YounsT Jodelle enchants all. 

Fat Villequier crariis all, 

His Holiness ilanins all, 

Esclairuionde bright outshines all. 

And wisely declines all, 

La Kebourswill bless all, 

La Fosseuse confess all, 

La(;uyolwillflyalI, 

Torigni deny all, 

.lohii Calvin misguide all. 

Wise Chicot deride all, 

Spanish Philip-|- may crave all, 

The BearnaisI biave all. 

The Dkvil will have all I 

*' Gramcrcy," said Ilcnri, as Chicot came to a pause ; more, it 
would appear, from v/ant of breatli. than from lack of material for 
the continuance of his strains; " thou hast fairly earned tliy hip- 

■ Bishop of I'aris. 
t i liilip II. J Ilcnri ol 2savarrc, afterwards Henri IV. 



THE BEZOAR. ] 1 1 

pocras, were it only fov the justice; ivii(lerc(l to tlio lovely Esclnir- 
moude, who, as thou truly sayost, outshines alL 15ut, by our lady, 
mcsseigneurs, we must not neglect tlie service of Bacchus for tiuit 
of Apollo. Samson, ihy choicest Cyprus — a health !" 

Every glass was raised — every eye bent upon the Viwj;. " To 
licr," continued Henri, draining Ids goblet; " Avho in "her own 
person combines all the perfections of her sex — la belle Esclair- 
monde !" 

" La belle Esclainnonde !" echoed each guest, enthusiastically 
clashing his glass against that of his neighbour. 

Amidst the confusion incident to this ceremony, Crichtou entered 
the room. Eor an instant his gaze rested upon that of the demoi- 
selle; and, momentary as was that glance, a world of sad and pas- 
sionate emotion Avas conveyed to the hearts of both. He then took 
the seat which had been reserved ibr him, by the side of Margue- 
rite de Valois. Conversation in the meantime proceeded. *' I 
Avould fain inquire Irom your majesty, ' said Brantome, in a tone 
which showed that the Cyprus he had quailed had not been without 
its effect upon his brain ; " what are the precise notions wliich you 
entertain respecting beauty. For, with a due appreciation of 
diaphonous orbs and hyacinthine tresses, 1 cannot entirely," and 
here the abbe cast a look, inebriate as that of Septimlus on Acme, 
upon Marguerite de Valois ; " I cannot, I say, admit their supre- 
macy over eyes black as night, and locks dark as the raven's Aving. 
Both styles have merit, no doubt; but surely your majesty cannot 
be aware of the ' thirty requisites,' or you would never assi'm the 
palm of perfect beauty to a blonde." 

'• Thou art a heretic, cousin," replied Henri, laughing; " but 
Ave plead ignorance as to thy ' thirty requisites.^ Let us hear 
them; Ave shall then sec how fiir our own opinions correspond Avitli 
thine." 

" I had them from a fair dona of Toledo," replied Brantome, 
*' a city Avhere there are many gracious dames; and though I liavo 
never, except in one instance," he added, again glancing at Mar- 
guerite ; " met Avith a combination of such exc;ellencies, yet I 
may fairly enough assert that I have encountered them all in 
detail." 

" The requisites, cousin !" said Llenri, impatiently. 

" Your majesty will excuse my rhymes," replied the abbe, with 
becoming modesty ; " I am no poet, like Konsard. Thus they 
run — 

'STDe ®f)irtD <tlc(iuisitcs.* 

Thirty points ot perfection eacli judge understands. 
The Standard of feminine beauty demands, 

'Tliese A'erses are imitated from txtrcntaiiic of beaux Sis, recorded in the Dames 
Galatites. Brantome gives tliem in Spanish jirose from the h|)s of a fairTo- 
ledan, mentioned in tlie text ; they are, hoAvever, t6 be met Avith in an old French 



1 12 CRICHTON. 

Tiirce vhite : — and, witlioiu fiirtlier prelude, we know 

'1 hat the skin, liands, and teeth, ^lioiild be pearly as siio;*. 

Three black : — and our standard departure forbids 

IVom dark eyes, dark>oiiie tresses, and darkly-fringed !iJs. 

Three red :— and liic lover orconielmess seeks 

l"or the hue of the rose in the lips, nails, and cheeks. 

Three long : — and ol this you, no doubt, are aware ? ' 

Long the body should be, long the hands, long the hair. 

Tliree short : — and herein nicest beauty appears — 

Tcet short as a fairy's, short teeth, and short ears. 

Three large . — and reuieinber this rule as to size, 

Embraces the shoulders, the forehead, the eyes. 

'I'hree narrow : — a maxim to every man's taste — 

C'ircnmlercnce small in mouth, ancle, and waist 

Tiiree round : — and in this 1 see iutinite cliaims — 

Itounded fidness apparent in leg, hi|), and arms. 

Three Hne :— and can anght the enchantment ecliine, 

Of tine tapering lingers, tine hair, and line hps'f 

'i'hree small ; — and my thirty essentials are told — 

Small head, nose, and bosom, compact in its mould. 

Now the dame who comprises attractions like these, 

\ViII require not tiie ccstiis of Venus to please, 

^Vliile he who has met witli an union so rare, 

Has had better luck than has fall'n to my share." 

Bmntomc's sonfj was cxcccdinq-ly avcU received, innsmuch ns it 
enabled the gallants to olier various compliment?, direct and indi- 
rect, to the fascinations of their fair companions. Neither did Henri 
i'ail to take advantage of th.c plea it ailbrded him, of scnitinisini:; 
the charms of Esclairmonde, as the particular features of beauty 
passed in review before the abbe. 

Crichton looked sternly on. His blood boiled within his veins, 
and his indignation mi^ht have carried him to some extremities, 
if Esclairmonde's imploring looks had not restrained him. 

Amidst the laughter and acclamations of the guests Marguerite's 
voice shouted hollowly in his ear, " I have watched your glances, 
Crichton. In your kindling eyes I read your thoughts. Your 
minion is wholly in Henri's power. You camiut deliver her." 

Crich ton's reply was interrupted by a wild scream of laugh tei 
proceeding from the bullbon Siblot, wiio, regardless of the confusion 
he created, or the risk which the costly vessels on the board might 
incur from his antics, suddenly whirled himself into the very 
centre of the table, taking up a position on tlic cover of a vase 
supported on three feet, upon the knob of which he described 
various rapid circles with the dexterity and ease of the most perfect 
posture-master. No sooner was this feat accomplished amidst the 
laughter and astonishment of the guests, than bounding — without 
injury to the economy of the banquet — over enamelled dish and 
plate, with a velocity which left little time for consideration, he 

work anterior to our chronicler, entitled De la Lounage et Bcctutc des Dames. The 
ianie maxims liavc been turned into Latin hexameters by Francois Corniger (an 
ominous name lor a writer oii«sucha subject), and into ]t;diaii verse by Vincentio 
Cahueta. 



TUE BEZOAR. 1 1 3 

bruslied witli his sliaggy beard the fair cheeks of every dame he 
passed, not excepting even jNIarguerite de Valois, and only paused 
when he arrived at last before Esclairmonde. He then chuckled 
and nodded at Henri, as if consulting his inclinations, as to whether 
the demoiselle should be submitted to the same disgusting ordeal 
as the others, but receiving no signs of encouragement from the 
monarch, he retreated to his vase, Avhere, like a priestess of Apollo 
upon her tripod, after a brief prelude of gyrations, with a rapidity of 
luterance almost as bewildering as his antic mazes, and an intini- 
tudc of grotesque gesticulations, he burst into the following an.plii- 



couri: 



Cfic temptation of ^t. ^.luljonj].* 
I. 

Saint Anthony weary 
Of iierniit cell dreary. 
Of penance, and [jrayin^, 
Of orison saying, 
Of niortiHcaiiun, 
And fleshly vexation. 
By good sprites forsaken, 
By Sri II overtaken. 
On flinty couch lying. 
For deatii, like Job, crying, 
Was suddenly siironded 
By thick mists, tliat clouded 
All objects witli vapour, 
— And through them, like taper, 

A single star sliimuieied, 
And with blue flame glimmered. 

II. 

What spell then was muttered 
May never be uttered ; 
Saint Anthony piayed not — 
Saint Antlioiiy stayed not — 
But down — duwn descending 
Tiiroiigh caveins unoiKhng, 
Wliose labyrinlh-i travel 
May never unravel, 
By thuudeiing tui :ei.t, 
}W toppling crag hurrei.t, 
All Denis unlieedini;. 
As levin swift speeding, 
riabakkuk ont-vying 
On seraph-wing Hying, 
Was borne on lieud's pir.iu;." 
To Hell's d; rl; dominion. 

• Sec Callot's magnificent piece ( f dUilIerie, upon this subject, and the less ex- 
travagant, but not less admirable picture of Teuiers ; and what will well l)e-.ir 
comparison with cither, Ketzch's illusiration of the Walpurgis Kight llcvels of 
Guothc. 

I 



Hi CRICHTON. 



III. 



Oil ! rare is the revelry 
Of Tartarus' devilry! 
Above liini — around him— 
Oil all sides surround him— 
With wildest grimaces 
Faiita-itieal t'aees 1 
Here lume hats are twittering. 
Strange winged mice Hitteriug, 
Great horned owls hooting. 
Pale hissing stars shooting. 
Red tire-drakes careering 
With liar|)ies are Heering. 
Shapes whizzing and whirling, 
N\'eird Sabbath-dance twirling, 
Round beardeil goat scowling, 
Their wild reliaiu howling — 
" 'aicgrfmonos ^k circmos 
Cijiicgciuc mic lia tcncmos."* 

IV. 

Here Lemures, Lares, 
Trolls, I'oliots, fairies, 
Nymph, gnome, salamander. 
In frolic groups wander. 
I Fearful sliajjcs there are rising, 

Of aspect surprising, 
Phantasmata Stygia, 
Spectra, Prodigia I 
Of aspect horrific, 
Of gesture territic. 
Where cauldrons are seething. 
Lithe serpents are wreathing, 
And wizards are gloating 
On jiois'noiis scum floating. 
While skull and bone placed out 
In circle are traced out. 
Here witches air-gliding 
On broomsticks are riding. 
A hag a fawn chases, 
A nun Pan embraces. 
Here mimic lights waging. 
Hell's warriors are raging ; 
Each legion commanding 
A chief is seen standing. 
Beelzebub gleaming, 
Like (ientiie god seeming-- 
Proud Belial advancing, 
With awful ire glancing ; 
Asmodcus the cunning, 
Abaddon, light shunning, 

• According to Dolancre, the usual rrfntin of the Sorcerers' Sabbath-song. See 
his " J)escription of tbe Inconstancy of Kvil Angels and Demons." " Delancre'* 
])escrii)ti(m of the Witclies' Sabhatii," observes the amusing author of Monsieur 
Oiijic, " is so very ample and ■i)articular, that I don't believe I should be better 
in armed concerning it if I had been there mysell"." 



TUE BEZOAR. Ho 

Dark Moloch deceiving, 
His subtle webs weaving ; 
Meressin air-d\veliiri<r. 
Red Manuiion gold-telling. 

V. 

Tiie Fiend, tlien dissembling, 
Addressed ilie saint trembling . 
" These are thine if down bowing. 
Unto me thy soul vowing, 
Thy worship thou'lt offer." 

*' Back, Tempter, thy profl 
With scorn is rejected." 

" Unto me thon'rt subjected. 
For thy doubts, by the Eternal!" 
Lauglied the Spirit Infernal. 

At his word then compeliinir. 

Forth rushed from iier dwelling 

A shape so inviting, 

Enticing, delighting, 

Willi lips of such witchery, 

Tongue of such treachery, 

(That sin-luring smile is 

The torment of Lilis,) 

Like Kve in her Eden, 

Our father misleading. 

W itii locks so wide-flowing. 

Limbs so bright-glowing. 

That Hell hath bewrayed him, : 

If Heaven do not aid him. 

*' Her charms are surrendered 
If worship is rendered." 

" Sathan, get thee behind me I 
My sins no more blind me^ 
By Jesu':; temptation! 
By lost man's salvation ! 
Be this vision banished !"' 

And straight Hell evanished. 

And suiting the action to tlic phrase, at the conclusion of his 
song, Siblot threw himself head over heels from the table, and 
Vanished likewise. Acclamations were heard on all sides. What- 
ever the festive assemblage miglit think of the jester's song, they 
-A-ere infinitely amused by his summerset. By this time, too, the 
generous wines, with which each goblet was constantly replenished, 
had begun to do their duty. Every eye grew bright — every 
tongue loud, and a greater degree of licence reigned throughout. 
Crichton alone partook not of the festivities. 

" Par la Mort-Dieu, mon brave Ecossois," said Henri, with a 

I 2 



IIG CRicnxoN. 

smile of exultation, '* you arc not in your ujgual spirits to-niglit. 
You have not a smile lor a lair dame — you do but indifferent jus- 
tice to Berini's supper (and Villequicr, or your brother bard, lion- 
sard, will tell you it has merit) — and you wholly neglect Samson's 
goblets, thougii this Syracuse hath potency enough to turn the blood 
to llame. Try it, I pray of you. Your thoughtful visage assorts 
ill with our sprightly associates. Let your spirits sparkle like our 
^v^ne, like the eyes around us, and droAvn your despondency in the 
llowing bowl." 

"An excellent proposal, sire," said D'Epernon ; "Crichton is 
^-ither in love or jealous — perhaps both — he eats not, talks not, 
drinks not, signs inliillible." 

" Pshaw," replied Joyeusc, " he has lost a favouiite hawk, or a 
horse, or a thousand pistoles at ])lay, or — " 

" He thinks of his duel with the mask," added Saint Luc ; " he 
has confessed and received the Holy Communion, and tlie priest 
has enjoined a night of fasting and repentance." 

" He has lost a supper, then, winch, like Hrantume's beauty, has 
every requisite," said Villequicr, Avith his mouth full of marchpane. 
" I pity him." 

" Or his appetite," said llonsard, " without which even a supper 
at the Louvre would bo thrown away.'' 

" Or a rhyme," said Torigni ; '•' a loss to make a bard look sad, 
eh, jMonsieur Ronsard ?" 

" Or a sarbacane," said Chicot. 

" Or a bibloquet," said Siblot. 

•' Or a toy of less moment than cither," hlccuped. Brantomc — 
"a mistress." 

Here a loud laugh was raised. " A truce to raillery," said. 
Henri, laughing with the rest; " Crichton is a little out of sorts — • 
latigued, naturally enough, with his disputation of the morning, 
and his exertions in the ball-room — however, I trust he has not 
entirely lost his voice, but that he will favour us with one of those 
exquisite chansons-a-boire, with which of old he was wont to 
enliven our waissalry.'' 

" A song ! — a song !" echoed all the symposiacs, laughing louder 
than ever. 

" ]My strains will scarcely harmonise with your revel, sire," 
replied Crichton, gloomily; "my livelier thoughts desert me." 

" No matter," replied Henri, '' be they sad as those of Erebus — 
'twill give a sliarper edge to our festivity.''' 

In a voice then which, as he proceeded, gradually hushed all dis- 
position to mirth, Crichtoii sang: — 



THE BEZOAK. 117 



^I)e ^|)rcc Orgies. 
I. 

In banquet hall, beside the kinj;, 
Sat proud Tbyestes rcvclhiij:. 
Till-' f'ostal board was covered fair, 
The festal meats were rich and rare; 
1'liyestes ate tiill daintily, 
Thyestes laimhed full lustily ; ' 
But soon his iiaughiy visage fell — 
A dish was brought — and. wo to tclll 
A gory head that charger bore! 
An iiifani's look the features wore! 
Tiiyestes shiif-ked — l\iu!: Atreus siniled- 
Tlie (iilher had devoured his cliild! 

/■/// Ihe gobli-t—fill It high— 

To 'rin/cf,tt.s icvcli I/. 

Of blood-red ii'inc.i the h'iglilcst dtccse, 

1 lie g!o ion's g rape of Syracuse ! 

IL 

For a victory obtained 
O'er the savage Geice tiiaincd, 
In his grand Caesarean ball 
Domitian holds high festival. 
To a solemn feast besought 
Tint her are the senate brought. 
As hejonistlu^ stately ciowd, 
Smiles each pleased patrician proud, 
One by one each guest is led: 
^^ here Domiiian"s feast is spread ; 
Each, jecoiling, stares agliast 
At the ominous repast : 
]{ouiid abacus cf blackest shade 
lilack triclinia are laid, 
Sal)le vases deck the hoard 
M ith dark-coloured viaiuls stored ; 
.Shaped like tombs, on either hand, 
Kows of dusky pillars stand ; 
O'er each pillar in a line. 
Pale sepulchral lychni shine ; 
Cinerary inns are seen, 
Carved each with a name, I ween. 
By the sickly radiance shown 
Every guest may read bis own ! 
Forth then issue swarthy slaves. 
Each a torch and dagger waves ; 
Some like Manes habited, 
I'igures ghastly as the dead ! 
Some as l.ennires attired, 
Lai tOK some, with vengeance fired. 
See ihe throat of every guesl 
Hy c. nuirderous gripe is prest ! 
Wh^it the wretch, with horror dumb. 
Thinks Ins latest hour is comel 
l.oud then laugli'd Domit'.in, 
Thus his solemn feast boiran. 



lis CRICHTOX. 

Fill ihe gnUct—Ji/lil ///g/:— 
To ilotiiilidit's ttvcl'i/. 
Let our gliiwtiig gdhli I be, 
Ciownd uilli a III- (i/ ■'^icii'y 

III. 

Borgia* holds a papal fete. 

And Zizime, with heart elate, 

With his chiefs harhariaii 

Seeks the <i(irge()iis \ atieati. 

*1 is a woiich'diis sijiht to see 

In Cluistiaii liall that company '. 

lint the Othniaii warriors soon 

Scout the jirecepts of Mahoun. 

Wines of Sicily and Spain, 

Joyously tho;e payiiiins drain; 

While Borgia's words their iaiigl'.ter stir 

" Bi/jii»lts I'npiililcr ."' 

At a siiinal — pages three, 

Witli liold golileis, hend the knee ■ 

liorgia poms the purple stream 

Till heads upon its surface gleam. 

** Do us a reason, noble guest," 

Tluis Zizime. the pontiH' pressed : 

*• liv our triple-crowti there lies, 

In liiat wine-c!i() Paradise I ' 

Higli Zizime the goblet raised — 

Loud Zizime the Cyprus praised— 

To (acli guest in oider slow, 

Nest the felon panes go. 

Kach in turn the Cyprus cpiafTs, 

Like Zizime, each wildly laui:hs,— 

Laughter horrible and strange! 

Quick ensues, a fearful change. 

Stifled soon is every cry, 

Azrael is standing by. 

Glared Zizime — but spake no more: 

Borgia's fatal feast was o'er ! 

Fill tlic gohlrt-fillit Ingh— 

Willi the uinca of llnli/ ; 

Bo> gilt's iroid-s out' lauglilcr stir-— 

Bibinitis J'ajxiliter ! 

*' Blbimus reji-alitcr !'' exclaimed Henri, as Cricliton's soncf ccn- 
eluded. " Dieu Merci I we have no dread of such a consummation 
at our orgies. A reveller might well stand in awe of the bowl, if 
after his nocturnal banquet he should awaken in Elysium. You 
must now perforce pledge us, mon Ecossois, or we shall think you 
liold our feasts in the same honor as those of Borgia — a cup of 
Cyprus — you will not refuse us ?" 

• Pope Alexander VI., of the family of Lenziioli, but who assumed previous to 
l)is pontificate the name of Borgia, a name rendered infamous, as well by his 
own crimes and vices, as liy those of the monster offspring Cajsar and Luerezia, 
whom he had by the courtezan Vanozza, aecordinfr to Gordon, instigated to the 
murder of Zizime or Djem, son of Maliomet II., by a reward of 300,000 ducats, 
promised by Bajazet, brother to the ill-fated Otinnan I'rince. 



THE JESTER. 119 

" He will not refuse we," said Marguerite de Valois. " Give me 
a goblet, Loiscl.'^ 

A page approaclied with a flagon of gold. " Fill for me," said 
the Queen. And the wine was poured out. " To our reunion," 
whispered she, drinking. " La Ibrza d' amore non risguarda al 
dehtto." 

" I pledge you, madanie," answered Crlchton, rai!<ing the goblet. 

Marguerite's eyes were fixed upon him. All trace of colour had 
deserted her checks. " How is this? ' exclaimed Crichton, laying 
down the goblet untastcd. " Poison ! Do lior'^ia's dru^s find 
entrance here?" 

" Poison !" echoed all, rising in astonishment and dismay. 

" Ay — poison !" reiterated Crichton. " See the ruddy bezoar 
in this ring has become pale as opal. This wine is poisoned." 

" / have drunk of it," said Marguerite, with a withering look. 
"Your own fiint heart misgives you." 

" Some j^oisons have their antidotes, madamc," observed 
Crichton, sternly. " The knife of Parysades was anointed on one 
side only." 

" Bring Venetian glass," cried Henri, " that will remove or 
conlirm your suspicions. Sangdieu ! Chevalier Crichton, if thii* 
interruption be groundless, you shall bitterly repent it." 

" Give me the Venice glass,"" said Crichton, " I will abide the 
issue." 

A glass was brought, bell-shaped, light, clear as crystal. Crich- 
ton took it and poured within it the contents of his own goblet. 

For a second no change was observed. The wine then suddenly 
hissed and foamed. The glass shivered into a thousand pieces. 

All eyes were now turned on the Queen of Navarre. She had 
fainted. 

"Let her be cared for," said Henri, afTecting indifference, 
" Miron must attend her — he will understand — " and the king 
whispered a few words to Du Halde. "Fair dames, and you, 
messeigneurs," added he to theguests, who looked on aghast, " this 
incident must not interrupt our revel. Samson, we appoint thee 
our taster — wine — wine." 



CHAPTER VHL 

THE JESTER. 

Le Marchant. Vous estes, ce croy-je, le joyeulx du Eoy ? 

Panurge. Voire. 

Le Marchant. Fourchez la. 

Kabelais. Fantagruel. Liv. IV. Ch. VI. 

The effect of the occurrence, just detailed, was visible in the 
altered complexion and demeanour of the dames, and it required 
all the gallantry and attention of the cavaliers, in any degree, to 



120 CRICIITON. 

restore tlieir gaiety. Conversation, however, soon became more free 
and discursive. Each galliard boasted, in his turn, of his prowess 
in arms — of liis dexterity in horsemansliip — of his unerring aim 
witli the pistol — of his fatal stroke with tlie poignard — of liisabihty 
with the rapier — in short, of liis perl'oct acquaintance with the 
whole " theoric and practic" of the duello — a subject which neces- 
sarily involved the discussion of Crichton's approaching combat. 
The discourse began to take a very animated turn, many specula- 
tions being hazarded as to the rank and name of the challenger, a 
subject upon which the dames appeared singularly curious, and 
even Esclairmonde manifested anxiety ; when, as if brought thither 
to gratify their wishes, the sable mask suddenly presented himself 
at the entrance of the banquet- chamber. 

Henri instantly commanded admittance to be given to him, and 
the mask was, in consequence, ushered to the seat which Mar- 
jruerite de Valois had abandoned, thus brintzinirhim into immediate 
contact with his adversary Cricliton. Their situation appeared to 
be agreeable to neit'ner party ; but it was now too late to remedy 
the mistake, and Henri laughed it off in the best way he could. 

" Nothing can be further from my intention than to interrupt 
the harmony of your majesty's table," said the mask, in reply to 
the king's apology, " and, 1 trust, I shall not incur the censure of 
your brave gentlemen, by offering a second oilence to one, whom 
I liave already defied to the combat. I am no faith-breaker, sire. 
But I crave your pardon for trespassing on your patience. I came 
not hither to join your revels. 

"Tore Heaven, then, mon cousin!"' replied Henri, regarding 
the mask with some astonishment, " if not to festivity, unto what 
hath your visit relation ?" 

The mask looked with some anxiety towards Crichton. The 
Scot instantly rose. 

" I am in the way, sire," he said. *' Your counsels will be more 
securely carried on if I quit the banquet." 

*' No, by our Lady !" cried Henri, rising, and with great courtesy 
motioning Crichton to resume his seat — "this shall never be. 
If any one must suffer inconvenience, it shall be ourself. I am at 
your service, mon cousin, though 1 must need say^'ou have ehasen 
a strange season for an audience." 

So saying, the monarch reluctantly led the way towards an 
embrasure — 

" Chicot," he said, in an under tone as he passed, " do thou 
assume our seat for the nonce? We must not attend to the in- 
terests of others to the entire exclusion of our own — and hark 
ye, gossip, as you value your ears, suffer not a syllable to pass 
between Crichton and our mignonne, Esclairmonde — you under- 
stand." 

With a mock dignity, infinitely diverting to the guests, Chicot 
instantly installed himself in Henii s vacant chair ; his first pro- 



THE JESTER. ]2l 

ceeding being to ploce his niarotte between tlie lovers, -whicli he 
laughing termed " his ambnsfudor's sword, whereby they were to 
understand they coula only speak by proxy." His next, -was to 
call upon Ronsard for a song. The bard would willingly have 
declined the jester's invitation, but the voices of the revellers were 
against him, and he Avas necessitated to promise compliance. 

" Fool," muttered Crichton, sternly, who had alreadv taken 
advantage of the king's absence to hazard a whisper to Esclair- 
monde — '' wilt thou mar this opportunity afforded us, by chance, 
of devising means fur her escape ? Why should she not fly now ? 
I alone will Avith^'a id every attempt at pursuit." 

"And who will tlien be the fool?" replied Chicot. " Xo — no, 
my addle pate hath hatched a scheme worth two of yours. Set 
yourself at case. Jiorrow a sarbacane from the Vicomte do 
Joyeuse ; and meanwhile suffer the ' law-giver of Parnassus,' 
as liis flattercis tt:rm him, to proceed with his roundelay. 
Sec you not that it diverts the attention of the guests, and 
leaves US' at liberty. — Fool, quotha ! — recant that appellation, 
brother." 

'* I cry thee mercy, gossip," rejoined Crichton, " thou art, 
indeed, a very miracle of wit. Joyeuse," he added, addressing the 
vicomte; " 1 prithee, lend mc thy sarbacane." 

" To despatch a billet to some distant fair one in the outer 
banquet-hall; ah! galliard ; here 'tis." And with this, Joyeuse 
sent his page with the long tube of chased silver resting by his side, 
to the Scot. 

Konsard, meanwhile, commenced his song, which, if it shoidd not 
be found to equal in merit some better known lyrics of the bard, 
*' qui, en irunqois, parla Grec et Latin" its failure must be attri- 
buted to the supper he had eaten, and the Cyprus he had swallowed 
(both, according to his former patron, Charles IX., untavourable to 
the jMuse), and, in some degree, to the quaintness of the measure he 
selected, 

m)i Hcgcnti of Faltc?. 
I. 

Tisnislitl — fLMtli Valdez, in di;"uisc, 

Hies; 
And his visage, as lie glides, 

Hides. 
Goes he to von church to prav? 

Eh! 
No, tliat fane a secret path 

Hath, 
Leading to a neiglibourit)g pile's 

Aisles ; 
Where nuns lurk — by priests cajoled 

Old. 
T'lither doth Don Valdez go — 

Oh ! 
Tiiithcr vestal lips to taste 

Haste. 



!22 CRICIITON. 

II. 

'Ncaih von nrcli, wliv dotli lie st:::! J ? 

And 
Ihips it tii:.t lie liiiiieis now 

llou- 
Suddenlv row rd |)i iests iippoar 

Here. 
Vii'cc'S chant a dirju'-likc dim 

llyiiin : 
Mutes a sahle cotiin drear 

Hear ; 
Where a tnonumenl duth lie 

Hiiih 
'Scutcheons nroiid Death's dark parade 

Aid. 
Valdez sees, \( ith fresh alarms, 

Amis, 
\\ hicli liis GWii — (uules cross and st;ir I) 

Are. 

HI. 
An hour — and \et he iiatli not ^one 
■ On ; 

Kei l-.cr ran lie slren::ili to speak 

r.ke; 

Hark I he cries, in fear and doiiiit, 

Out, 
'■ Whom inter ve in that tond)? 

^^ horn? — " 
" Vakiez I — Hell he. ere twelve hours, 

OiHs! — 
Wait « e fill l,i> funeral 

All!" 

IV. 

" Monk I tiion hiiiiL^st. if tl.i< he truiii, 

Hu'th!" 
Valdez his own fite wiih dread 

Read. 
Question none he uttered inure; — 

O'er 
"i'was ; atid he doth [x-aoefullv 

Lie 
In the tcmb he saw, thus crazed, 

Raised. 

ftlrmrnto {llort — Life's a stale 
'iale. 

During the progress of Ronsanl's song, tlic jester had not remained 
idle. Amidst a thousand absmd grimaces, intended for the amuse- 
ment of the company, he had contrived in various ways to make 
known the nature of his intentions respecting P^sclairmondc's 
deHveronce to Crichton, and the latter, struck, apparently, with 
the feasibility of his plan, traced a hurried line on the paper- 



THE JEi«TER. 123 

covcrinp!; of a dragee, wliicii he took Irom a pile of confoctlonerv 
before him, and then applying the sarbacane to his hps, winged 
Avitli dexterous aim, the sugared missive into the lap of the De- 
moiselle Torigni. This incident, if it attracted any notice at all, 
passed for a mere piece of gallantry, a supposition abundantly 
confirmed by the conduct of the fair Florentine, whose sparkling 
eyes and throbbing bosom, as she perused the paper, as well as her 
nod of acquiescence, while she finally crushed it wltliin her hands, 
sufliciently attested the nature of her feelings. Brantome, who 
was her neighbour, hemmed significantly. Torigni crimsomed to 
the temples ; but nothing more passed upon the inatter. 

" Bravo 1" exclaimed Crichton, who, flushed with the anticipated 
success of his scheme, liad now entirely recovered his spirits, and 
joined enthusiastically in the applauses bestowed upon lionsard's 
performance ; though it may be suspected, from the warmth of 
liis pi-aises, that not a word of the song had reached his ears. 
" Bravo !" he cried, with well-feigned rapture ; " the strains we ha\e 
listened to are worthy of him Avho has won for himself the proud 
title of the ' Potte Fra>i(;i>is, par Excellence;' of hiui who will enjoy 
a kindred immortality with the Telan and Tvlaionian bards ; of him 
whoui beauty has worshipped, and sages honoured ; and to whom 
one fairer than the fairest nymph of antiquity — the loveliest pearl 
of Scotia's diadem hath inscribed her priceless gift. 

A RoNSARD rApollon de la source des Muses. 

Happy bard ! upon whom such a queen hath smiled. Not Alain 
Charticr, upon whose melodious lips, when closed in sleep, ^Margaret 
of Scotland inipressed a burning kiss ; not Clement Marot, the as- 
piring lover of Diane de Poitiers, and of the royal Marguerite, was 
so mtich to be envied. Happy I — happy bard ! upon whom all 
lovelv things smile." 

" Except the lovely Torigni," interrupted Chicot, " and she 
alone, who smiles on all, frowns upon him. For my part, I have 
the bad taste to prefer my own A-erses, or those of Alellin de Saint 
Gelais, our ' French Ovid,' or the elegies of my cousin, Philippe 
Desportes, (our ' Tibullus,' if llonsard is to be our ' Anacreon' — 
bah !) I/a connets are worth all the erotic poesy indited 

By Ronsard on tliese l.ulies tliree, 
Cassandra, Helen, or Marie." 

"Peace I" said the Scot, "and to confound thee and all sucli 
unb(!lievers, I will, if my memory serves me, recite an ode recently 
written by the bard thou hast traduced, worthy to be classed with 
the most fervid strains ever poured out by him who sang of old, of 
love, and of the vine. Attend !" And addressing the poet, whose 
handsome countenance glowed with satisfaction, and who acknow- 
ledged the compliment (for your bard is never insensible to flattery) 
by kissing his wine-cup, Crichton, Avith the grace and fervotir of 
an Alcibiades. delivered himself of the foUowin"; ode. 



124 CZlCUTGly. 

Anacreontic* 
I. 

\VIicn Bacchus' jjift assails my brain, 
Care flies, and all licr gloomy traiti j 
My pulses tlirob, my yoiitli rettirrij. 
With its old fire my bosom iiurns ; 
Before my kindliui; vision rise 
A thou^aiui iilorious pliantasies ! 
Su'lden my einpiy coffVrs swell, 
^\ itii riiiii's inecusumable ; 
And mi^'litier treasurts 'round me spring 
Than Cioe^us owned, or I'hrygias king. 

II. 

Noneht seek I in that frenzied iiour, 
Save love's intoxicatir)g power; 
An arm to guide me in ti)e dance. 
An eye to thrill me with its glance, 
A lip impassioned words to breathe, 
A hand my t<mples to enwreathe : 
Kank, honour, wealth, and worldly weal, 
Scornl'ul, 1 crush beneath my heel. 

in. 

Then fill the ehaliee till it shine 

Bright as a gem incarnadine ! 

Fill! — till its fumes have freed me wholly 

I'rom the black pliantom — Melancholy I 

Better inebriate 'tis to he. 

And dying live, tlian living die! 

"Trinquons, mon cher," cried RonsarJ, lioWing out liis goLlct 
as Cricliton concluded ; " my verses acquire a grace from you, 
such as they never possessed before." 

" Forget not the rhymes of the good Pantagruel," said Chicot — 

*' Et veil qu'il est de ceiveau phanaticque, 
Ce me seroit acte de trop picqueur, 
Penser mocquer ung si noble trincqueur." 

At this moment the Vicomtc de Joyeusc shghtly coughed, and 
directing a glance of intelligence at Crichton, volunteered and 
executed, with much vivacity and spirit, the following — 

Birgc of Uourbon. 
I. 

Wlien the good Count of Nassau 

Saw Bourbon lie dead, 
*' By Saint Harbe and Saint Nicholas! 

lorwaid !' he said. 

II. 
*' Mutter never prayer o'er liim. 

For litter ne'er halt ; 
But sound loud the tiumpet — 

Smmd, sound to assault ! 

• Paraphrased from BonsajJ's Ode. — Lorsque Bacchus ente chez moi, ifc 



THE JESTER. 125 

III. 

" Bring engine — bring ladder. 

Yon old walls to scale ; 
All Koine, by Saint Peter! 

For bourbon shall wail." 

And now, to follow the king and the mask. 

"Wc would willingly serve you in this enlevement of the 
Gclosa," said Henri, continuing a eonversation with tlic xuiknown, 
the earlier part of which it is not necessary I.0 repeat ; " willingly — 
but sh'iU I own to you a weakness ! — I have apprehensions — " 

" Of Crichton?" asked the mask, scarcely able to repress his 
scorn. 

" Of my mother, cam mio. I hold it a rule never to interfere 
with her plans, unless they interfere with my own, and in this in- 
stance I see not how our interests can be mixed up with your 
wishes. Besides, to speak plainly, 1 have an alliiir on hand at 
this moment which may not improbably excite her displeasure ; 
and I am unwilling to hazard aught that may occasion serious 
grounds of dilference between us. Why not tarry till to-mor- 

lOW?" 

" Because — but I have already stated my reasons for this urgency 
— it must, be to-night — " 

" You have as little reliance on Ruggieri as I have, mon cou- 
sin," laughed the king. 

" I am as little accustomed to baulk my inclinations as your 
majesty," replied the mask, impatiently — " The prey is stricken. 
Shall I hesitate to seize it ? By Saint Paul, no. I detain you, 
«ire. Suffer me to quit the presence. Since you decline giving 
jne your authority I will act upon my own responsibility." 

" Stay," replied the king, vacillating between the awe in which 
lie stood of Catherine's resentment, and his anxiety to serve the 
mask, " the guard stationed round the Hotel de Soissons refused 
you admittance, you say. This ring will obtain it for you. Take 
it, and take the girl, and Ruggieri, too, if you list. So that you 
I'id tis and our good city of Paris of him and his accursed waxen 
images, I care not. If you encounter the queen-mother I leave you 
to make your own excuses. Take care not to compromise me in 
the matter. You need fear no interruption on the part of Crich- 
ton. He is safe within this chamber, and I will give instant 
•orders that the doors of the Louvre be closed till dawn." 

" In an hour that caution will be needless," exclaimed the mask, 
triumphantly. '' Ere that space be past, my views will be accom- 
plished." 

And with a haughty salutation the unknown departed. 

The king remained an instant in conference with Du Halde. 
Chicot, who, upon the departure of the mask, had vacated his 
•seat, approached them. Our icster had a strong penchant for 
•caves-dropping. 

" Let the portals of the Louvre be instantly closed,'' said Henri, 



] 25 cnioiiTON. 

** not a fjucst must go fortli till cawii — above all, tlic Chevalier 
Crichton." 

The chief valet LoweJ. 

" I have lurtlier cominands for thee," continuod the hinir, lower- 
ing ills tone — " at my wonted signal thou wih extinguisli the Hglits." 

A scarcely perceptible sniile plaved upon Du llalde's courtler- 
likc countenance. 

*' Ha ! runs it so?" said Chicot, drawing ncover to tlie group. 
And here wc leave him to return to the lovers. 

" Ksclairmonde," whispered the Scot, as the buffoon quitted the 
table, *' place ycnu- trust unlle:^itatinglv in thiit man. lie is your 
safeguard. Conlide in hiui, and fear nothing." 

'' I do not fear, Chevalier Crichton," replied the demoiselle, in 
the same low tone. " In my extreuiity I have one friend who 
■will not iail me — the good Florentin Chretien." 

" You have one who will perish for you, or with you,'' re- 
turned Crichton. " Wc shall meet again?" 

" Perhajis," answered Ksclairmonde ; "and vet I know not — the 
future is a gulf into wliich I dare not gaze. If possible I will quit 
this palace — this city — on the morrow. One tic alone can detain 
me, if I am free from this hateful bondage." 

" And that is— ?" 

" Henri do Valois," rejoined a voice. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE S A K B A C A N E. 

Je (lis, et je le S(;ai que le Hoy ayant pris uue nierveilleuse frayeur de ces choses, 
dcs le teins de la Sarbacane, deviiit enfin si peureux qu'il trembloit a la vue du 
moindre eclair. Confession de Sancy. 

The king, whose quick car caught the last words of their con- 
versation, had approached the lovers imperceived. In vain did 
the jester attempt to warn them by slightly coughing. Henri 
■was too rapid in his movements to allow him to proceed, and he 
was fearful of awakening suspicion by any overt display of his sym- 
pathy Avith their situation. 

" Chevalier Crichton," said the monarch, angrily regarding tlu 
Scot, " I would not have to remind you a second time of your 
plighted word. Take heed how you rouse my choler. I have 
something of the Medlcis in my composition, though it may not 
often manifest itself." 

" And I," returned the Scot, fiercely — 

" Lo mondc e>t un hoiiffbn, riiomme line comcdie, 
L'liii porte la marotte, et rautre est la folie," 

chanted Chicot, adding in a whisper to Crichton, " Your intempe- 
rate Scotch blood will ruin all — bethink you what you do." 

" You talk boldly, chevalier," said Henri, " and I trust you 



THE SAllBACANE. 127 

Avill demean yourself as stoutly on the morrow with your sword. 
Your adversary of the mask threatens to rob you of your laurels, 
and to put a stain upon the spotless order, with whieh I have in- 
vested you." 

" The modest precepts of chivalry teacli us, sire," replied Crich- 
ton, " that to vaunt is not to vanquish — 

Uii chevalier, n'eii doiitez pas, 
Doit ferir hunt, et parler bas. 

I shall abide the issue — content to rely upon a sword wliich has 
never yet failed me, and a cause which I maintain to be the right,'" 
" Enough," replied Henri, whose petulance Avas readily dissi- 
pated. "1 have bidden Du 11 aide give orders for the proclama- 
tion of the jousts at noon upon the morrow, within the lesser 
gardens of the Louvre, and I bid ye all, fair dames and puissant 
kniofhts, to "race it with vour presence — 

Servans d'amoiirs, regaidez donlcement 
Aux eschaffaux anges de Paradis: 
Lors jousterez fort et joyeiisetnent 
Et vous serez lionorez et clieris." 

As Henri sung this refrain of an old ballad of the Tourney by 
Eustache Deschamps, with much taste and some feeling, his features 
assumed, for a moment, the expression which might have animated 
them, when, flushed with the promise of a glorious manhood, his 
youthful valour had achieved the victory of iMontcontour. 

" Ah, Crichton !" he sighed, as he concluded ; " the days of 
Tannegui Du-Chatel, and Gaston de Foix are past. With my 
brave father, Henri de Valois, chivalry expired !" 

" Say not so, sire," replied Crichton, " while yourself can yet 
wield a lance, and while a Joyeuse, a D'Epernon, and a Saint-Luc, 
yet live to raise their banners." 

" To say nothing of a Crichton," interrupted Henri, " whose 
name will jjild our reign liereaftcr, when others are forgotten. — ■ 
With the Bearnais in the field — the Balafre coquetting with ray 
crown, and my brother of Anjou in open revolt against me, I 
have need of loyal hearts and true. Joyeuse, mun enfant^ I heard 
thy voice just now — hast thou not some stirring strain of knightly 
days, to chime with the chord which chance has struck within my 
breast ?" 

" If such be your pleasure, my gracious liege," replied Joyeuse, 
*' you shall have the lay of the truest knight that ever served monarch 
of your realm — the valiant constable, Bertram! Du Guesclin." 

With a fire and spirit which evinced how completely the glorious 
proAvess of the Avarrior, Avhose brave deeds he celebrated, was in 
unison with his OAvn ardent aspirations after chivalrous renown, 
n^oyeuse then sang, in a rick melodious voice, the foUoAving 



\'2'i CTiicnroN'. 

Dittvi cf Bu CGucscIm* 
J. 

A silver shield squire diil wit-liI. cluirj^cd with an cngle black, 

Witli talon red. and two-lbid lit ad. who lollowed on tiie track 

Of tile lii'>t kt!i;:iit tliat t re in liiiiit inirjed mace, or conclied tlie Innce, 

Dii Guesclin named, wlio tinnclieoii claimed as Constable ot" Fruiicc. 

II. 
In Brittanv, where Keinie>f dotii lie Dn Guesclin first drew breath ; 
Bom for eniprize — in counsel wise, orave, Io\ai nnto death. 
With hand and sword, with heart anu word, sirved well tiiis baron bold 
The azure scutcheon that displayed three fleiir-de-lis of gold. J 

"ill. 
1. ike Guesclin bold of warriors old in prowess there wa^ none, 
'Mid peers that ^too(l 'roinid Arthur trood, Haldwin or brave Houillon ; 
Nor, as 1 ween, hath kniuiithood seen a thief more puissantly 
\N itli stafF advance the flower of France 'gainst hostUe chivalry. 

IV. 
— Guesclin is dead ! and with liim fled the bravest and the best, 
That ever yet, by foe beset, maintained fair (iallia's crest ! 
His soul (>od shrivel — were he alive, his spear were couched a<:ain 
To guard the three gold lilies from the white cross of Lorrain I) 

" Heaven rest the soul of tlic valiant constable !'' siolicd Ilenvi, 
as .Toycuse brought liis ballad to a close. " Would he were Hvini^ 
now I — but Avhereibre," ho acldcd, rrlancinir iiflcctionately at tlio 
■vicotnte, " should I indulge the Avish while thou, my gallant 
D'Arf^ucs, rcmaincst to mc ? — With thee by my side," he con- 
tinued, smilins^, " I need have little anticipation of the third 
v'rown which the Duchess de ]\lontpensicr promises mc — Poland's 
•Jiadem I have already borne — that of France I now possess — 
but the monk's tonsure — " 

*• Will become her brotlier, the Ijalafre. better than you, my 
gracious liege," interrupted Joycuse, " to Tartams, with the felon 
cross of Lorrain and its supporters." 

* A free version of an "olde pentil" Breton lay of the ace of Charles V. of 
France, a stanza is sxihjoincil, that tlie reader may liave a taste of its freshness 
and shiiplieity. T!ie ballad, it may Le Gt)scrve(l, lias remained wholly inedited, 
until the publication by M. Crapelet, of the tioldeii manuscript of tlie Combat 
des Trente, extracted from the BiliUotltifiue du Hoi. 

£c Disti'f De il-lons. t3rrtrnn "Dt Gbsguin. 
licscu tiarctcm a . U. cglc tic satlc 
"3 . \\. tf strs ct . 3:, rog'r b.iston 
^Jonrtoist U pvctu Ir iallant tonrrst.iblc 
C!v.i tst Cjlasgiiin Ccnvan auotst ,1 ncm 
ftl broil fu nrs Ic dicbahcf brrion 
^Jrctii ct iiailii rouiactcii.v rumr . 3:. tor 
Cijiii lant srnii tr loutal cucr rt lie lion 
Urscu tra?ur a . itj. flours lif hs 'tior. 
^ The Cliiiteau de la Motte-Broon, near IkCiines. 
X The royal arms of France. 

^ The co<rnizaiue of the house of Guise. Tlie double Cross of Lorrain vas 
adoptc^J as an ciisi.Lrn by tlie I.eauntTS, of wliom the Diike of Guise, Mas J/.e 
prime mover: — a circumstance which jrave rise to the following sarcastic and 
somewhat irreverent quatrain, quite in the spirit of the times : — 
Mais, dites moi, que si^Miifie 
Que les Ligueurs ont double croix ?^ 
C'est qu'en la Liiriie on erucifie 
J>.'sus (. lirist encore une fois. 



THE SAKBACANE. 129 

*' An ! Joycusc — my brother," said Henri, smiling affectionately, 
*' tliou art, indeed, as brave as Du Guesclin, as loyal as Bayard." 

" Bayard!" exclaimed Crichton, " my heart leaps up at that 
name, as at the clarion's call. Would that my life might be like 
Bayard's, and," he added, fervently ; " my life's close likewise I" 

" To thiit prayer, I cry amen with my whole soul," said Joyeuse, 
" But while our hearts are warmed Avith the thoughts kindled by 
guch glorious recollections, prithee, Crichton, clothe somewhat of 
thel-' gallant deeds in thine inspiring verse. Thou art a minstrel 
worthy of Bayard. Even my I'ricnd, Philippe Desportes must 
yield the palm of song to thee." 

" Joyeuse is in the right,"" said Henri. " A nobler subject for 
the bard could not be found, nor better bard to rehearse sucli 
subject. Three well beneficed abbeys Averc the meed of as manv 
sonnets from Desportes. 1 know not how I shall requite your 
[•erformance, mon cher." 

" Bestow not such unmerited praise on me, I beseech your 
majesty," replied Crichton, "or 1 shall scarce adventure my lay 
on a theme I cannot dwell upon without deepest emotion." 

" First let us pledge the memory of the reproachless chevalier," 
said Henri, " and then embalm his deeds in song." 

The goblets were filled — and drained. Crichton pronounced his 
pledge with devotion, and quaftcd the sparkling contents of his 
"wine-cup to the dregs. 

In a tone, then, which showed how deeply his own sympathy 
was enlisted in the subject-matter of his strains — with an unstudied 
simplicity of manner perfectly in unison with the minstrel measure 
lie had chosen, and with much knightly fervour — he sang the 
followin<f ballad: — 

'^fit ^foorli of 23nunrl3. 
I. 

" A boon I crave, my Bayard brave :"- -'twas thus King Francis spoke; 
" The field is won, tlie battle done,* yet deal one other stroke. 
For by this light, to diib us kniglit, none worthy is as thou, 
Whom nor reproach, nor fear approach, of prince or peer we trow." 

II. 

*Sire!" said the knight, " \'on jndge not right, who owns a kingdom fair 
'Neath his command all knights do stand — no service can he share." 
" Nay I by our fay !" the king did sa}-, " lo ! at thy feet we kneel, 
Let silken rules sway tiltyard school;, our laws are here of steel." 

III. 

"VVith gracious mien did Bayard then, his sword draw from his side ; 

" By God ! Saint Michael I "and Saint George ! 1 dub thee knight!' he cried. 

* The famous engagement with the Swiss, near Milan, in which Francis the First 
came off victorious. Fleuranges places the ceremony of the king's knighthood 
br/orc the battle. The '• Loyal Servant," however, states that it occurred, as ia 
most probable, after the conflict. 

K 



130 CaiCHTON. 

" Ari?e, good king! wool may tliis bring — such grace on tlice confer. 
As erst Irom blow of Charles did flow, Koland or Oliver! ' 

IV. 

With belted blade, tlie king arrayed — the kni;iht the spur applied, 
And then his neck with chain tliii deck — and accolade supplied — 
" Do thy devoir at ghostly choir — maintain high coiirtesie, 
And from the fray in war's array, God grant tlioii never flee!"' 

V. 

" Certes, good blade,"* tiien Ravard said, his own sword waving high, 
" Thou shalt, perdie, as relic be preserved full carefully ! 
Kiglit fortunate art thou, good sword, a king so brave to knight! 
And with strong love, all ariirs above, rest honoured in my sight. 

VI. 

And never more, ns heretofore, by (!iiristian chivalry, 
My trcnciiant blade, shalt thou be rayed, or e'er endangered be! 
For I'aynim foes reserve thy blows — the Saracen and iMoor 
Tliine edge shall smite in bitter light, or merciless estour!"t 

VII. 

Years, since that day, have rolled away, and Bayard liurt to deatli, 
'Neath gray Rebecco's walls outstretch'd, exhales his latest breath. 
On Heaven he cried, or ere bodied — l)ut cross had none, I wist, 
bave that good sword-hilt cruciform, which with pale lips he kissed J 

VIII. 

Knight ! whom reproach could ne'er approach, no name like unto tiiine. 
With honour l)right, unsullied, white, on Tames proud scroll shallshine! 
Ihit were it not to mortal lot denied by grace divine. 
Should Liajard's life, and I3ayard's deatli, and his good sword be mine. 

"Bravo!" exclaimed Joyeuse, "may tlic same spirit whicli 
animated Bayard animate you on the morrow ! 

A bien jouster gardez votre querelle 
Et vous serez honorez et cheris, 

as runs tlie old refrain. ' Souvins toi,' as the poursnivants-at-arms 
are wont to cheer us at the tournev, ' de qui tu cs ills, et ne forligne 
pas!'" 

" ]\Iy father's sword will, I trust, be grasped by no degenerate 
hand," replied Crichton, smiling-, " and prove as fortunate to 
me as Orlando's resistless blade Durandal, or thy namesake 
Joyeuse, the trenchant weapon of Charlemagne. I shall neither 
forget of what worthy gentleman I am the son, nor," he added, 
glancing at Esclairmonde, " of what fair dame I am the servant." 

" Will not the dame you serve," asked the vicomte, smiling, 
*'in accordance with the good old practice of chivalry, too much 

• " Tu es bien heureiise d'avoir aujourdhui, a un si beau et si puissant roi, donne 
I'ordre dc chevalerie. Certes, ma bonne tpee, vous screz conmie reliques gardee, 
ct Eur tout autre honore !" — Precis de la Chevahrie. 

t ]'>st()ur — a grand melee. 

X " This sword has been lost. Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savov, requested it 
of Bayard's heirs. One of them, Charles du ^Motet, Lord of Chieliiliane, sent him, 
in del'auU of it, the battle-axe of wliich Bayard made use. The duke told the 
Dauphinese gentleman, wlien lie wrote to tliank him for the present, 'That in 
the midst of tlie pleasure he felt at beholding this weapon placed in the worthiest 
part of his gallery, lie could scarce elioose, but regret that it was not in sucli good 
hands as of its original owner.'" — Cliam/iicr. — See also the account of Bayard'i 
deatli in the Chronicle of tlie Loyal Servant. 



THE SAREACANE. 131 

neglected, I grieve to say, now-a-days, bestow some token or favour 
upon you? The dame De Fluxasgave her sleeve to Bayard, when 
he gained the prize of the tourney at Carignan." 

" I have no other token but tliis to bestow," said Esclairmondc, 
blushing, and detaching a knot of ribands from her hair, '• Avliich 
I now give to the Chevalier Crichton, and pray him to wear for my 
sake." 

Crichton took the gage, and j^ressing it to his lips, exclaimed 
with fervour, 

" I "will bear it upon my lance ; and if my adversary boast like 
token of his lady's favour, I trust to lay it as an ollcrinir at vour 
feet." 

" No more," interrupted Henri, impatiently. " I, myself, 
will break a lance in your behoof, belle Esclairmondc, and here 
appoint you Queen of the Lists. Remember, messeigneuvs, the 
heralds "vvill proclaim the joust to-morrow. I, myself, will enter 
the barriers, which I have appointed with more than usual mag- 
nificence. Thus much I owe to the combatants. Do tliou, 
Joyeuse, array fourteen of thy followers in Avliite scarves, and thou, 
D'Epernon, the like number of thy Quarante-Cinq, in yellow. I 
■will have the courses, « la fuulc^ take place by torchliglit, as was 
the custom of my chivalrous lather — at which time, also, I will 
make trial of my Spanish jennets in the new Ballet des Chevaux, 
■devised by my chief equerry. Par la ]Mort-Dicu ! if my reign be 
remembered for nothln": else, it shall be referred to for its ceaseless 
lestivities." 

" And now," he added, gallantly, " that Ave have listened to the 
lay ot prcux chevalier, 1 trust the response of gentle dame will 
not be denied us. The lair Torigni, I know hath a Avitching 
skill upon the lyre, but the voice I chiefly desire to hear is that 
of my lovely neighbour. Nay, fair demoiselle, I am peremptory, 
and AvUl take no refusal. She Avhose lightest tones are music, 
cannot be held excused on pica of want of skilL You need but 
to link your voice with the words of some simple legend, and 
I will engage that your performance shall exceed in attraction 
the most finished effort of the choicest Italian cantatrice, even 
though your opponent should be (with a glance at Crichton) the 
•divine Gelosa herself, whose notes attracted all our good citizens 
to the Hotel de Bourbon." 

Aware that remonstrance would be unavailing, with the best 
grace she could assume, and in a voice, the tones of which, as 
Henri justly remarked, were perfectly musical, Esclairmondc, 
without hesitation, complied with the king's request, and with 
much natural and touching pathos, executed the following 
^Spanish romance: — 

2 K 



132 CRICHTON. 



J)iisef anti Z-orniilin.* 
I 

Tliroimli the Vega of Granada, where tlie silver Darro elides — 
From ills tower within tlie Alpuxar — swift — swift Prince Yiisef rides. 
To her who iiolds his heart in tlirali — a captive Chiistian maid — 
On wirms of fear and doiiht he Hies, of sore mischance afraid. 
For ah I full well doih Yusef know with what relentless ire, 
His love for one of ail verse faith is noted by his sire : 
" Zorayda mine," he ciies nloiid — on — on — his courser strain-— 
"Zorayda mine !— thine Yusel conies 1" — the Alhambra walls he gains 

II. 

Through the marble Court of Lions — througli the stately Tocador— 
To Lindaraxa's bowers he goes — the Queen he stands before; 
IJer maidens round his mother group — but not a word she speaks. 
In vain amid that lovely throng, one lovelier form he seeks ; 
In vain he tries 'mid orient eyes, orbsd:.rker far to meet ; 
No form so light, no eyes so bright, as hers his vision greet, 
•' Zorayda mine — Zorayda mine ! ah whither art thou fled/" 
A low, low wail returns his cry — a wail as for the dead. 

Ill- 
No answer made his mother, but her hand gave to her son — 
To the garden of the Generalif together are they gone ; 
^Vhere gushing fountains cool the air — where scents the citron pale, 
\Vhere nightingales in concert fond rehearse their love-lorn tale, 
^Vhpre roses link'd with myrtles make green woof against the sky, 
Half hidden by their verdant screen a sepulchre doth lie; 
"Zorayda mine — Zoravda mine! — ah! wheiefore art thou flown, 
To gather flowers in Yemen's bowers w hile 1 am left alone I" 

IV. 

Upon the gro\ind knrels Yusef— his lieart is like to break ; 

In vain the queen w( nil comfort him — no comfort will he take. 

His blinded gaze he lur is upon that sculptured marliie fiir, 

Embossed witii gems, and glistening with coloured pebbles rare ; 

Ked stones of Ind — black, vermeil, gteen, their mingled hues combine, 

AVith jacinth, sapphire, amethyst, and diamond of the mine. 

*' Zorayda mine — Zorayda mine !" — tiuis ran sad Y'uset's cry, 

** Zorayda mine, within this tomb, ah ! sweet one ! dost thou lie r" 



Upon that costly sepulchre, two radiant forms are seen. 
In s[)arkling alabaster carved like crystal in its sheen ; 
The one as Y'usef fashioned, a golden crescent bears. 
The other, as Zorayda wrought, a silver crossiet wears. 

* The incidents of this ballad are, with some sli<iht variation, derived from 
those of the exquisite Frencli romance, I'lorc et BUmcheJwr, the date of which may 
be referred to tlie tbirteentli ccnttir}', and which iimiucstionably, as its receirt 
editor, iL Taulin, I'aria, supposes, is of b^'auish or ^Moorish origin. 



THE SAKBACANE. J 33 

And ever, as soft zephyr sighs, the pair his breath obey. 
And meet within each others arms hke infants in their play.* 
*• Zorayd'i (air— Zorayda fair" — thus golden letters tell 
" A Christian maid lies buried here — by Moslem loved too well. 

VI. 

Tliree times those golden letters with grief sad Yusef reads. 

To tears and frantic agony a fearful calm succeeds — 

*' Ah ! wo is me ; Zoiayda mine — ah ; would the self-same blow 

That laid thee 'neath tliis mocking tomb, had laid thy lover low; 

Two faitliful liearts, like ours, in vain stern dcatli may strive to sever— 

A moment more, tlie pang is o'er, ihe grave unites us ever, 

Zorayda mine — Zorayda mine— this dagger sets me free — 

Zorayda mine — look down — look down— thus — thus I come to thee l" 

VII. 

" Hold ! Yusef, iiold !" a voice exclaims, " tliy loved Zorayda lives — 
Thy constancy is well approved — tiiy sireliis son forgives. 
Thine ardent passion doidjting long — thy truth I tlius have tried. 
Behold her wiiom thy faitiiliath won — receive her as thy bride!" 
In Yusef s arms — to Yusef s heart, Zorayda close is pres>'d. 
Half stifled by a flood of joy, tliese words escape hi-, breast : — 
"Zoravda mine- Zoiayda mine! — ah! dtubly dear thou art 
Uninterrupted bliss be ours, whom deatli has failed to part l** 

The monarch's loud applauses at the close of the song were reite- 
rated to the echo by the asscir.blage. Crimsoning with shame, 
Eslairmondc ventured a glance towards her lover, whose silent admi- 
ration was of more value in her eyes than the courtly compliments 
which were so freely lavished upon her efforts. 

" And now for the lay of the belle Torigni," said Henri, " her 
5ongs are wont to be of a more sprightly description — ah! Signorina 
mia I Shall we sue in vain?" 

Torigni needed little pressing ; but with much archness and 
spirit, complied with the king's request in the following ballad: — 

Yolanticf 

A golden flower embroidering, 
A lay of love low murmuring ; 
ISecluded in the eastern tower 
Sits fair Yolande within her bower: 

Fair — fair Yolandel 

• This circumstance is thus depicted in the French Romance i 
En la toinbe et quartre tuiaus 
Aus quartre cors bien fait et biaus. 
Es quiex li quartre vent feroient 
Chascuns, ainsi com'il ventoient. 
Quant li vens los enfans tochoit, 
L'un beisoit i'autre et accoloit ; 
Si disoient, par uiLcroinance 
De tout lor bon, de lor enfance. 

lYoRE ET liLAKCnEFLOIU 

t A reiy free adaptation of a sparkling little romance by Audefroy-le Bastard 
to be found in the liomanccro Francois, entitled Bele Yolans. JNIucli liberty has 
been taken with the conii.it i:-.-^ i,:.xaii:* — ijilceJ the song altoj^ether bears but 
ghjiht resemblance to its original 



134 CRICHtON. 

SiitidcMily a voice austere, 

\\ \i[\ sliarp rpprooC breaks on licr ear :— 

Her iiiuilier 'tis who silently 

Has stolen upon lier privacy — 

All ! fair Yolande! 

*' Mother ! why that angry look ? 
Mother! wily iliat ^luup rebuke? 
Js it tliat I while away 
My solitude witliamorons lay'' 
Or. is it that inv thread ot"j:old 
Idly I weave, that thus you scold 

Your own Yolande — Your own Yolande? 

II. 

It is not that you while away 
Your solitude with amorous lay. 
It is not that your thread of gold 
Idly you weave that thus I scold 

My fair Yolande! 
Your want of caution 'tis I chide: — 
The Baron fancies tiiat you hide 
lieiieath the cushion on your knee, 
A letter from the Count Mahi: — 

Ah I fair Yolande! 
Br.sy tongues have filled his brain 
\\ ith jealousy and frantic pain ; 
Hither hastes he with his train ! — 
And if a letter there should be 
Concealed 'neath your embroidery? 
.Say no more. Hut give it me. 

My own Yolande — my own Yolande." 

"By our Lady!" exclaimed Henri, laughing, "that ditty likc9 
me well. Samson, a cup ot" Syracuse — messeigneurs, I pledge our 
fair minstrels — Ah I — par la ]\lort Dieu ! — I have a feeling of such 
unwonted exhilaration in our heart, that I must perforce give vent 
to it in song. My Hippocrenc is this fiery -wine — my inspiration 
the lovely Esclairmonde.'' 

This gracious intimation on the part of his majesty was received, 
as might be anticipated, coming from such a quarter, with acclama- 
tions. 

" Henri is certainly drunk, ahbe," observed Joyeuse. 

" Beyond a doubt," returned Brantome, shaking his head, and 
perfectly unconscious of his own condition, " Avine speedily assaults 
his brain — ha — ha ! But do you not perceive, my dear vicomte, 
that tlie banquet draws to a close ?" 

"Do you think so?" asked Torigni — "my heart flutters very 
unaccountably. jMonsieiu* le vicomte, bid your page give me the 
least possible drop of Cyprus. I have not entirely recovered the 
shock her ^Majesty of Navarre gave me." 

'" Or the effects of Crichton's billet," returned Brantome, hem- 
ming signilicantly. 

" His majesty's song," intcrnoccd Joycu;-e. 



THE SARBACANE. 135 

With a taste and skill that showed how highly cultivated had 
been the musical talent he possessed, Henri then gave the 
following rondel : — 

Issdairmontrt, 
I. 

The crown is proud 

That decks our brow ; 
The laiigli is loud— 

That triads us now. 
The sounds that tall 

Around — above 
Are laden all 

N\ itli love — with love — 

NN ith love — with love. 

II. 

Heaven cannot show, 

'Mid all its sheen 
Orbs of such glow 

As here are seen. 
And monarch ne'er 

Exulting own'd, 
Queen might compare 

With Esclairmonde. — 

With Esclairmonde. 

III. 
From Bacchus' fount, 

Deep draughts we drain; 
Their spirits mount. 

And (ire our brain ; 
But in our heart 

Uf hearts enthroned. 
From all apart, 

Ilests Esclairmonde — 

Rests Esclairmonde 

** Perfect !" exclaimed Ronsard. 

" Perfect!" repeated every voice. 

" His late majesty, Charles IX., never improvised strains more 
delightful," continued the bard. 

*•' Never," replied Chicot, " Charles's unpremeditated strains 
being generally understood to be your composition, Monsieur de 
Ronsard. I think nothing oi' them. Mediocrity is the prerogative 
of royalty. A good king must be a bad poet. But you have all 
praised his majesty's performance, now listen to the moral of the 
story — though morality 1 must own is a little out of fasliion in the 
Louvre." And mimicking, so far as he dared, the looks and tones 
of the king, the jester commenced his parody as folio v.'s : 

The crown is proud. 

But brings it peace ? 
The laugh is loud — 

Full i^iciw 'twill cease. 



136 CRICIITOX. 

The sounds that fall 

From liizlitfst breath, 
Are laden ;ill 

Wjtii death — witli death. 

\\ ith death— with death. 

" Enough, nnd too much," interrupted Henri, "vrc will not have 
our flow oi" spirits checked b}'- thy raven croaking. Be prepared,* 
he ^vhispcred, *• with the signal; and now, messcigncurs," he con- 
tinued aloud, " the night wears, the music sounds again, the new 
masque of ' Circe and her nymphs"' awaits you. Nay, mignonne," 
he added, in a low impassioned tone, and forcibly detaining Esclair- 
monde ; " you must remain with me." 

At this hint from the monarch the guests arose ; and each gallant 
taking a dame under his arm, left the banquet-hall. Ciichton and 
Torigni were the last to quit the room. A signiticant look passed 
between the Scot and Chicot, as he lingered for an instant at the 
doorway, the meaning of which the latter appeared clearly to 
comprehend, for waving his hand, as if in obdiencc to the royal 
command, the perfumed torches were suddenly extinguished. 
Page, valet, usher, and bullbon, disappeared ; the tapestry was 
swiftly drawn tog(>ther ; the valves were closed ; and Henri was 
left in darkness with the demoiselle. 

Ail this was the work of a moment. The king was taken a little 
by surprise. Chicot had given the signal sooner than he intended. 

Concluding himself alone with Esclairmonde, Henri addressed a 
passionate exclamation to her, at the same time endeavouring to 
obtain possession of her hand. The demoiselle, however, Avith a 
cry of terror, eluded his ^^rasp, and lied, so i'ar as she was able to 
determine in the obscurity in which all was wrapped, towards the 
door. 

" Ah, ah, fair bird ! you cannot escape nic now," exclaimed 
Henri, exiiltlngly, following in pursuit. 

And as he spoke, witli outstretched hands lie grasped at some- 
thing which, in the darkness, appeared to be tlie llying iigure of 
the damsel. The sUdden prostration of his royal person, and the 
subsequent loud jingle of falling glass, mixed with the clatter of 
plate, soon, however, convinced him of his error ; while a stifled 
laugh, proceeding, as he concluded, from the demoiselle, completed 
his mortification. 

The king arose, but said nothing, and, suspending his own 
respiration, listened intently. Eor a moment not a sound wai 
lieard. Henri then thought he detected a light step stealing 
towards the other side of the room, and directed his attention to 
tliat quarter. A noise, as of arras being raised, followed by a faint 
creak, such as might be produced by a sliding panel, was just 
audible. " Diable ! the secret door — can she have discovered 
it ?" ejaculated Henri, rushing in the direction of the sound. 
" She may elude me alter all." 

A light laugh, however, issuing from a dlfTcrent part of the 



THE SARBACANE. 137 

cliamber, and which, questionless, originated with his inamorata, 
Batistied him that she was still in the room. Gliding noiselessly 
forward, guided by the sound, ere another instant he had grasped a 
small soft hand, which he covered with a thousand kisses, and 
which, strange to say, palpably returned his pressure. 

Henri was in positive raptures. 

" How much one may be deceived!" exclaimed the enamoured 
monarch ; " this delightful gloom makes all the diflercnce in the 
world. 1 was quite right to have the torches extinguished. You, 
fiir Esclairmonde, who, a few minutes ago, were all coyness and 
reserve — a very belle dame sans mevci — are as amiable and complai- 
sant as — (whom shall I say ?) — as the obliging Torigni." 

" Ah, sire!" murmured a low voice. 

" I'faith, fair demoiselle,"' continued the delighted Henri, " so 
charming do 1 find you, that I am half tempted to become a 
heretic myself. On these lips I could embrace any faith proposed 
to us—" " 

At this moment, a hollow voice breathed in the very portals of 
his ear, these words — "Vjlain Hekodes"'"' — an anagram framed 
by tlie Jacobins upon his own name — Henri de Valois. 

The king started, and trembled. 

It has already been stated, that Henri was bigoted and super- 
stitious to the last degree. His hand now shook so much, that 
he could scarcely retain the fiir fingers he held within his grasp. 

" Did yoa speak, demoiselle ?" he asked, after an instant's pause. 

" No, sire," replied his companion. 

" Your voice appears strangely altered," returned Henri, " I 
scarcely recognise its tones as those of Esclairmonde." 

" Your majesty's hearing deceives you," returned the lady. 

" So much so," replied Henri, " that \ could almost fancy I had 
heard your voice under similar circumstances before. This shows 
liow one may be mistaken." 

" It does, indeed," replied the lady ; " but perhaps your majesty 
found the voice to whicli you allude more agreeable than mine." 

" By no means," replied Henri. 

" You would not then change mc for any other ?" asked the 
lady, timidly. 

" Not for my kingdom," excLiinicd Henri, "would I have any 
one else in your place ! She of whom I spoke was very diderent 
from you, via ?»/<»." 

" Are you quite sure of that, sire ?" 

" As of my salvation," replied Henri, passionately. 

" Of which thou art by no means assured," breathed the deep 
sepulchral voice in his ears. 

" There — again — did you hear nothing, demoiselle ?"" asked the 
king, in new alarm. 

" Nothing whatever," rejoined the hdy. *' Yf hat odd fancies 
you have, sire !" 



138 CRICHTON". 

'■'■ OJtl, indeed !" answered Henri, tremblin2f. " I begin to tlilnk 
I acted -svrongly in loving a Huguenot. — Par la Saint-Barthelemy ! 
you must reform your I'aith, demoiselle." 

" 'Tis thou, Henri de Valois, who must reform," returned the 
sepulchral voice, " or thy days are numbered." 

" Averte faciem tuam a peccatis meis .'" exclaimed the terrified 
king, dropping on his knees, " et omnes iniquitates vieas dele /" 

" What ails your majesty ?" asked his companion. 

"Hence — hence — lair delusion!" exclaimed Henri — "avoid 
thee ! — Doceho iiiiqiios vlas tuas, Domine I" 

*' Trouble not the virtuous Huguenot," continued the voice. 

" I}i peccatis coiicepit me mater, '^ continued Henri, 

*'True,"' replied the voice, " or the memory of Fernelius hath 
been scandalously calumniated." 

"Fernelius!" echoed Henri, scarcely comprehending what was 
said to him, and fancying in his terror that the voice had acknow- 
ledged itself to belong to the shade of his mother's departed phy- 
sician—" Art thou the spirit of Fernelius arisen from purgatory to 
torment me ?" 

" Even so," was the response, which seemed mingled with 
diabolical laughter. 

" I will have nighth'- masses said for the repose of thy sold, 
unhappv Fernelius," continued the king — " so thou wilt no more 
perplex me. In I'aradisum deducant tc Aiirjeli ! Suscipinnt 
JMarti/ves !" 

'*Thou must do more," returned the voice. 

" I will do any thing — every thing you enjoin, gracious Ferne- 
lius," said the king. 

" Cherish thy jester Chicot," continued the voice. 

" As my brother." answered the king. 

*'Not as thv brother — but as thyself," returned the shade of 
Fernelius. 

" I will— I will," replied Henri. " AVhat more ?" 

" Abandon this vain quest of the virtuous Esclairmonde, and 
return to her whom thou hast abandoned." 

" Whom mean you ?" asked the king, somewhat perplexed — 
*' to whom have your words especial reference, most excellent 
Fernelius — to my Queen Louise ?" 

"To the Demoiselle Torigni," rejoined the voice. 

" Torigni !" echoed Henri, despairingly — "any of my formei 
loves were preferable to her. Is there no other alternative ?" 

" None whatever," sternly answered the spectre. 

" Sooner then," replied Henri, " will I incur — ha! — diahlc ! — 
a ghost indulge in merriment — this is some trick — " he exclaimed, 
suddenly recovering his confidence, and starting to his feet, while, 
with his right hand, lie grasped at some object near him. " We 
have traitors here," he continv.od, as steps were heard retreating. 
*' Tliis is no ghost — no Fernelius — " 




-d 



THE SARBACANE. 139 

" Wliat in the name of wonder has your majesty been talking 
about all this time ?" asked the kidy with aileetcd astonishment. 

" Vou shall hear anon. 'Fore Heaven, demoiselle, you will have 
reason to repent this conduct — and your accomplice likewise will 
rue his rashness. We can readily divine who is the author of this 
mistaken pleasantry. What ho! lights! li<4hts !" And applying 
a whistle to his lips, the doors were instantly thrown open, and the 
attendants rushed in with llambeaux. 

The torchlight fell upon the monarch and his companion. 
Abashed probably at the presence of so many spectators, the lady 
covered her face witli her iiands. 

" Look up, demoiselle !" ejaculated Henri, angrily — " Nay, I, 
will not spare your blushes, depend upon it. Our whole court shall 
learn the trick you would have put upon your sovereign : — our 
whole court shall witness your exposure. Look up, I say — if 
your effrontery could carry you thus lar, it may bear you still further. 
A few moments back the laugh was on your side, it is now on ovrs 
— ah! — ah! — Par Dicu ! — 1 would not spare you this inlliction 
for our best barony. Look up — look up, Demoiselle Esclair- 
monde — " 

And forcibly withdrawing the hands of the lady, her features 
were revealed to the general gaze. 

They were those of Torigni ! 

Despite the presence in which ihey stood, the courtiers found it 
impossible to repress a titter. " Diantre !'' exclaimed Henri, pet- 
tishly — " Duped ! — deceived ! — what — what has become of Esclair- 
monde?" 

At this moment the crowd respectfully drew aside, and the 
Queen Louise stepped forward. 

" The Demoiselle Esclairinonde has placed lierself under my 
protection," she said, approaching his majesty. 

" Under your protection, Louise I" said the monarch, in amaze- 
ment. "Do you ailbrd sanctuary to a Huguenot? By tlie lour 
Evangelists I madame, we esteemed you too good a Catholic to 
hazard even the chance contamination of a heretic's presence." 

" I trust I m.ay sympatliise witli the distress of those whose 
opinions dilter Irom my own without offence to Him who is in 
Himself all charity," replied Louise, mildly ; •' and in tliis ca^o where 
innocence and purity have sought refuge with me, I could lay 
little claim to the first of Christian virtues — Mercy — had I refused 
it. I have passed my word for her safety." 

'"' You have done wisely — very wisely — I must say, madame," 
exclaimed Henri, contemptuously, " and no doubt your lather 
confessor will concur with your sentiments. We shall see. I shall 
not argue the point now. There is one person, however, with 
whom we can deal. AVhere is the demoiselle's loyal servant? 
Where is Crichton? He has not taken shelter vmder your wing 
likewise. Your word wc conclude is not passed for lain" 



140 CRICHTOX. 

" The Clievallcr Ciichton lias quitted the Louvre, Henri," 
rcpiicd Louise. 

" Lnpossible !" exclaimed the king; " the gates are closed hy an 
express order.'' 

•' He is gone, nevertheless," rejoined Torigni. 

"Gone 1" echoed Henri. " V>y your contiivance, madame," 
he added, looking angrily at the queen. 

"No, Henri," replied Louise, gently; " neither had he a hand in 
Esclairmonde's liberation. The demoiselle sought me alone.'' 

" How then did he contrive his llight?" demanded the king, 
turning to Torigni. 

The demoiselle glanced towards the secret panel and nodded. 
Henri understood her. 

" Kndiigh," he said, " I sec it all, but where is your accomplice 
— the spectre?" 

" Here — sire — here," cried Siblot, dragging forth Chicot, -whoso 
icct he had detected peeping from under the table, " here is — " 

" The Doctor FerneliiiS," replied Chicot, Avitli a look of drull 
contrition, "pardon — pardon, sire." 

" Thou Fernelius! " exclaimed Henri, -who, notwithstanding his 
dis])leasure, could scarcely Ibrbear laughing at Chicot's grimaces, 
" How didst tliou produce those awl'ul sounds, thou treacherous 
knave ?" 

" I?y this tube," replied Chicot, holding up the sarhacane of the 
Vieonite de Joycuse. " You must own 1 played my part ^vith 

" A sarhacane I" exclaimed Henri — " henceforth I banish all 
tubes of this description from the Louvre, and thou mayst thank 
our clemency, deceitful varlet, that I do not banish thee with them." 

" Surely your majesty would not pass a sentence of self-exile," 
returned the jester. " Sire you promised the v\orthy Fernelius to 
cherish me as yourself" 

"Coquin," cried Henri, "I am half disposed to send thee to 
keep Fernelius company. But enough of this. Joycuse," he added, 
" go with thy ibllowers to the Hotel de Soissons, and if tliou 
encounterest this Avayward Crichton or the mask within its walls 
place both under arrest till to-morrow. Lose not a moment on 
the way. Madame, I attend you." 



141 



CHAPTER X. 

THE HOTEL IJE SOISSOXS. 

Voila (lone son execrable palais ! i^alais de la luxure, palais do la trahison, palaia 
de tous les crimes! — 

VicTOK Hugo. 

Quitting the Louvre, its festivities, and its enrau-ed and dis- 
contented monarch, and descending into the gardens ol'the palace, 
Ave shall now pursue the footsteps of a masked cavalier, who, wrapped 
in the folds of a sable domino, took his hasty way through its 
embowered walks and trim arcades. 

The whole of the space, at this time crowded by the courts and 
other buildings forming the offices of the Louvre was, at the period 
of our narrative, disposed in noble alleys bordered with exquisite 
shrubs — shadowed by tall trees — with here and there terraces and 
patches of the smoothest verdure — balustred with marble steps and 
low pillars — and watered by gushing fountains of the clearest 
crystal ; anon diverging into labyrinths and bowers, in which 
gleamed Faunus or Diana, or haply some "nymph to the bath 
addressed," and displaying throughout the luxury and magnifi- 
cence of the monarch (Francis L), by whom the pluisancc had 
been laid out. 

The moon shone clear and cold m the highest heavens as the 
cavalier hurried swiftly through this region of beauty. For one 
instant he paused to gaze at the wing of the Louvre fronting the 
spot on which he stood. The casem.ents were brightly illuminated 
with the torches of the fete — the music resounded blithely from 
afar — but the masker's eye rested not upon the festive lights, nor 
did he listen to the gay symphonies. His eye was fixed upon a 
lamp shining like a star from one of the higher towers of the period 
of Philip Augustus that flanked the palace, and his ear was 
strained to catch the faint sound produced by the closing of a 
lattice. He then plunged into a dark avenue formed by two 
rows of clipped yews before him. 

The gardens of the Louvre were bordered on the one hand by 
the waters of the Seine, across which river-chains were dravrn so as 
to cut off all approach in this quarter, Avhile on the other, they were 
defended by a turreted wall and external moat, which separated it 
from the encroaching buildings of the Rue du Coq. Emerging 
suddenly from the alley in which he had disappeared, the ca- 
valier stood beneath the shade of a spreading elm, whose branches 
overtopped the wall upon which he gazed. 

Tiie figure of a sentinel, with arquebuss in hand, was seen 



142 CRicnroN. 

slowly parading tlic rampiut-walk, liis steel cap and liabcrgeon 
gleaming in the pale moonlight. To divest himself ot'his domino, 
underneath Avhich appeared a rich satin ball-room costume — to 
swatlie the folds of the cloak around his left arm, and with his right 
hand pluck his puignard from its sheatli, and strike it deeply into 
the bark of the tree, by which means he rapidly climbed it— to pass 
along its branches — to drop Avithin a few paces of the astonislied 
sentinel — and swift as thought to place the weapon at Ins throat, 
was with the cavalier little more than tlie wo'-k of a moment. 

So unexpected lind been the assault, tliat the sentinel scarcely 
attempted any resistance, and was so closely griped, as to be unable 
to raise a cry: his arquebus? was wrested fronr his hold, and Imrled 
into the foss ; while his antagonist, having apparently accomplished 
his purpose in disarming him, bounded over the parapet ot the 
•\vall, and, clinging to the rough side of a buttress, descended with 
the utmost velocity and certainty to the very edge of the water, 
Avhere, taking advantage of a projecting stone, he contrived to bring- 
both feet together, and with a single spring, cleared the wide deep 
inoat, and alighted in safety on the other side — disappearing in- 
stantly afterwards in the far-cast shadows of the gloomy I'uc du 
Coq — and accomplishing what appeared in the eyes of the sen- 
tin<?l, who had watched his efforts from above, a marvellous and 
almost superhuman feat. 

" j\Iille tonnerres !" exclaimed the sentinel, who had made 
sure that the cavalier would have fallen midway into the moat, 
rubbing his eyes in astonishment as he beheld him arrive on the 
opposite bank, " it must be the fiend in person !" Whereupon he 
devoutly crossed himself, adding, " no man of mortal mould, save 
one, perchance, could have taken that leap, and he who might have 
done it, the Scottish galliard Crichton, people say, is something 
more than mortal. I recollect seeing him leap five-and-twenty feet 
in the hall of arms, but that was nothing to this moat, which, if 
it be an inch, niust span nine yards, with scarcely a resting-place 
for the point of a toe to spring from — to say nothing of a run. 
Tu-dicu ! — if it be the Chevalier Crichton, and he be not the devil, 
he has had a narrow escape of it to-night, in more ways than one ; 
for had he passed through any gate of the Louvre, instead of down 
that break-neck wall, he had encountered the dagger of Maurevert, 
or some of Madame Catherine's mouchards. Notrc-Darac ! if it 
be Crichton, I am not sorry he has escaped, as we shall have the 
combat to-morrow in that case. lUit peste ! why did he throw 
away my arquebuss ?" 

With his vain lamentation, and his vain search for liis gun, v/e 
shall leave the sentinel, and once more track the steps of the 
cavalier, who had no sooner gained the shelter of the houses, than 
he resumed his domino. Swiftly shaping his course througlr the 
deserted streets, he glided along like a phantom, without encoun- 
tering so much as a stray Serjeant of the guct royal, some of whom 



THE HOTEL DE SOISSONS. 143 

were, for tlie most part, to be met Avitli at all hours in this fre- 
quented quarter, Avhen, at the very moment lie passed it, the door 
of a small tavern, the Falcon, situate where tlie Hue Pelican turns 
from the Rue Saint- Honore, was suddenly thrown open, and forth 
issued two roystcring blades, members of the university, it would 
seem from their scholastic caps and gards, who had evidently been 
indulging in copious libations, and were now, in all probability, re- 
treating to their place of rest for the night. 

In ligure, the one was tall, light, and not without a certain air 
of dignity in his deportment. Despite its uncertainty, his step was 
light and agile as that of a mountaineer, and about his shoulders 
light, long, yellow hair depended in great profusion. The second 
scholar was more squarely and stoutly built, and moved forward as 
if urged into his present quick movement by the energy of his 
companion. A small square cap surmounted a liead of rough 
brown curling hair, shading an open manly countenance, lighted 
up by a keen gray eye, sparkling at this moment with unwonted 
iire. His whole appearance, while it betokened the possession of 
great personal strength, showed also that his vigour was united 
with a sluggish temperament. With a step almost as heavy 
as that of his master, a huge dog plodded at his heels, bearing 
rmdoubted marks of his English origin. And if any doubts 
could be entertained as to what country either dog or master might 
belong, the student settled that question by roaring at the top of 
a strenuous voice the following chaunt, in a tongue which requires 
no translation on our part to place it before the reader. 

I. 

Your Gaul may tipple his thin, thin wine. 
And prate of its hue, and its fragrance fine. 
Shall never a drop pass throat of mine 

Again — again ! 

His claret is meagre (but let tliat pass), 
I can't say much for his hippocrass, 
And never more will I fill my glass 

With cold champagne. 

ll. 

But froth me a flaggon of English ale. 
Stout, and old, and as amber pale, 
Wliicli heart and head will alike assail — 

Ale— ale be mine I 

Or brew me a pottle of sturdy sack, 
Sherris and spice, with a toast to its back. 
And need shall be none to bid me attack 

That drink divine! 

The reader will have been at no loss to discover in tneso 



144 CRICHTON. 

Students liis somewhat ncp^lectcJ friends O^ilvy and Blount. 
To tlie cavalier also they "would appear to be equally well known, 
for lie instantly joined them, addressing the former by his name. 

Ogilvy at once came to a halt, uttering an exclamation of delight 
and astonishment. " You are fortunately encountered, Jasper," 
said tlie cavalier ; " you can serve me," 

" Show me but how !'' exclaimed Ogilvy — " my arm shall second 
your wi^^hcs." 

" If your head have discretion enough to guide it, I am assured 
it will,'" returned the cavalier; *' but the enterprise on which 1 am 
bent requires coolness as well as courage, and you were better able 
to assist mc had your libations been poured from the fountain 
rather than from the wine-flask."" 

" Our libations have been poured forth in honour of the victor 
of the University of Paris — of the admirable Crichton," returned 
Ogilvy, somcwiiat reproachfully, " and if blame is to be attached 
to our carouse, he who is the cause of it must be content to bear 
the burthen. My pulse beats quick 'tis true, but my brain is 
calm enough — and if need be, 1 will plunge into the first well we 
cncoimter on our road." 

"And I," said lUount, " have little to observe, noble sir, except 
that I will follow you wherever you list to lead me. The wines I have 
swallowed — as sour as Flemish beer, with (Heaven save the mark !) 
your honoured name upon my lij)s ; and the stupifying heibe a la 
reine, as these Frenchmen call their tobacco leaves, which I have 
pulled aAvay, may have muddled my intellects; but they have not 
extinguished my courage. I can if need be, put some guard upon 
my tongue, having no great fancy for talking at any time. And I 
can still (I would fain hope) wield staff or SAvord, as occasion may 
require, to some purpose. J3ut if I should fail in my devoir, there 
is a follower at my heels, whose brain is at all seasons as bright as 
my own ; who is no toper, and who will serve you loyally tooth 
and nail. What ho, Druid !" 

A deep-toned growl from the dog answered his master's call. 

*' Brave dog," said the cavalier, patting the aniuial's leathernside, 
"would thou couldst go with me !" 

" By Saint Dunstan ! he s/ia/l go with ^-ou if you desire it, worthy 
sir," rejoined Blount. 

*•' "Will he leave, then, his master," asked the cavalier incredu- 
lously. 

" He will do aught I bid him," answered Blount. *' Here, 
sirrah," and stooping for an instant, he muttered somewhat in 
Druid's ear, accompanying his intimation with an emphatic gesture, 
perfectly intelligible, it would seem, to the dog, who instantly 
quitted his side, and attached himself to that of the cavalier. " He 
will not quit you now till I recall him," said Blount, " Druid knows 
his duty as well as the most trusty retainer." 

"His sagacity is indeed wonderful," said the cavalier, "and I 




)gibry and Blount 



THE nOTEL DE SOISSONS. 145 

tliank you for your confidence in trusting me Avitli so valued a 
friend. But I pray you to recall your boon. The risk I run is 
imminent." 

" I have given you my dog as a gage, noble sir," returned Blount, 
firmly, ''and I may as well throw my own life into the bargain, 
seeing I would almost as soon part with one as the other. I 
give you both, therelbre, freely. Be tlie result of this adventure — 
•whither tending, to what concerning I know not — what it may, 
it matters not ; my prayers are soon said; my tenure to this world 
is but slight, and I have never yet heard of the danger I would 
not confront. In which respect I am somewhat of lionesi Druid's 
opinion, who holds all antagonists unwortliy of his teeth who will 
not rouse his ire ; and who will not turn his back on any beast that 
ever walked. Lead on, sir, I have that within me, that prompts 
me to be doing." 

" And you, Jasper Ogilvy ?" — 

A tight grasp of the cavalier's hand was all Ogilvy 's answer. 

" Enouiih !" said the leader, hastening; forward. 

And as they proceeded with the same rapid pace as heretofore, 
the mask briefly developed his project. " And so the Geloso, 
whom that assassin Spaniard stabbed, turns out to be a girl after 
all," said Ogilvy. — " By Saint Andrew, the interest I felt in her 
behalf is not so unaccountable as I conceived it to be. Right 
gladly will I lend a hand to her deliverance from this cursed astro- 
loger's roost, and from her persecutor. I marvelled much to see 
you in that mask and guise, but now 'tis all explained. Vou are 
in the right to undertake her rescue ; and were none other to be 
found, I would alone attempt it. A maiden — by my troth 'tis 
passing strange." 

" Not so strange, friend Jasper," remarked the Englishman, 
laughing ; " as the change which this metamorphosis, in point of 
sex, appears to have wrought in thy sentiments. This morning 
thou hadst a holy horror, Avorthy of John Knox himself, of every 
thing savouring of a player. Now, when a pair of bright eyes 
stare thee in the face, thou carest not to avow tliine errors. Ah ! 
I fear thou art flillen into the wiles of the enemy. Those dark 
looks and dark eyes are but snares, Jasper, and her calling is a 
vain one." 

" Tush," returned Ogilvy, " my abomination of her calling is 
not a whit diminished. And if I have expressed any concern 
respecting her, it is because — " 

'' She linds fivour in thine eyes — I am at no loss to perceive it," 
rejoined the Englishman. 

" No such thing," answered Ogilvy, sharply ; " and if you 
repeat that assertion. Master Blount, I shall think you desire to 
put an affront upon me. I repeat I care not for the girl. 
Of a verity she liatk charms. But what of that ? iSIarian Gra- 
liam, to whom I plighted my troth, hath a far sweeter smilo. 



14G CRICHTOX. 

tliougli her eyes may not be so bliiiht, or her tresses so near rival 
to tlic raven's wing. I care not lor her — nay, now I bethink me 
of her calling, Avere it not the pleasure of my patron and friend 
that I should accompany him upon this adventure, she might even 
tarry with Ruggicri in his tower, for any cflbrt I would make to 
release her." 

. " Your want of interest in her occasions some i-light discrepancy 
in your sentiments, Jasper," returned IJlount, laughing; " but 
since you lind the matter irksomC; leave it to us, and return to the 
Ecossais. We will accomplish the adventure alone, I Avarrant 
you."^ 

" Xo !" exclaimed Ogllvy, impatiently; "it shall never be 
said — " And he was proceeding with some warmth, wlien his 
speech was cut short by the cavalier, who addressed him with some 
coolness — '' It was not without reason, Jasper, that I told thee thy 
tongue was scarcely under tlie control of thy reason. I may not 
accept of thy assistance, if I am to purchase it at the hazard of 
failure." 

Thus rebuked, the choleric Scot held his peace, and the party 
moved on for some mouients in silence. 

Arrived within the Rue des Dcux-Ecus, at that time shadowed 
by the tall trees which formed the avenues and groves of Catherine's 
stately gardens, the cavalier, pointing out the high Belvidere of the 
vast Palladian structure, constituting the Hotel dc la Reine, now 
distinctly defined against the fleecy clouds of the moon-lit sky, 
exclaimed, " You now behold the castle of the enchantress. I 
liave not dlsGjuiscd the peril vou will incur bv entering: it. AYill 
you go on : 

]5oth answered in the affirmative. The party, therefore, turned 
the corner of the palace, and entering the adjoining Rue du 
Tour, along one side of Avhich its lofty walls ran, the principal 
front of the magnificent building, and its grand portal, erected by 
Bullan upon the model of the i arnese Palace at Caprarola (upon 
which an immense shield of n-.arble displayed the blazon and 
cypher of the queen-mother), Avere at once brought into view. In 
that still hour, and in that mysterious light, there Avas something 
ominous in the appearance of the gigantic building Avhich stood 
before them. Perliaps, in no instance was the superstition of 
Catherine's character more strongly evidenced, than in the con- 
Btruction of this proud but needless palace— needless, Ave say, 
because she had already expended vast sums upon the erection of 
the Tuileries, having after her husband's death abandoned the 
Tournelles, Avhen terrified by the predictions of her astrologers, 
Avho foretold that she Av^ould perish in some place bearing the name 
of Saint Germain ; and the Tuileries unfortunately happening to- 
be in the parish of Saint Germain I'Auxerrols — for this idle reason 
only did she al)andon the glorious edifice of her OAvn construction, 
iu.d at an infinitude of trouble, accompanied by prodigious outlays,. 



THE HOTEL DE SOISSONS. 147 

required Avhen her exhausted funds could ill brook such wanton 
expenditure, together with the secularisation of an abbey and the 
overturning of a nunnery (Les Filles Penitentcs), for which pur- 
poses she had to procure bulls from the Pope ; on this account 
alone, we say, did she proceed to cumber the ground with this 
huge structure — not a stone of which is now left standing, Avith 
the exception of the column or observatory attached to its courts, 
toward which building we are shortly about to repair, and shall 
then more particularly describe. It may not, perhaps, be here 
altogether out of place to mention, as a sequel to the story, a cir- 
cumstance which has been much dwelt upon by the supporters of 
judicial astrology, and which Avould almost seem to verify the 
prophecy of her soothsayer: viz., that Catherine, notwithstanding 
all her precautions, eventually expired in the arms of t^alnt Ger- 
main I'avyn, Bishop of Nazareth, chief confessor to her son, 
Henri III. 

The party now approached the grand portal, before which was 
arrayed a guard of some lialf-dozen musketeers with their ser- 
geant at their head — the rojal blazon upon their doublets glim- 
mcrinrj in the moonlight — who placed their Ions: musketoons in 
the rests, and blew their lighted tow-matches as they drew nigh ; 
while the sergeant, in a loud tone, commanded a halt. 

A brief parley ensued. But, perceiving the queen's glove dis- 
played upon the cap of the cavalier, the sergeant immediately 
drew his men aside and suffered them to pass. The gate was 
imbarred at their summons, and as the porter somewhat slowly 
performed his office, the following remarks from the sergeant 
reached the ears of the cavalier and his companions — 

" Ventx'cbleu ! Chopin — we have a strange night of it. Wo 
arc set here to prevent Ruggieri's escape, and it seems as if he had 
called all the fiends in Tartarus to his aid. First comes that mask 
and seeks admittance : we refuse him. Anon he comes again with 
a crowd of imps blacker than himself, demanding the deliverance 
of a player girl. Then, lor a third time he appears, with the king's 
signet, which we dare not disobey, and gains admission with his 
comrades. Well ! no sooner do we think we are rid of him, than, 
by Proteus ! here he is again, Avith a couple of familiars in the 
shape of scholars, and a dog the like of which I never saw before. 
Diable m'emporte ! if I can understand it. One thing is clear, 
he has got the queen's license, and so we must not say him nay, but 
he must have the devil's Avatch-word if he Avould return again, for, 
by holy Peter! he comes not forth Avithout a bullet to try the proof 
of his pourpoint." 

" Heard you not that ?" Avhlspered the cavalier, '* our foe is be- 
forehand Avith us. Not a moment is to be lost." 

The porter started, as he beheld the mask, and iuA-oluntarily 
placed his hand before his eyes to ascertain Avhether or not his 
vision deceived him. He bowed, lioAvever, to the ground as he 

L 2 



148 CRICHTON. 

recognised the ensign of the qucen-mothcr, and the next moment 
the party found themselves \vithin the court-yard of the palace. 

Before thcin stretclied a smooth parterre, in the midst of ^vhich, 
bathed in the moonlight, glimmered a lovely statue of the Queen 
of Love, the workmanship of the i'amous sculptor Jean Goujon, 
the restorer of the art in his own country, and surnamed the Phi- 
dias of France, who perished by the hands of Charles IX., 
at the massacre of Saint liurthelcmy. But it was not to gaze on 
this miracle of art that the cavalier now paused. Keither was it 
to admire the gorgeous and illuminated windows of Catherine's 
embowered chapel — the then wonder of Paris — to listen to the 
choral hvmn resounding from its shrines, and breaking the mid- 
night stillness around them — nor to note the majestic towers of 
Saint Eustache, which commanded the spot whereon they stood. 
Pointing out a tall column which might be discerned spiring from 
out a grove that skirted an extensive esplanade, and indicating the 
path that led to it through the gardens of the palace, the cavalier 
was about to quit liis companions, when Ogilvy's quick 03^0 detected 
figures gliding at some distance from them amongst the trees. 
" They are yonder, by Saint Andrew !" exclaimed the Scot, 
*' there is yet time." 

Scarcely had the words escaped him ere the cavalier disap- 
peared ; and the two scholars instantly commenced a pursuit of the 
ligures they had descried. Druid regarded his master wistfully 
for a moment, but receiving a fresh command from him to that 
effect, put himself upon the track of the cavalier. 

The doors of the hotel w^cre opened to the cavalier's summons. 
Not a word was exchanged between him and the ushers, from one 
of whom he received a torch. Alone he passed through a magni- 
ficent hall, the ceiling of which was decorated with exquisite 
frescoes — ascended a vast staircase of carved oak, and entered a 
long and glorious gallery crowded with trophies and panoplies 
collected by the chivalrous Henri II., and streaming with painted 
glass, " blushing with blood of queens and kings."" This gallery 
he swiftly traversed, and finally reached a recess, within which, as 
Catherine had informed him, were placed three bronze statues. 
Touching the spear of the central figure, it yielded to his pressure, 
disclosing a dark and tortuous passage, into which the cavalier 
unhesitatingly plun^i^ed 



U9 
CHAPTER XI. 

THE LABORATORY. 

Forcsirjht. But I liave travelled in the celestial sjjlieres, know tlie sio^ns, and 
plaiKJts, and their names — can judueof motions direct and retrograde ; of sextiles, 
quadrates, trines, and oppositions, riery trigons, and aquatical trigons. 

CoNGREVE. Love for Love. 

Leaving the cavalier to pursue his subterranean path alone, we 
shall endeavour, in the meantime, to give the reader some idea of 
the singular scene that awaited his arrival in the laboratory of the 
astrologer. 

Let him picture to lumself a high vaulted chamber, cylindrical 
in shape, massive in construction, dungeon-like in aspect. Let 
him darken its gray granite walls with smoke — erect within it lour 
pilasters, and decorate the Huted shafts oi" each with crowns, lleurs- 
de-lis, broken mirrors, horns of abundance, and with the letters (£*. 
and |i^. intcrlact.'d and surrounded with love-knots, devices emble- 
matic of the widowhood and queenly state of the buikler of the 
turret. Let him next place witliin each subdivision of tlie Avail, 
created by these pillars, talismanic elHgles of superstitious import, 
and lest his fancy should not be wild or extravagant enough to 
supply sculpture sulHciently grotesque, Ave Avill endeavour to give 
some direction to it. In the iirst compartment, then, let liim 
imagine " a kingly and croAvned shape" seated astride upon an 
eagle ; grasping in one hand a thunderbolt, and in the other a 
sceptre ; Avhile a female figure, beaked like the Ibis, holds to his 
gaze an enchanted mirror. Let him surround this group Avith 
hieroglyphics and cabalistic characters, and engrave beneath it tb.e 
word fl^agicl: the intelligence of Satan. In the next compart- 
ment let him place another female shape of rare beauty, Avitli 
dishevelled hair, grasping in the right hand a serpent, and in the 
left a singularly formed knife — let him encircle this medallion AA'ith 
HebrcAV and Chaldaic sentences, and inscribe at the head ILicIJCincl 
— the spirit of Venus ; and at the feet ^Smoijcl — one of the 
twelve angelic govei'nors of the celestial signs. We may add, 
also, that these talismans, esteemed of sovereign virtue, and of 
power to aid in the acquisition of mystical lore, Avere composed of 
divers metals, molten Avhen the constellations presiding ever the 
nativity of the queen, by Avliose command they Avere fabricated, 
lield sway ; and Avere soldered together Avith human gore, and the 
blood of goats. The third compartment is occupied by a group 
yet more fiintastical. Here may be seen an altar of ivory, against 
Avhich is placed a crimson cushion sustaining a huge crucifix of 
silver, inclosing a lesser cross of ebony. On either side stands 
a satyr, Avrought in bwnzc, supporting his rugged person Avith a 



150 CRICHTON. 

club, and bearing upon bis sbouldcr a vase of pure and sblning 
crystal, containing certain unknown drugs, destined, it would ap- 
pear, ibr some impious oblation to tlie Kvii One at tlic celebration 
of the Sorcerers' Sabbatb. 

Witbin tbc fourtli and last compartment some mystery Is evi- 
dently shrouded beneath the close-drawn folds of a thick and 
gloomy curtain. 

Ivuggieri's laboratory would have been incomplete bad it wanted 
what, in the jargon of hermetic pbilosopby, would be termed the 
keeper of secrets, tlic producer of immortal fire, the athanor, or 
furnace. Behold it ! — in shape round, as directed by the fornnda 
of the science, capped and winged on either side with a thin tube, 
with door and window, brazen plate, mattrass, and cucurbite 
comjilete. Upon the furnace door, tliis proianc application of the 
sacred text lias been made — " Qnccrite, quccrite ct invcnictis, jndsate 
et apcric'tur vobis." Around tlic square pane of the little window 
is traced the following enigmatical inscription, the solution of 
wliich must be left to the reader's ingenuity : — 

Nunc tiiniittis Super fiindaincnta 
Fiiiulanu'iita Super verba niea 
Verba niea Super diliizain te 
Diligaiii te Super alteudite. 

Upon the furnace is placed a gourd-shaped, bolt-headed glass vessel, 
licrmetically scaled, and filled with a red fluid, the label of which 
purports to be lac virr/iids. Next to this stands another cucurbite 
plunged ill bahieo, containing a specific prepared according to the 
recipes of Flamcl, Artephius, Pontanus, and Zacharius, for the 
cure of all astral diseases. Ailixed to the copper vessel, deno- 
minated Saint jNlary's Bath, in which this bolt-head is deposited, 
is the following inscription : 

]\Iaria mira sonat 
Quaj nobis taba donat 
Gumniis cum biiiis 
I'ugitivum t"uu;it iuimis 
Horis in triiiis, 
Triavinciat i'ortia finis 
Filia Plutouis 
Consortia jungit amoris. 

On the floor near to the furnace is strewn all the heterogeneous 
lumber proper to the retreat of an adept : to wit, earths, metals, 
" vitriol, sal-tartar, argaile, alkali," gums, oils, retorts, alembics, 
" crosslets, crucibles, and cucurbites." Nor must we omit a slab of 
black marble, on wliich arc deposited certain drugs and small 
phials, together with a vizard of glass, a circumstance sufliciently 
attesting the subtle and deadly nature of the tinctures sometimes 
extracted by the inmate of the chamber. 

Having thus put the reader in possession of the features of the 
room, we sliall now place before him its occupants. 



THE LABORATORY. 151 

At a tabic, quaint and p-rotcsquc in its character as the rest of 
the furniture, lighted by the dull red flame of a silver lamp, 
lurnishcd -with an hour-glass and a scull, with a mystical scroll 
stretched out before him, and apparently buried in deep cal- 
culations in a high-backed oaken chair, -wrought with the same 
bizarre devices as the table, sat an old man in a black velvet ^ai-b 
■\vitK llowing sleeves — whose livid countenance and bald furrowed 
brow, clotlicd with a velvet scull-cap, proclaimed him to be the 
presiding inilucnce of this weird abode. Beside llugo-icri sat 
another stately figure, in whose haughty, imperious demeanour and 
proud brow the reader, we apprehend, will have no difhculty in 
recognising the queen-mother. 

Underneath the table, and almost appearing with his broad, 
hunched shoulders to lend it support, glared tlie dwarf, Elberich ; 
his red luminous eyes sparkling like phosphoric coruscations in the 
gloom. Nothing of the mannikin's swart and shapeless figure could 
be discerned in the obscurity, beyond the outline, which resembled 
that of a grisly bear. But his hand would seem to grasp the 
wheel of some hidden machinery, serving to raise a trap-door, 
carefully contrived within the floor of the turret. At the dwarf's 
Icet was rolled, what appeared to be a round furry ball, but 
which, in reality, Avas a small black cat, of the civet species : 
an animal held in great request by tlie ancient necromancers for 
the confection and perfection of various charms, a certain pebble 
lodged beneath its tongue, being supjDOsed to confer the gift of 
Vaticination. 

At the moment when we raise the curtain of this picture for the 
reader's inspection, tlie group we have portrayed was silent and 
motionless, lluggicri pursued his calculations with earnest zeal; 
and the progress of his studies was watched \\ ith intense interest by 
the queen-mother. The dwarf remained immoveable as an ebon 
image. Nothing but the flashing of his eye-balls betokened ani- 
mation. 

Suddenly a sharp musical ring was heard vibrating in the air, 
like the sound produced by a glass vessel accidentally stricken. The 
queen-mother raised her eyes, and fixed them upon a curiously 
constructed astrological instrument, placed on a stand in her imme- 
diate vicinity. Framed according to the instructions delivered by 
the star-wise seers of antiquity, this machine represented seven 
figures symbolicid of the planets (whom INIercurius Trismcgistus 
calls the seven Governors of the World) — wrought with infinite 
labour and cost when each orb was in ascendance, of the most 
precious stones, earths, and metals, supposed to be under its 
especial influence. The figure upon which Catherine"'s gaze now 
turned was that of an armed man of ruddy brass, mounted upon 
a lion of the same metal, grasping in his right hand a naked 
sword, and in his left a trunkless head, carved in a blood-stone. 
Upon the helm of this martial image Hamed a beryl; and in 



152 CRICIITOX. 

its slow ascent, the weapon witliin its grasp coming in contact with 
a bell-shaped glass above it, had given the alarum. 

" The mask comes not,'' exclaimed Catherine, regarding the 
image with some dismay. *' Bright Jove hath no more dominion, 
we are now under the rule of fiery ]\Iavors — a planet of ma- 
lignant aspect towards us." 

"True, my daughter," returned the astrologer. "And see the 
red orb ascends within the second flicc of Aries. "Would he had 
arrived eie this conjunction had occurred! Our scheme will 
scarcely prosper." 

*' Say not so, father," replied Catherine, confidently: "If 
Crichton perish we shall have achieved much towards its accom- 
plishment. And when did thv tinctures, or Maurevert's poignard 
fail us ?'' 

'• If the blow be dealt, or the potion swallowed, never, my 
daughter, but — " 

•' But what, father ? Why these misgivings ?'' 

" The heavenly configurations presage danger to the Scot, not 
death," answei'ed the astrologer, gravely. " For, though in his 
horoscope the giver of life meets with the interficient at this hour ; 
tliough the lord of the fourth house is in conjvmction with the lord 
of the ascendant in Aries, within the orbs of a square of Saturn ; and 
Capricorn descends upon the cusp of the eighth ; yet there are other 
strong and countervailing signs. He may escape us, daughter." 

" Ila !" exclaimed Catherine. 

" Methiidvs I see his star still shining in the heavens," continued 
Ruggieri ; " majestic and serene it traverses the sl-cies. A halo of 
glory surrounds it, Malignant and cross aspects dart their baneful 
rays athwart its track. In vain they scowl. It pursues its course 
in splendour undisturbed." 

" Does thine art tell thee this?" demanded Catherine, impa- 
tiently. 

" j\Iy silent and unerring counsellors thus admonish me, my 
daughter,'' replied the astrologer, " I am but their interpreter." 

" Say on, tlien," continued Catherine, coldly. 

" The star has become a meteor," returned Ruggieri. '* Its 
lustre is blinding." 

" What more ?" 

"I gaze again. The hjcavcns are void and dark: the meteor 
ihat dazzled me has sunk — the star of Crichton has set for ever." 

" And when will this occur ?" 

*' Ere half a lustre shall have elapsed, my daughter." 

" So long ! and how Avill his doom be accomi)lished ?" 

*' The sign is fiery, and Saturn the afflicting planet," returned 
.he astrologer. " Within his leaden sphere Hylech is cadent. Tlie 
native will peri.-h by the edge of the sword." 

"And ilthe unerring counsellors tell thee thus much concerning 
this Scot, what import do they bring touching thine own late?" 



THE LAT50RATORY. 153 

" Sliall I erect a scliemc, my daugliter?'' 

•' It Avere needless," returned the queen-motlier, sternly, " I will 
read it for thee. Thy destiny is linked with that of Crichton. 
Or he or thou wilt perish. If lie survive the night the stake will 
be thy portion on the morrow ; I will not stretch forth my hand, 
as lieretofore, to redeem thee from the wheel." 

" My gracious mistress ! — " 

*' If the heavenly inlluences fail thee, wrest aid from darker 
powers. Summon to thy assistance by potent spells, such as thou 
boastest to have won fi-om thy magical lore, a demon, like that 
Avhich served the wise Cardan ; and bid him smite thine enemy. 
Tor, by my soul, if Crichton live to annihilate my projects, thy 
ashes shall be strewn by the winds over the Place de Grevc, ere 
niglit once again draw her veil over the city !" 

" The gnome Avho served the wise physician you have named, 
replied liuggieri, firmly, "had not power over life. Jerome 
Cardan could foresee, but not avert ; and yet he was Avell versed 
in the language of the stars. When he foretold that your august 
spouse, Henri II., was menaced with a fearful and sudden death, he 
could not unfold the means of its avoidance ; neither could his 
art turn aside the flital lance of Montgomerv. The end of the 
illustrious monarch was decreed on iiigh. And when my long 
communing with the celestial intelligences informs me that your 
own great career will close within the limits of Saint-Germain, I 
can do no more than point to the term of destiny. It is not enough, 
that your majesty has abandoned the Tournelles and Tuileries ; nor 
that you abstain from setting foot within the district bearing that 
name ; your destiny will infallibly be accomplished, despite your 
precautions. I have promised you length of days, power, and 
dominion ; and my prognostications will be fultilled. But the 
means of their fulfilment rests with myself I have shown you how 
your dominion may be maintained, your power extended, and by 
what means length of days may be ensured. If I perish, your 
honours, your rule, your sway over the king, your power will depart 
from you, and moulder like a worm-eaten truncheon into dust. 
Deliver me to my enemies, and ere a week have elapsed, I predict 
that Loiiise de Vaudemont will have absolute sway over her hus- 
band's affections. Joyeuse will be in power, the League destroyed, 
Guise and his partisans, who indirectly aid your schemes, cruslied ; 
Henri of Navarre and the Huguenots will regain their strength in 
Paris, and your majesty wall be without a party, and perchance in 
exile with your son the Due D'Alen^on. These results, which I 
foresee, my skill enables me to avert ; and when my dust whitens 
the pavement of the Place de Greve, and your foes exult in your 
downfall, you will then call to mind my warning." 

Catherine uttered a single exclamation of displeasure, but she 
offered no interruption to thn astrologer. 



154 CRICIITOX. 

" To summon a spirit of duvkncss were matter of little difTiculty," 
continued Ku<rgien, who had entirely regained liis confidence, " to 
him Avho possesses the treasured hieroglyphics of Jsicholas Flamel 
— who can draw the names of the evil angels from Holy AVrit, as 
did the learned Hebrew ^Nlecubals — who can search the ancient 
Chaldean sages for a genius in the rays of Sol or Lima — who un- 
derstands the characters and seals of spirits, the kingly writing of 
the Malachim, that Avhich is termed by the soothsayers of the cast 
* the passing of the river,' and tlie Notariacon of the Cabalists. 
But a spirit invoked without due preparation, like the extraction 
by yon athanor of the argent-vif, in wliich strange colours, caUed 
out of season, endanger the magisterium, may, in lieu of assistance, 
bring destruction. Xevertheless, if your majesty desires it, I will 
prepare to raise a phantasm, proceeding according to tlie directions 
of ApoUonius, Tripiionius, Albertus, and Kaimundus Lullius, and 
shall make use of the signs given by the wise Porphyrins in his 
occult treatise ' De Kcsponsis.' " 

"1 do not desire such evidence of thy skill," returned Cathe- 
rine, coldly. " Choose some more convenient season for thy con- 
sultations with tlie powers of darkness. I would not have my 
own scul placed in jeopardy by such unhallowed intercourse. But 
if thou hast, in truth, a famihar spirit who serves thee, he should 
have guarded thee against thine enemy. Crichton should never 
have found entrance here." 

" Crichton obtained admittance by stratagem, gracious madam 
— I was at tlie moment engaged in tending the wounds of the 
Gelosa, and Elbcrich for the first time neglected his trust. The 
Scot had seized the image and the scroll ere I could prevent him, 
or destroy them." 

** And bv his acquaintance with the cliaracter of that scroll, he is 
master of all ourintrigucs with the Guise and the Bourbon — of our 
communication with hi? holiness, and above all, of the hidden pur- 
port of our mission to Mantua — " 

"He is, madam ?" 

*' And he is aware of this mask"'s connection with our plot — of 
the part Avhich he was destined to play in aiding our son, the Due 
D'Alcn^on, to the throne of his brother Henry — all this thcu hadst 
set down in thy accursed document." 

" It were vain to attempt to disguise my inadvertence iczzn. your 
majesty — I had done so." 

'* And by consequence, he is acquainted with the name and rank 
of this mask." 

" Unquestionably, madam." 

" And docs my name — mark me, Ruggieri — answer, anJ equi- 
vocate not, — does my name, I say, appear in connection with that 
of the Due D'Alen^on in th.e plot for Henri's dethronement ?" 

"No, madam," returned Ruggieri, boldly. 

" Art thou sure of this ^" 



THE LABORATORY. 155 

" As cf my existence." 

" Cosmo Riip,-gieri, thou Last scaled tlilne own fate.'* 

" How, madam ?" 

"The kini^- requires a victim. I must make a virtue of nccc3 
»ity. Justice must take its course upon the morrow." 

" And your majesty will surrender mc to the tribunal ?" 

'*If Henry demand it, I cannot ojffer resistance." 

" Have you reflected on the consequences of such a step, 
madam?" returned Kugfiieri, with sullen audacity. 

" The consequences — ha !" 

" The question may enforce strange truths from me." 

■•' Wlio will credit an accusation from thee — and against me — if 
written proof exist not ?" 

The fiuTows upon Ruggicri's sallow brow were wrinkled into 
a bitter smile. 

" But if written proof slioidd exist, madam — if I can produce 
your own despatches — subscribed with your own hand, sealed with 
your own signet ?" 

"Ha!" 

" If I can exhibit your own confessions that you have poisoned 
two of your sons, and are now conspiring to dethrone a third — 
what appearance will the charge assume then, madam ?" 

" Plast thou not destroyed my letters "r" demanded Catherine, 
trembling with wrath — '•' but no — no — 'tis false — thou trillest with 
me." 

"Behold them !" cried Rugglcri, drawing a packet from his 
bosom. 

" Traitor !" exclaimed Catherine, " thou hast preserved those 
papers to betray me." 

" No, madam,"" replied Kuggieri — " but to protect myself. I 
liave served your majesty faithfullv. I have betrayed no trust 
confided in me ; and the rack shall tear me limb I'rom limb ere it 
shall wrest word from me to your dishonour. Deliver me to Henri's 
tribunal. Surrender me to the Chambre Ardente — and do so fear- 
lessly. Here are your papers." 

" I was indeed mistaken in thee, Rugglcri," rejoined the queen- 
mother, moved. — " While aught of power remains to me, not a 
hair of thy head shall be injured." 

" I have ever found you a noble and generous mistress," cried 
the crafty astrologer, respectfully kissing the hand which Catherine 
■extended to him. 

" Commit this packet to the flames, my loyal servant," said 
•Catherine, "it may fall into other and less loyal hands than thine." 

" Before I do so, will it please your majesty to examine its con- 
tents ?" returned Rugglcri. " There are certain papers Avhich yoa 
may not choose to have destroyed." 

" I know of nothing I should care to preserve," said Catherine, 



158 CKIOHTOX 

musing. " Speak it* tliere be aught I call not to minJ, good 
father." 

*' Amongst other matters, that packet contains the proofs of 
Esclairmonde's birth, which may be needful, should your majesty 
ever reinstate the fortunes of her house — or use her as a hostage 
against the Hnguenot party — " 

" True — true," replied Catherine, " give them to me — these 
proofs are needed now. I must lay tlicm before Henri. 1 must 
reveal to him the secret of her birth. I observed to-night, that he 
looked -svitli eyes of devotion upon the demoiselle. Thy enchant- 
ments have wrought tipon him in a quarter least expected. I must 
caution him against further advances." 

" Ahreman grant your caution come not too late, madam," said 
Ruggieri ; " his majesty is greatly enamoured ; and he hath a rival, 
moreover, to give a spur to his passion." 

"Indeed !" exclaimed the queen-motlier, '"who has dared to 
approach my protegee in the character of a lover ?" 

'' He who dares every thing." 

"Thou canst not allude to Crichton ?'' 

" I have his majesty's assurance that the accursed Scot is her 
favoured suitor," returned IJuggieri. 

" Insolent !" exclaimed Catherine ; " and yet I might have 
guessed as much from INIarguerite's vindictive ravings, with which 
I thouuht Esclairmonde's name was strangely coupled." 

" His majesty has, no doubt, carried his design into execution, 
and roused the suspicions of the Queen of Navarre," returned the 
astrologer ; "he threatened as much in my liearing." 

"Doubtless he hath done so," answered Catherine ; "and if 
jealousy befriend us with Marguerite, little more is to be feared 
Irom Crichton. On that score we need entertain no further appre- 
hension. Thy phial was entrusted to her — " 

" To Marguerite ?" exc.aimed Ruggieri, uneasily. 

" Upon a solemn pledge, which slie dares not disobey. Be 
tranquil — Crichton will trouble us no more." 

" A woman s will may Avaver," muttered Ruggieri, " of all your 
sex, your majesty is the only one I have met with possessing in- 
flexibility of purpose." 

At this instant a sound was heard within the wall of the apart- 
ment, as it a key were turned within the wards of a lock. 

" He comes !" ciaculated Catlicrine, joyfully — " all is well." 

And the next moment a door, so carelidly concealed within the 
masonry of the turret as to be wholly undistinguisliable, was thrown 
open, and the masked cavalier stood before them. Druid lollowed 
at his heels 



137 
CHAPTER XII. 

THE INCANTATION. 

Voulez-vmis en I'tre convaincu tout a I'hcure (rcprit le Conitc) sans taut c!e ta- 
lons! Jem'tn vasfaire veiiir les Sylpliesile Cardan, vous enteiidrcz dcleur propre 
lH)uche ce <iu"ils sont, et ce que je vous en ay appiis. 

Le Cosite de Gabalis. Quat/iaue l'.ntreticn. 

A COURTEOUS greeting passed between tlie cavalier and the 
queen-mother ; but unequivocal symptoms of dissatisfaction were 
exhibited by the dwarf and his feline companion at Druid's intru- 
sion into their domain. IJristling, spitting, and erecting her back, 
the cat, like an enraged virago, seemed prepared to attack the 
stranger with tooth and talon, while the dwarf, no less offended, 
searched about for some more formidable weapon of offence. 
Druid, however, taking up his position at the feet of his new mas- 
ter, treated these hostile demonstrations with disdain, keeping his 
glowing eyes fixed upon the movements of the astrologer, in 
whom he appeared to recognise an enemy. 

Catherine's first inquiries from the cavalier were, whether ho 
had been present at the royal supper ; and receiving a reply in the 
afHrmative, she continued her interrogations ; " and your adversary 
was there likewise," she asked, " was he not ?" 

" He was, madam," answered the mask. 

" Did he occupy the seat wont to be reserved for him by our 
slaughter Marguerite ?" demanded Catherine, eagerly. 

" llie Chevalier Crichton was placed next to the Queen of Na- 
varre," returned the mask. 

" And she — she pledged him — did you observe so much, 
signor ?" 

" I saw the wine poured out. 1 heard your daughter's whis- 
pered pledge. Crichton raised the cup to his lips — " 

" Now the Virgin be praised !" exclaimed Catherine, trium- 
phantly ; " that draught has rendered him immortal. Ruggieri, 
the stars have deceived thee. Thine horoscope was false. Thy 
potion hath been swallowed. Our enemy is removed. You are 
right welcome, signor. You bring us glad tidings. I promised 
you you should learn more of Crichton's fate when you came 
hither. That cup — " 

" Was poisoned," rejoined the mask ; " I know it, madam." 

" Ha ! — was its efiect so sudden ? — Is he then dead ?" 

" He lives." 

« Lives 1" 

*' A jewel within his ring gave him timely warning of his dan- 
ger. The deadly potion did not pass his lips." 

*' Confusion !" exclaimed Catherine. " But though the poison 



158 CRICDTON. 

has faiied, twenty poignards invest the Louvre — he cannot avoid 
them all." 

" Criehton lias quitted the Louvre, and is yet in safety," returned 
the mask ; " he has haiiled the vigilance of your spies." 

" My horoscope deceived me not, you lind, good, daughter," 
said Ivuggieri, who, despite the ill success cf their schemes, could 
not rcpri'ss his exultation at this testimony to his astrological skill. 
— " i\Iy apprehensions Avcrc not groundless." 

" Peace !" cried the queen-mother, " "when I requested your 
attendance here, slgnor, it was to confer on matters of more 
moment than this Scots escape, and 1 crave your pardon :f I 
dwell too much upon it. I am not accustomed to defeat. ]\Io- 
ther of Heaven ! it would not now surprise me if tliis minion of 
fortune, deeming himself invincible, and pulled up by his success, 
should adventure hither and attempt the rescue of the Gelosa — as 
he vaunted he would do, in the presence of my son's assembled 
court. Heaven grant he may carry his boast into execution. But 
no, even his audacity hath its limits." 

" Your desires may be gratilied, madam. Crichton, I doubt 
not, will fulfil his word. Arc you sure he is not here already?" 

" Signor !*" 

" Nay, madam, the question is not irrelevant. He is aware of 
your appointment with myseli^ — he quitted the Louvre in a disguise 
in all respects like my own — he has escaped your guard — he has 
vowed to attempt the Gelosa's rescue — why should not I look for 
him here ?" 

" You forget, signor, that you alone posseis our glove. Your 
enemy may have the same masquerade attire in all respects ; but, 
without that passport, he could not gain entrance to our palace." 

'* My enemy possesses the king's signet, madam," returned the 
mask, " which even yow guard must respect." 

"Ha! doth he so?" exclaimed Catlierine, " this is news indeed. 
Ruirgieri, who waits without?" 

" Some half-dozen trusty blades, with a Spaniard, and a son of 
Anak, whom I have taken this night into your majesty's service. 
Knaves who fear not to use the stiletto; and who have, moreover, 
a wrong to avenge upon this Scot, being somcwhile students of the 
University." 

" Enough — summon them to my presence." 

Ruggleri stamped upon the floor. 

" I\ladam," said the mask, sternly; *' I am accustomed to meet 
my adversaries in the field — sword to sword. I cannot sit by and 
see murder done." 

" ^Murder !" laughed Catherine, derisively ; " that plira^e suits 
not with the iustice of a queen. What ho 1 Ruo-gieri, come they 
not?" 

The words had scarcely escaped her lips, when several dark 
figures ascended from the trap-door, the bolts of which were with- 



THE INCANTATION. 159 

drawn Iby tlic dwarf, and arranged tliemsclvcs in silence before 
the queen. Amonost tliein were the Spanish student Caravaja, 
and tlic giant Loupgarou. These desperadoes appeared to be 
now in their native element ; and tlieir licrce and reckless coun- 
tenances well assorted with the nature of the occupation for which 
they Avere now apparently destined. 

" Get behind yon carvings," said Catherine, motioning to the 
darkling group ; " yet stay — let him Avho has the surcst'^dao-.Ter 
remain behind." 

" For la vida del Rey i I claim that honour from your majesty," 
said Caravaja ; " my dagger hath never failed me." 

" Let thy blow be dealt with more certainty, braggart, than was 
his, who this morn aimed at the same breast — that of the Chevalier 
Crichton." 

" For Talma cle mi madre !" ejaculated the Spaniard ; " is it 
Crichton whom your majesty — ?" 

'• Ha ! dost parley with us, knave ? Take thy place above the 
trap-door — strike as he ascends." 

Caravaja drew his dagger, and took the position indicated by the 
queen. 

" He will not escape us now, methinks," exclaimed Catherine, 
triumphantly. 

" Is it possible, madam, you can witness this slaughterous deed 
unmoved ?" 

" You shall behold my calmness. You know me not, signer." 
" I hear a footstep," exclaimed Ruggieri ; " he comes." 
" Art ready ?" asked the queen of the Spaniard. 
'* My dagger thirsts for his blood," returned Caravaja ; " I see 
the waving of a domino within the vaulted passage below ; it is a 
masked figure, your majesty — not Crichton." 
" Be silent, fool, 'tis he." 

" iMadam,"" exclaimed the mask, firmly, " this must not be. 
No assassin's blow shall be struck while T. stand by." 

" Would you assist your enemy ?" said Catherine, scornfully : 
" an Italian, and forgive !" 

" I do not ask Crichton's life of your majesty ; I see well you 
are relentless. I entreat you only to delay the stroke till you have 
confronted him Avith me. Seize him, and stay his speech. But 
strike him not till I withdraw my mask." 

A terrible smile played upon Catherine's features. 
" Though you begged this boon upon your bended knee," said 
she ; '* though my own soul Avere set upon the issue, I Avould not 
delay my vengeance one second. Are you answered, slgnor ?" 

" I am," replied the naask sternly, and laying his hand upon his 
sword. 

A profound silence ensued. Not a breath Avas draAvu. There 
was something so appalling in this momently-anticipated assassina- 
tion, that the hearts of the spectators grew chill with horror, and 



IGO cniciiTOX. 

even Ruggicri's livid check took a more gliastly hue. Catherine 
alone wa? superior to ihis weakness of humanity. Her countenance 
Avas lighted with a glance of tiiumpli — and she listened intently fur 
the approaching footsteps. The sounds drew nearer, and the points 
of a sable leather could now be discovered, emerging from the 
trap-door. 

Catlierine motioned to Caravaja : the latter raised his dagger and 
drew back to give more certainty to the stroke. Tlie new comer 
slowly ascended, uttering an exclamation as his eye rested upon tlic 
queen and her companions. At this moment tlie Spaniard's weapon 
gleamed in the lamp-Hght ; but he struck not— his arm was disabled 
and pinioned by the teeth of Druid, and his poignard rolled upon 
the lloor. The new comer, whose attire and mask in all respects 
resembled that of the sable cavalier, started and looked round 
irresolutely. 

"Hence I" exclaimed the cavalier, " your plans are foiled — your 
stratagem is discovered — your life cndaiigeved — hence !" 

" My followers are within hearing," returned the mask, raising 
a call to his lips. 

l)ut ere sound could be emitted, the trap-door closed with a 
liollow clangour beneath his Icet : the machinery having been 
suddenly turned, and the bolts shot into their sockets by the dwarf. 

Catherine arose and fixed h.er piercing eyes upon the cavalier. 

" A moment ago I told you, signer, that you knew me not. 
Take heed you purchase not that knowledge too dearly. I for- 
give this indiscretion on the score of your youth — but beware how 
you incur my displeasure a second time. The proverb would tell 
you that the oflender writes in sand — the oiFended in marble. Aly 
wrong is engraven in adamant. This man liath delied me, and by 
my father's head, he shall die the death." 

" What am I to understand Irom this, madam ?" inquired the 
mask, in a voice so exactly resembling that of the cavalier, that the 
nicest ear could not detect a shade of difference in the intonation, 
and even Catherine started at the sound. 

*' Now, by our lady of good succour," cried the queen, address- 
ing the cavalier, " were 1 not assured of your identity, signer, I 
should almost doubt the evidence of my senses — the delusion is 
wonderful."" 

" No delusion is practised on my part," returned the mask, 
haughtily. "Your majesty is tlie dupe of other artifice.'' 

" You bear yourself boldly, mcssire," returned Catherine, " but 
your confidence will not long avail you. Tear off his mask !'' 

At this command of the queen the men-at-arms, headed ])y 
Loupgarou, sprang from their concealment. 

"Ha! — Saint Anthony to the rescue ! — ofFI" cried the mask, 
fiercely, putting himself" in a posture of defence. *' He dies, who 
first advances." 



THE INCANTATION. IGl 

** Soil ! — you refuse to remove your vizard," said the queen ; 
" you are sell-convicted, mcssire.'^ 

" To you, madam, I should not hesitate to reveal my features," 
replied the mask, " but bel'ore these rude assailants — never. You 
forg-et to whom you offer this indignity." 

" liy my soul, no — I forget it not," returned Catherine, scorn- 
fully ; " I offer it to one who hath openly doffed my power — who 
threatened to snatch a captive maiden from my grasp, and who 
volunteered his own head as the price of his failure. He has failed, 
and think not I will omit the penalty." 
" Those were Crichton's words, madam." 
" And Crichton's are the features I would unmask." 
'* Then let your attendants tear off" his vizard who stands beside 

you." 

"Insolent!" exclaimed the queen, " I trifle — upon him, varlets 
— strike first — I shall have leisure to peruse his lineaments after- 
wards." 

" Hold, miscreants," cried the cavalier, drawing his sword, and 
placing himself between the mask and the assailants — " hold, or — " 

" Your blood be upon your own head," ejaculated Catherine, 
impatiently. " I have already wai'ned you." 

" On one condition, madam, I will sheathe my sword," said 
the cavalier. 

" If that condition be the life of Crichton, you will in vain pro- 
pose it," returned Catherine. 

" I do not ask Crichton's life," rejoined the cavalier — " I ask 
you only to defer your vengeance. Grant me a few minutes con- 
ference with your majesty, and let the removal of my mask be 
the signal to your executioners to assail their victim." 

" Be it so," replied Catherine. 

And, at a gesture from tlie queen, ere he could offer any effectual 
resistance, the mask was disarmed and secured by Loupgarou and 
his crew, and his arms bound together by the leathern girdle of 
one of the men-at-arms. Caravaja by this time, not without the 
loss of much of his raiment, and somewhat of his skin, had libe- 
rated himself from Druid's teeth, and muttering deep execrations, 
retired crest-fliUen amongst his comrades. 

" Porlaoreja sagrada de Malchosl" growled he to Loupgarou — 
" that hound must certainly be a wizard. I may say, with old 
Cornelius Agrlppa, * abi, perdita bestia, qua me tofum perdidistL' " 

" Hear me, madam !" exclaimed the mask, furiously, as soon as 
his choler allowed him utterance. " I repeat, you are the dupe of 
artifice. Let both vizards be removed, and you will then judge 
between us." 

" I shall exercise my own pleasure upon that head, messire," 
returned Catherine — " away with him, varlets, to the guard-room. 
See that the doors are barred against his followers ; and if rescue 
be attempted, tarry not for further orders." 

M 



162 CKICIITON. 

" We understand your majesty," replied Loupgarou, in a hoarse 
tone, inclining his enormous person towards the queen in such 
manner as a tall cedar might be bent by the desert blast towards 
some tree oi" meaner growth — the giant, we may remark, had been 
jicontinently chosen (such is the reverence in which brute force 
and stature are held by the vulgar) to the command of this bravo 
troop. "Have you any further commands, madam?" asked rlie 
Titan, with a second obeisance. 

The cavalier again interposed. 

'• Your majesty will, 1 trust," he said, " issue your commands, — 
that your captive be treated with the courtesy and respect to which 
his condition entitles liim. I have your promise that he shall 
receive no injury till I withdraw my mask. But I will rather 
remove it now, and bring his fate to an instant issue, than expose 
■a gentleman to the debasing taunts of a felon band like this ; 
whose insults, were I in his place, it would be more difficult to 
ibrook than their daggers' points." 

" I see not wherefore we should respect his honour who re- 
garded not mine, signer," returned Catherine, sarcastically — "but 
be it as you desire. Remove the captive," she continued, address- 
ing Loupgarou. " Treat him with all consideration consistent 
with his safe custody. It were well if he bestowed the few minutes 
•of grace left him, in preparation for the eternity he will so soon 
-enter upon. Look to him well — the lives of all shall answer for 
Jiis life." 

" Madam Y' exclaimed the mask — *' by my soul, you are de- 
ceived." 

" Away !" cried the queen. And without allowing him time for 
further speech, the mask was hurried down the trap-door, and the 
iron valve instantly closed over him. 

The dwarf expressed his satisfaction at his disappearance by a 
■multitude of ellin gambols. Catherine clapped her hands — her 
•custom when greatly pleased — and turning to the cavalier, said, 
with a benignant smile, 

" I will now come to the subject nearest your heart, signor, 
and speak of her whose deliverance this luckless Crichton was to 
■have effected — the Gelosa. You may desire to behold her." 

" I came hither for that purrose, madam,"^ replied the cavalier. 

The queen motioned to Ruggieri. Followed by the dwarf, the 
;astrologer w^ithdrew to that side of the chamber across which the 
curtains were drawn, and busied himself in describing certain lines 
with his Jacob's staff upon the floor, while his companion proceeded 
to set fire to various spicy Avoods in a brasier, in which from time 
to time, he cast other odoriferous ingredients, presently filHng the 
■chamber with a cloud of vapour. 

" Hath a magical ceremonial to be performed previous to her 
•appearance ?'' asked the cavalier, in a tone of impatience. 

" Said 1 not there was sorcery iu the case," returned lluggicri— 



THE INCANTATIOX. 163 

" The girl is under the domiuion of invisible hut powerful essences, 
over whom these spells have control. You shall not only behold 
her in person, but learn by what charms she has so long held your 
soul in subjugation." 

"It needs no conjuration to discover the nature of those allure- 
ments," returned the cavalier impatiently. " She whose eyes shame 
the star Aldcboran in lustre, and whose ibrm rivals that of the sylph 
Agla in lightness, need not resort to enchantment to hold lier lover's 
heart in thraldom. I can divine whence her fascination arises 
Avithout thine aid, good father." 

" Can you likewise divine whence arises her repugnance towards 
your suit, noble signer ? Can you tell by what power she is 
enabled to resist your passionate suit?" 

" By that power, over which no art or enticement, human or 
superhuman, can prevail — that of virtue," returned the cavalier. 

" Pish !" exclaimed lluggieri, scornfully shrugging his shoulders 
— " the honour of man and the faith of Avoman, like trinkets used 
to decorate apparel, are excellent embellishments to discourse, but 
of little real utility to the possessor. I understand not the advan- 
tngc of such ornamental qualities, and have no strong belief in 
their existence. Virtue, however, has little to do Avith this girl's 
repugnance to you, signer. She prefers another ; and has been, 
moreoA'er, in possession of a charm, Avhich, as I told you, I removed 
this morning from her neck. Take this key, signer, I have 
jilunged it into a collyrium of such efficacy, that it cannot fail to 
draAv her love toAvards him Avho wears it. Her heart Avill no longer 
dwell upon Crichton, but upon you." 

The cavalier took the key and examined its curious Avorkman- 
ship attentively. Ruggieri withdrcAV to continue his mysterious 
rites. 

" While the astrologer is occupied Avith his sulFumigation," said 
Catherine, assuming a confidential tone; " you shall learn the secret 
I have to disclose to you — a secret Avliich, as I have already 
observed, nearly concerns yourself." 

. '* A secret Avhich concerns me, madam?" said the cavalier, Avhose 
eye Avas still fixed upon the golden key he held ; '* does it relate in 
any Avay to the Gelosa?" 

*' By our Lady !" exclaimed Catherine, scornfully, " Ruggieri AA'as 
not far from the truth, Avhen he said you Avere bcAvitched by thisgirL 
Your thoughts run on nought else. But do you imagine, fair sir, 
I am equally the subject of her fascinations, that 1 should trouble 
myself Avith the afiairs of a minstrel?" 

"Your pardon, madam. But I thought y<ju had made some 
discovery touching the condition of this yirl. There is an inscrip- 
tion graven upon this key, from Avhich 1 gather somewhat of her 
history." 

"Indeed!" said Catherine, " AA'hat imports it?" 

M 2 



10 V CRICHTOX. 

"That she is tlie dauglitcr of a dame of Mantua, of rank; her 
name CTincvra." 

" How learn you this, noble signer ?" asked the astrologer, 
anxiously returning towards him. 

"From the handle of this key, upon which these characters, 
revealed by the powerful acid thou hast applied, have become 
apparent — ' Gincvra, daughter of Gincvra Malatcsta — Mantua.' " 

*' Taphthartluirath !" exclaimed the astrologer, shaking as if a 
vision had passed before him. 

" What ails you, father?'' inquired the queen. 

" Nothing, madam — nothing, stammered Kuggierl, desirous, it 
would seem, to conceal the interest he took in the cavalier's disco- 
very; " but there is more, is there not, noble signor? Give me that 
kev — why did I part with it from mine own keeping?" 

'' Of what avail had it been to thee ?" said Catherine, scornfully; 
" thy boasted art could not enable thee to detect those hidden 
characters. But what mean those mystic letters and that figure? 
Can you unravel this further mystery, signor?" 

" The fif^ure is that of the planet Saturn, under whose dominion 
the metal of which this key is wrought, is placed by the disciples 
of occult philosophy. The letters are cabalistic characters, refer- 
rinfT by numbers to those of the Hebrew alphabet; and forming, 
when placed together, a legend in that tongue, which may be thus 

interpreted : — 

Gold ! who wert a father's bane, 
Gold ! who wert a mother's stain, 
Gold ! be ilioii a daughter's chain 

Of purity. 
Shield her breast fioni sword and fire, 
From intemperate desire ; 
From a heaven-ahandon'd sire, 

In charity!" 

**A singular inscription!" exclaimed Catherine, "and by my 
faith, signor, you have shown no little ingenuity in its elucidation. 
I question Avhether my captive Crichton, who is said to be as well 
versed in the mysteries of the Cabala as Pico di Mirandola, could 
have rendered it more felicitously. But love is qiuck-sighted." 

" Suffer me to behold that inscription, noble signor,"" said Rug- 
fjiere, trembling? Avith aiiitation. " I would fain examine those 
characters with mine own eyes." 

" Not now — not now, good father," interrupted Catherine 
peremptorily; " this bauble has already oilbred too much interrup- 
tion to my conference. What matters it to thee who was the sire, or 
who the mother of this girl?" 

" Every tiling !' exclaimed the astrologer, eagerly, but correcting 
himself, he added — " that is, my charm would be moie perfect if I 
possessed the talisman." 

" 'Tis plain thou didst not understand its use or virtue," returned 
the queen — " To thy task without more delay." 



TDE INCANTATION. 1G5 

And Ru2;gierl, seeing opposition was useless, slowly withdrew, 
casting a lingering, longing glance upon the amulet which he 
had so heedlessly abandoned to another, and which, (now that he 
had parted with it) appeared to assume infinitely more importance 
in his eyes than it had done while it continued in his own posses- 
sion. 

" Your majesty had a disclosure to make to me?" said the cava- 
lier, as soon as the astrologer had retired — " muiy I venture to 
recall your attention to the subject ?" 

" I have a secret to communicate not less singular than that 
you have just chanced upon," said the queen ; "but before I 
luilold my mystery, I must inquire from you whether amongst 
the beauties who thronged the Louvre to-night, you noticed one 
who held the chief place among our dames of honour, and who was 
for .some time the fiivoured object of the king, our son's regard?" 

"Your majesty cannot mean the Demoiselle Esclairmonde?" 
returned the cavalier, starting. " Is it possible your communications 
can have reference to her?" 

"My disclosure has reference to Esclairmonde, signor," rejoined 
the queen — "you have heard, perhaps, that there is a mystery 
attached to her birth." 

" I have heard, madam, the court rumour, which runs that she 
is an orphan, the daughter of a Huguenot gentleman of distinction, 
but that her real name is carefully concealed even from her own 
knowledge by your commands." 

" The tale whispered abroad by my orders has reached your ears, 
I find," replied Catherine, " nor is it altogether wide of the truth. 
She is the daughter of a Huguenot leader — but that leader was 
Louis I. de Bourbon, Prince de Conde." 

For a moment the Cavalier appeared to be lost in astonishment. 
Uttering a single exclamation of surprise, he maintained a perfect 
silence, as if overwhelmed by the queen's intelligence. Catherine 
regarded him fixedly. 

" My news," she said, " excites your admiration. You deemed 
not that in my unknown attendant, Esclairmonde, you beheld the 
daughter of a house illustrious as your own." 

" I am indeed filled with wonder, madam," faltered the cavalier 
— " Esclairmonde a Princess of Conde ! — can it be ?" 

" Look at these papers which authenticate her birth," returned 
Catherine, placing the packet given lier bv Ruggieri, before the 
cavalier, " Read that despatch from Tavannes, the captor of the 
infant princess — read those instructions from the Cardinal of Lor- 
raine — that memorial of the guard who seized her — this credential 
of her attendant, and my own letters of autliority written at the 
period. Let your own eye glance over these documents, and you 
will at once satisfy yourself of the truth of what I have asserted." 

With a hand trembling with eagerness, the cavalier took the 
packet. His eye wandered rapidly over its contents. 



166 CRICIITON". 

"I am satisfied, madam," replied he, as Lis hasty scrutiny con- 
duded. " And the secret of Esclairmonde's birth is of course, 
•wholly unknown to the prince her brother ?" 

•' Henri de Bourbon believes that his sister perished In her 
infancv," returned the queen. " I will brielly relate to you how- 
she fell into my hands, and you will then perceive his grounds for 
that supposition. During Louis do Bourbon's flight from Noyers 
to Kochelle, an ambuscade, placed by my directions in the moun- 
tain passes near Sancerrc lor the purpose of intercepting the fugitives, 
surprised and attacked the litter in which the princess and her infant 
charirc w-erc conveyed. By miracle she and her son escaped: but 
a fair child — a babe — scarce weaned, was borne off in triumph by 
the assailants. Condc, at the head of his ritters, vainly sought to 
recover his treasure. His efforts Avere so desperate, that a strata- 
gem was resorted to, to bailie his fury. A child snatched from 
one of his household, was hurled beneath his horse's feet, and 
deceived by the outcry of his opponents — thinking that he had 
imwittingly contributed to the destruction of his own offspring — the 
prince in despair directed his attention to the preservation of his 
distracted consort, with whom, and with his son, he succeeded in 
effecting a secure retreat. From that day to the hour when his 
>lood clycd the battle-field of Jarnac, Conde continued in ignorance 
jf his child's existence. She Avas to iiim as she had been no 
more." 

A deep sigh bxu'st from the cavalier's breast as Catherine paused 
for a moment to ascertain the impression she had produced. Appa- 
rently satisfied, she proceeded wnth her narrative. 

"A month after the event I have described," continued the queen, 
" a fair-haired infant was brought to nie at the Louvre, by a faithful 
emissary of Tavannes. 'The lawn is netted,** wrote the marechal 
in the letter now lying before you, ' the deer hath escaped our toils.* 
By the advice of the Cardinal of Lorraine, the wisest and most pre- 
scient of counsellors, the princess was reared in entire seclusion and 
in ignorance of her rank — and by the cardinal's advice also, the 
motives of which you will find there developed, she was secretly 
suffered to imbibe the Calvinistic principles of her family. 
Of late, in order the more effectually to mask my designs, I have 
given it out that I intend her for the cloister, and I have noted 
■with satisfaction the effect which this announcement of my will has 
produced upon her. The period which the sage cardinal foresaw 
is arrived. Anjou's plot is ripe. The Iluguenota must be gained. 
With Esclairmonde I have the means of Avinning over their 
leader. AVith her I have an earnest of Conde's fidelity, should he 
league his arms with ours — with her I can paralyse his efforts 
should he declare against us." 

** A refined and subtle scheme, madam," replied the cavalier, 
who had with difficulty repressed his indignation during the latter 
part of the quccn''s recital, and whose vizard alone prevented the 



THE INCANTATION. 1G7 

wratliful expression of liis countenance from being perceivc(l, " and 
worthy of a discipline of Niccolo Maccliiavelli, such as the Cardinal 
of Lorraine was known to be. But may I venture to ask, madam, 
whether you. now propose to restore the princess to her brother ? 
And, futhermore, wliat may be your majesty's motive in making 
me the dep<Dsitary of so important a state secret as the mystery of 
her birth ?" 

" Your questions arc somewhat abrupt, signer," replied Catherine, 
with a slight expression of displeasure; " nevertheless, I will answer 
them as freely as they are put. Your alliance with Anjou — your 
devotion towards myself — entitle you to my confidence. Why I 
liave entrusted you with a secret so dear to me as that of Esclair- 
monde's birth will presently appear. Meantime I will answer your 
first inquiry at once, by saying that I do not propose to restore the 
princess to her brother, till the full object of her detention shall 
be accomplished. I have other and more extended views respecting 
her. In a word, I have yet to dispose of her hand in marriage." 

The cavalier started. 

" How?" he exclaimed, with some impatience — '• Will your 
majesty exercise the power which you have acquired over the 
destiny of this princess, to give away her hand Avithout the consent. 
— without the knowledge — of her brother, Henri de Bourbon ?" 

" Without his consent — without her own," returned Catherine— 
" Think you the Prince de Conde's approval will l)e needed to ratify 
an alliance proposed and sanctioned by Catherine de Medicls ? I 
shall bestow her upon him who serves me best, not on him who may 
please her lancy most, or that of Henri de Bourbon. The choice 
of the one might fall upon some hostile leader of the Huguenot 
party — the election of the other, were she consulted, might be 
declared in i'avour of some such arrogant adventurer as the young 
Scot, whose life now hangs npon my breath ; and who, as I learn 
from Ruggieri, hath already dared to ofler his suit to her." 

" It was in ignorance of her rank that he did so," returned the 
cavalier, " for whatever opinion I may entertain of the scope and 
aim of Crichton's ambition, I cannot think that, had he been 
acquainted with Esclairmonde's exalted birth, he woidd have ven- 
tured to aspire to her hand." 

" He has already aspired to the fiivours of my daughter, Mar- 
guerite de Yalois," returned Catherine frowning, " and he who 
will dare to soar so high in gallantry, will scarce content himself with 
a lowly flight in honest love. You are mistaken in your estimate of 
this Scot's character, signer. I read it more clearly than you do. 
His ruling passion is ambition. He aims at distinction in all things 
and were 1 to free him from his fetters, and to entrust him with 
the secret I have just now communicated to you, the first use he 
would make of his liberty would be to renew his suit with redou- 
bled ardour to the princess." 

" There, I am assured you wrong him, madam." 



IGS CKicnxoN. 

" Xo matter," cried Catherine, " I shall not afford him the 
opportunity. Crichton is of an order of men -svho must be 
crushed ere they attain dangerous eminence. To elevate him would 
be to endanger our own power. Henri is ruled, as you well know, 
by his minions — the minions are ruled by Crichton. Ilis mental 
acquirements — his bravery, and his various and unequalled accom- 
plishments have already obtained complete ascendency over a court, 
wliich of all others is most easily dazzled by such quaUties.'' 

" And are these the only iaults you can lay to Crichton's charge, 
madam?" asked the cavalier. 

" No," replied Catherine, " he has yet a greater fault.'' 

" Beseech your mnjcsty name it." 

*' He is of incorruptible honesty," rejoined Catherine, "had he 
been otherwise, he had been the fittest instrument I could have 
chosen for my purposes — as it is, he is only an obstacle — " 

" Which will speedily be removed," supplied the cavalier, 
gravely. ^' Suffer me to change the subject, and to return to that 
from which we have wandered.'" 

" The Princess of Conde — true,'' replied Catherine ; "you beheld 
her at the Louvre to-night, signor — I would gladly learn what is 
your opinion of her attractions ! Is her beaaty equal to that of our 
dames, think you?" 

" It is without a peer in the world," sighed the cavalier. 

Catherine smiled complacently. 

" Mary Stuart," she said, " in the zenith of her youth and 
loveliness — when the walls of the Louvre resounded with the sighs 
of her thousand worshippers — and when the whole chivalry of 
Europe flocked to the court of France to bask in her smiles — was 
not so beautiful." 

" I can well believe it, madam," returned the cavalier, in a tone 
of deep despondency, " I have myself seen the unfortunate Queen 
of Scots, and her charms of person, wondrous as they still are, 
cannot, I think, have equalled the matchless perfections of Esclair- 
monde." 

Catherine again smiled ; and it was with some playfulness of 
manner that she now continued the conversation. 

" Slie is indeed most lovely, — so lovely that, I think, if Anjou's 
suit fail, as it is not unlikely, with that experienced coquette our 
sister (as her years as well as her regal dignity entitle her to be 
termed), Elizabeth of England, I shall console hini for his disap- 
pointment with the hand of the fairest princess of her time. What 
he loses in power he will gain in beauty. How say you, signor? 
Does this alliance meet with your approval ?" 

" Beseech you, madam, press not that question upon me," replied 
the cavalier, in a troubled tone, " and to be I'rank witli you, let me 
confess at once, that if the object of your conference be the consi- 
deration of an alliance between the Due D'Anjou and Esclairmonde, 
I am myself far too deeply interested in the fate of the fair princess, 



THE INCANTATION. 16& 

to be able to offer an impartial opinion upon the policy or impolicy 
of the proposed union, and must, therefore, with your majesty's 
permission, decline its further discussion. Esclairmonde's charms 
would alone entitle her to the hand of the proudest prince in 
Europe, who might deem himself supremely blest in their posses- 
sion." 

" Say you so, signor.''" returned Catherine, gaily. "What if I 
change the title and designation of the bridegroom? What, if for 
Francois de Valois, Due D'Anjou, I substitute that of Vincenzo 
di Gonzaga, Prince of Mantua — will that alliance please you 
better ?" 

" Madame !" faltered the cavalier. 

" Have I not rc;td your heart aright? Do you not love this 
maiden?"" 

" More than my life." 

" She is yours, then — I give her to you — and moreover, I 
will enrich her with a dowry from my coffers, such as neither the 
D'Este nor the Farnesc could bestow." 

A deep-drawn sigh was the only response made by the cavalier. 
Putting her own construction upon his silence, the queen continued: 
" Lend your aid with arm and counsel, to place Anjou upon his 
brother's throne, and Esclulrmonde is your reward." 

" And is the best blood of France," returned the cavalier, with 
bitterness, " to be bartered for treason ?*' 

" These are strange words from you, prince," rejoined Catherine, 
" can I have been mistaken in you ? Have I fostered a secret 
foe — are your own despatches — are those letters delusive? Answer 
me, Vincenzo. Do I address an ally of Anjou, or a secret foe 
of Henri — the friend of an aspiring prince, or the tool of a falling 
monarch?" 

" You speak to one who thinks, acts, and speaks freely and fear- 
lessly, madam ; who aspires to honour by honourable means — and 
who would hurl from his grasp the sceptre of France, could it be 
attained only by treachery. Your plot against Henri, phrase it how 
you may, is treasonable." 

" I will not quarrel with your terms, prince," replied Cathe- 
rine, coldly. " AV^ords are to us tlie cloak 'neath which the sword 
is hidden, and the more honestly they sound the less suspicion they 
are likely to awaken. You are welcome, therefore, to call our plot 
rebellious, so long as you can enact the part of an arcli-rebel your- 
self. But enough of this. You say you love the Princess of Conde. 
Assist Anjou in his (if you so please to phrase them) treasonable 
designs. Place him upon the throne, and she shall be the meed 
of your services." 

Catherine paused and fixed her eagle glance upon the cavalier, 
awaiting his reply. But he spoke not. Contending emotions 
seemed to agitate his bosom. 



170 CRICHTON". 

*' What means this?" exclaimed the queen, rising in displeasure. 
** Do you reject my offer?'*" 

" A latal bar exists against its acceptance." 

*' Your passion for this girl — this Gclosa — is it so ? By our 
Lady ! there must be witchcraft in the case. Ruggieri, proceed 
■with thine enchantments — "\ve mvist dissolve the spell. Prince," 
she continued in a stern deep tone, "reflect upon my offer. I 
shall expect your answer on the morrow. jNIcanwhile, bury the 
secret 1 have committed to your keeping within the inmost 
recesses of your lieart. Breathe it not even to your confessor. 
You can now conjecture why I desired this interview witli you 
— Avhy I selected you as the depositary of the secret of Esclair- 
nionde's birtli. Y^'ou have perused those evidences of her illustrious 
origin. You have satisfied yourself she is the daughter of Henri 
de Bourbon. I will now commit those documents to the secure 
custody of this coflcr." Saying which, Cathei'ine extended her 
hand to receive back the packet. 

"An instant, madam, I beseech you," returned the cavalier, 
still detaining the papers, while his eyes appeared eagerly to scan 
their contents. 

" You will have more leisure for their perusal on the morrow," re- 
plied the queen, " in the meantime turn your thoughts to her who 
more immediately claims your attention." 

At this juncture, and ere Catlierinc could possess herself of 
the packet, the chamber was ]Dlunged in darkness. Unobserved, 
during their conference, the dwarf had silently crawled near the 
speakers, and at a signal from Ruggieri, suddenly extinguished the 
lamp which hung above their heads. 

" The letters," demanded Catherine, hastily. And as she spoke, 
what she conceived to be the packet was placed in her hands. 

Suddenly a low and plaintive strain of music — whence proceed- 
ing, it was impossible to determine — was heard, and at the same 
moment, a cool and refreshing odour addressed itself to the 
senses of the cavalier. The cllect of this subtle spirit combined 
with the rich and fragrant exhalations of the chafing-dish, induced 
an agreeable langour, against the oveipowering influence of which 
it was vain to contend. It disposed the mind unresistingly to sur- 
render itself to tlie delusions about to be practised by the sorcerer. 
Through the dense cloud of vapour that now filled the apartment, 
nothing could be seen but the dull red fire of the brasier, and the 
symphony became each instant more faint, until it gradually died 
away. Tlie voice of the astrologer was then heard chanting the fol- 
lowing strains : 

Incantation. 

Lovely spirit, who dost dwell 

In the bowers invisible, ; 



THE INCANTATION. 17 , 

By undying Hermes reared; 
By Stagyric sage revered ; 
Where the silver fountains wander ; 
Where the golden streams meander; 
Where tlie dragon vigil keeps 
Over njighty treasure heaps ; 
Where the myster}' is known, 
Of the wonder working Stone ; 
U liere the quintessence is gained 
And immortal life attained — 
Spirit ! — by this spell of power, 
I call thee from thy viewless bower. 

The footstep of tlie astrologer was now heard to approach the 
hrasier. A hissing noise, as of some fluid cast upon the fiery coals 
succeeded. Fresh volumes of smoke ascended to the ceiling, emit- 
ting vivid sparks as they arose, and Ruggieri, muttering some 
unintelligible sounds continued liis spell. 

The charm is wrought — the word is spoken, 

And the sealed vial broken ! 

Element with element 

Is incorporate and blent; 

Fire with water — air with earth. 

As before creation's birth ; 

Matter gross is purihed, 

Matter luinrHi raritied ; 

Matter volatile is fixed. 

The spirit with the ciny commixed. 

Laton is by azoth purged, 

And tlie argeiit-vif disgorged ; 

And the black crow's head is ground, 

And the magistery fountl ; 

And wiih broad empurpled wing 

Springs to light the blood-red king. 

By this fiery assation — 

By this wondrous permutation 

Spirit, from thy burning sphere 

Float to earth — appear — appear! 

For an instant all became dark. Even the dull glare of the 
chafing-dish was obscured. A fresh strain of music more soft, 
more plaintive than the preceding melody, was heard. A dazzling 
stream of light was seen to cut swiftly tl.rough the air, and to settle 
near the astroloo-er. 



172 cracHTON. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE MAGIC IIIXG. 

It was then perceived that tlie brilliant flame flowed from a 
sword held by a female shape, robed in shining attire of almost 
gossamer texture. This sylph-like liguro, so lar as it could be dis- 
cerned through the vapour, appeared of rare and almost unearthly 
loveliness. In her right hand the spirit bore a flamin"- brand ; 
in her left a small vase of crystal, while in a thrilling voice she 
warbled the followinii; strains: — 



^ong of tijc Spirit. 
I. 

Within tlio golden portal 

Of the garden of the wise, 
Watching by the seven-spniy'd fountain 

The Hesperian Dragon lies.* 
Like tlie ever-burning branches 

In tlie dream of holy seer ; 
Like the types of Asia's churches 

Those glorious jets appear. 
Three times tiie magic waters 

Must the Winged Dragon drain ; 
Then his scales shall burst asiuider, 

And his heart be relt in twain, 

• Tlie above lines are little more tlian a versification of some of the celebrated 
President I)' Esparincts hermetic canons, with mIucIi the English adept must be 
familiar in the translation of Elias Asiimole. D Kspac/nct's Arcaiiiim Philosophice 
Hermeticce has attained a classical celebritv among his disciples, Avho were at one 
period sufBciently numerous. The subjoined interpretation of this philosophical 
allegorv' may save the uninitiated reader some speculation. " La Fontaine que Ton 
trouve a I'entree dn Jardi7i est le Mercure des >ages, qui sort dcs sept sources, parce 
qu'il est le principe des sept nutaux, et qu'il est forme par Ics sept planetes, quoi- 
que le soleil seul soit appele son pere et la hine seule sa mere. Ix; Uragori qu'on 
y fait boireest la putrefaction qui survienta la matierequ ils ont appelee Drayon, 
a cause de sa couleur noire, et de sa puanteur. Ce dragon quite ses vetemens, 
lorsque la couleur grise succede a la noire. Vous ne reussirez point si Venus et 
Diane nc vous sont favorables, c'est a dire, si j)ar la regime de feu, vous ne parvonez 
a blanchir la matiere qu'il appelle dans cet etat de blancheur le regne de la lune." 
— Diclionnairc Mytho-Hcrinctiiiue. The mysterious influence of the mnnbcr Seven 
and its relations with the planets is too well known to need expl;i nation here. 
Jacques Uohotu has noticed it in the enigma contained in his Aquarium Sapienlium 
beginning — 

Septem sunt urbes, septempro moremetalla, 
Jiuntque dies septem, scptimus est nunierus. 



THE MAGIC KING. 173 

Forth shall flow an enianatior). 

Forth shall spring a shape divine. 
And it" ."Sol and Cynthia aid tlu-f, 

!Shall the Clianned Key be lliine. 

II. 

In the solemn groves of Wisdom, 

Where black pines their shadows fling 
Near the haunted ceil of llerme-, 

Thi'ee lovely flow'rets spiing: 
Tlie violet damask-tinted, 

In scent all flowers above ; 
The milk v.hite vestal lily. 

And the pnrple flower oflove. 
Red Sol a sign shall give thee 

Where the sapphire violets gle^m. 
Watered by the rills that wander 

From the viewless golden stream. 
One violet slialt thon gather — 

Bnt ah ! — beware, beware ! — 
The lily anxl the amaranth 

Demand thy chiefest care.* 

III. 

Within the lake of crysial,-f- 

Koseate as the sun's first ray. 
With eyes of diamond histre.J 

A thousand tishes plav. 
A net within that water, 

A net with web of gold. 
If cast where air-bells glitier. 

One shining lish shall hold. 

IV. 

Amid the oldest mountaiiis,(^ 

Whose lops are next tlie sun, 
The everlasting rivers 

Through glowing channels run. 
Those mountains are of silver, 

Those channels are of gold ; 
And thence the countless treasures 

Of the kings of earth are roll'd ; 
But far— far must he wander 

O'er realms and seas unknown, 
Who seeks the ancient mountains. 

Where shines the Wondrols Stone! 

* Vous ne separercz point ces flours de leur racines— c'est-a-dirc, quil no faut 
rien otor du vase. Par ce moyen on aura d'abord des violettes de couleur de saiiliire 
fonce, ensuite de lys, et enfin rumaranthe, ou la couleur de pourpre, qui est I'indice 
de la perfection du souffre aurifique. Diet. Mytho-Herm. 

t Les philosoplies ont souvent donue le noni du Lac a leur vase, et au mercure, 
qui y est renferme. Diet. Mytho-Herm. 

X Lorsque la matiere e.st parvenue a un certain degre de cuisson, il se forme sur 
sa superficie de petites boules qui ressemblent aux yeux des poissous. Diet. Mytho- 
Hervi. 

^ Quelquefois les Alcliemistes ont entendu par le terme de Montague leur vase, 
leur tburneau, et toute matiere m^talique. Diet. Mytho-Herm. 



174 CRICHTON. 

As tlie spirit concluded her song she presented tlie crystal vial 
to the astrologer, exclaiming: — 

In thai mystic v.ise doth lie 

Life and immortality. 

Life to iiim who droops in death, 

T.> the iiaspiiiL' bosom breath. 

Immortality alone 

To him to whom ilie " Word" is known. 

Take it — 'tis a precious boon, 

Voiichsiifod by Hermes to his son. 

Ruggicri reverently received the gift. .Vnd, as if extinguished at 
a breath, the blue llanie playing upon the edge of the sword 
expired and the phantom vanislied. The brasier once more 
became visible, and the magician resumed the jjerlbrmance of his 
mysterious rites. At a gesture from his master, Elberich brought a 
panier lllled with sundry magical ingredients, together with a pon- 
derous volume fastened with brass clasps, and clothed in black vellum. 
From time to time Ruggieri took some herb or root liom the 
basket and cast it into the brasier, when it crackled and funx;d, 
and eventually burst into llame. Nothing was wanting to add to 
the effect of the ceremonial. The dwarf gibbered, the cat hissed, 
Druid, uttered a deep and prolonged howl. The sufFumigation 
mounted in clotids — and the voice of Ruggicri, hoarse and broken, 
and lialf choked by the vapour he inhaled, arose above the clamour. 
Thus ran his invocation: — 

On tlie smonldciing fire is thrown 
Tooth of fox ;ind weasel's bone, 
Eye of cat and scull of rat. 
And the hooked wing of bat. 
Mandrake root and murderer's gore, 
Henbane, iiendock, hellebore. 
Stibium, storax, bdelhon, borax, 
Ink of cuttle-fisii, and feather 
Of the screech-owl, smoke together. 

W^itn his Jacob's stalT, the astrologer then proceeded to trace 
certain figures upon the floor, and taking the black book from the 
dwarf, read aloud a mystical sentence, after which he closed the 
volume and resumed his spell: — 

On the ground is a circle traced ; 

On that circle a seal is placed ; 

On that seal is a symbol graven ; 

On that symbol an orb of heaven; 

By that orb is a figure show-n ; 

By tliat figure a name is known. 

'^^andering witch it is thine own !— 

But tiiy name must not be named, 

ISor to mortal I'ars proclaimed. 

Shut are the leaves of tlie Grimoirc dread ; 

The spell is muttered — the word is said, 

And tliat word, in a whisper drowned, 

Shall to thee like a whirlwind sound. 



THE MAGIC RING. 175 

Swift through the bhiveiiiii; air it flics — 

Swiftly it traverses earth and skies ; — 

Wherever thou art — above — below— 

Tliither that terrible word shall go. 

Art thou on the waste alotie, 

To the white moon making moan ? 

Art thou, human eye cscliewing, 

In some cavern philters lirevviiig? 

By familiar swart attended — 

By a triple charm defended — 

Gatherest thou the grass that waves 

O'er dank pestilential graves? — 

Or on broom or goat astride. 

To thy Sabbath dost thou ride? 

Or with sooty imp doth match thee? 

From his arms my spell siiall snatch thee. 

Shall it seek thee — and find thee. 

And with a chain bind thee ; — 

And through the air whirl thee. 

And at my feet hurl thee ! 

By the word thou dreadst to hear ! 

Nameless witch ! — appear — appear ! 

Scarcely were the words pronounced, wlien a rushing sound was 
heard, and the figure of a hideous hag suddenly stood before the 
astrologer. About her wiiliered neck and shoulders, tire v/itch's 
wintry locks hung in wild disorder ; her apparel was loathly 
and forbidding as her features. For a moment she remained with 
one arm leaning upon a staff, and with the other, smeared, it would 
seem, with blood, stretched out towards Ruggierl. 

" Whence comest thou ?" demanded he. 

" From my Sabbath-revel at IMontfiucon," replied the hag — 
*' Wouldst hear how we have passed the night ? Wouldst Icai'u 
the pranks we have played beneath the moon — how Sathan liath 
piped for us — how the dead have danced with us — how we have 
boiled infant's flesh — brewed philters — and confected poisons — ha ! 
—ha I— attend I" . 

And m a harsh discordant tone, the hasr sans; the follovv'ino- wild 
rhyme? 

I. 

Around Monlfaucon's mouldering stones. 

The wizard crew is flitting : 
And 'neath a Jew's unhallowed bones, 

Man's enemy is sitting. 

• Le Loyer observes, that the Saboe, evohe, sung at tlie orc/ia, or Bacchanalia, 
agree with tlie exclamations of the conjurers and witches—" Her Sabat — Sabat ;" 
and that Bacchus, who was only a devil in disguise, was named Sabassus, from the 
Sabbath of the Bacchanals. The accustomed form of their initiation was expressed 
in these words, — " I liave drunkof llie drum, and eaten of tlie cymbal ; and am become 
a proficient ;" which Le Loyer explains in the following manner : — By the ci/mbal 
is meant the caldron used by the modern conjurers to boil those infants they intend 
to eat ; and hy the drum the goat's skin, blown up, whence they extract its 



176 CRICHTON. 

Terrible it is to see 

Siicli fantastic revelry ! 

Terrible it is to hear 

Sounds that shake the soul with fear! 

Like the chariot wheels of Night 

Swiftly round about they go ; 
Scarce the eye can track their flight. 

As the mazy nieasuies flow. 
Now they form a ring of tiie ; 
Now a s[)iral, funeral j)ire : — 
Mounting now, and now descending, 
In a circle never ending. 
As tiie clouds the storm-blast scatters — 
As the oak the thunder scatters — 
As scared fowl in wiritry weather — 
They huddle, groan, and scream together. 
Strains iniearthly and forlorn 
Issue frotu yon wrinkled horn, 
By the bearded demon blown, 
Sitting on that great gra\' stone. 

Hound luith wliisllc and ivilli whoop. 

Sweep the evei-wliii Hn!T trooj) ; 

Streams of liglit their footstips Indl, 

forked as a comet's tail. 

" Her Salxil ! — Srilxit 1 — " ihci/crif,— 

An abhissjoinallicircomjX'Wj. 

II. 

Sullenly resounds the roof, 

\\ ith the tramp of horned lioof:— 

Rings each iron-girdled rafter 

With intolerable laugliter: 

Shaken by the stutniing peal, 

The chain-hung corses swing and reel. 

From its perch on a dead-man's bone. 

Wild with fright, hath the raven flown : 

Fled from its feast hath the flesh-gorged rat ; 

Gone from its roost is the vampire-bat ; 

Stareth and screameth the screech owl old. 

As he wheeleth his flight through the moonlit wold ; 

Bays the g;irbage-gluited hound. 

Quakes the blind mole underground. 

llis!.iijg, glides the speckled snake ; 

Loathliest things their meal forsake. 

From their holes beneath the wall, 

Newt, and toad, and adder crawl — 

In the Sabbath-dance to sprawl ! 

Hound with whistle and with whonp. 

Sweep the evcr-wldrling troop ; 

Louder grows thtir fi antic glee — 

Wilder t/el thtir revelry., 

"Her Sahnl J—Sahat'l—'' they cry, 

A young girl joins lluir company. 

moisture, boil it up fit to drink, and by that means are admitted to participate in 
the ceremonies of JJacehus. It is also alleged the name Sabbath is given to these 
assemblies of conjurers, lieeause tliey are generally held on Saturdaya. — Monsieur 
Oufle : — Description of the Sabbath. 



THE MAGIC RING. 177 

III. 

See diat dark-liair'd girl advances— 
' In her liand a poignard glances ; 

On her bosom, white and bare, 
Rests an infant passing fair : 
Like a thing from heavenly region, 
'Mid that diabolic legion. 
Lovelier maid was never seen 
Tiiati tiiat rnthless one, I ween • 
Shape of symmetry hath she. 
And a step as wild-doe iree. 
Her jetty luiir is all unbound, 
And its long locks sweep tiie ground. 
Hushed in sleep her infant lies — 
" Perish ! child of sin," she cries, 
" To fiends thy frame I immolate — - 
To fiends thy soid I dedicate ! 
Unbaptispd, unwept, unknown — 
Jn hell Miy sire may claim his own." 
From her dark eyes fury flashes — 
From her breast her babe she da-hes. 
Gleams tiie knife — her brow is wrinkled— 
V\ ith warm blood her hand Is sprinkled I 
Without a gasp — witliout a groan. 
Her slumbering infant's soul hath flown. 
At Sathan's feet the corse is laid — 
To Sathan's view the knife display'd.* 
A roar of laughter shakes the pile — 
A mocking voice exclaims the while :— 
" By this covenant — by this sign, 
False wife ! false mother ! thou art mine t 
Weal or wo, whate'er betide. 
Thy doom is sealed, infanticide ! 
Shall nor sire's, nor brother's wrath, 
Nor husband's vengeance cross thy path ; 
And on Inm, thy blight, thy bane. 
Hell's consnmiuLr fire sliall rain I" 

Round with whistle and irtl/i rv/ioop, 

Sweip the evei'-whirl()ig troop ; 

III Ihr caldron bnbhlini^fasl. 

The biibe is by it> mother cast ! 

*' Eman helini .'" shout the crew. 

And their J'renzied dunce renew. 

IV. 

The fiend's wild strains are heard no more — 

Dabbled in her infant's gore. 

The new-made witch the caldron stirs — 

Howl the demon-worshippers. 

Now begin the Sabbath rites — 

Sathan marks his proselytes jf 

• Sathan will have- an ointment composed oT the flesh of unbaptized children, 
that these innocents, being deprived of their livts by these wicked witches, their 
poor little souls may be deprived of the glories of Paradise. — De Lancre. 

i The devil marks the sorcerers in a place which he renders insensible. And 
this mark is, in some, the figure of a hare ; in otiiers, of a toad's foot, or a black 
cat. — UcU-io, Disquisitioncs Macjicce. 

N 



178 CRICHTON". 

And each wrinkled liaganoitits 

Witli iinmients rank l;or uitliered joiutt. 

Uiiiiiia^inabic croods — 

UiiiiiKiiiiiiablc deeds — 

roul, idolatrous, malicious, 

Baiel'ui, hlack, and su|)erstitious, 

Every holy Ibrni profaninj:. 

Every sacred symbol staining, 

Eacii enacts, fuilils, observes, 

At the feet of him he serves. 

Here a goat is canonised. 

Here a bloated toad baj)tized; 
Uells around its neck are hung. 
Velvet on its back is flung ; 
Mystic words are o'er it said, 
Poison on its brow is shed.* 
Here a cock of snowy plume, 
Elutters o'er the caldron's fume ; 
Bv a Hebrew Mooliel slain, 
Muttering spells of power amain "f" 

There within the ground is laid 

An image that a foe may fade. 

Priest unlioly, chanting faintly 

Masses weird with visage saintly; 

^V bile respond the howling choir 

Antiphons from dark grimoire,| 

Clouds from out the caldron rise, 

Siirouding ftist the star-lit skies. 

J>ike ribs of mammoth through the gloom. 

Hoar .Montfaucen's pillars loom ; 

Wave its dead — a grisly row — 

In the night-breeze to and fro, 

At a beck from Sathan's hand, 

Drop to earth that charnel band, — 

Clattering as they touch the ground 

AVitii a harsh and jarring sound. 

Their fluttering rag-, by vulture rent, 

A ghastly spectacle present ; 

Flakes of flesh of livid hue, 

With the white bones peeping through. 

Elue phosphoric lights are seen 

In the holes where eyes have been 

Shining tlirough eacli hollow scull. 

Like the gleam of lantern dull 1 

• As the salibath toads are hajjlizcd, and dressed in red or black velvet, with a 
■bell at their neck, and another at each foot, the male si^onsor holds their head, 
the female their feet. — De Lancre. 

t The sacrifice of a snow-wliite cock is offered by the Jews at the feast of the 
reconciliation. This was one of tlie cliarges brouglit against the jMarcchale 
D'Ancre, condemned under Louis XIII. for sorcery and Judaism. Anotiier ab- 
surd accusation, to which she pleaded guilty, Avas the eating of rams' kidne.ys ! 
Those kidneys, liowever, we are bound to state, had been blessed as well as deviled. 
Prom Cornelius Agripjia we learn that the blood of a white cock is a proper suf- 
fumigation to the sun ; and that if pulled in pieces, Avhile living, bj- two men, ac- 
cording to the ancient and a])proved jiractice of the IMcthanenses, the disjecta 
vicnihra of the nnfnrtunate bird will repel all unfavourable breezes. The reader of 
" IJabelais" will also call to minil what is said respecting le cocqblanc in the chap- 
ter of GarqdTjhiii, treating " de ce qu'ent signifi^ par lescouleurs blanc et bleu!" 

t Tlie "Llack Book." 



THE MAGIC KING. ^79 

Hark ! tliey shake tlieir niaiiacles-^ 
Hark! each liag responsive yells I 
And her freely-yielded waist 
Is by fleshless arms embraced. 
Once again begins tlie dance — 
How tliey foot it — how they prance! 
Round the gibbet-cirque careering, 
On their grinning partners fleering. 
While, as first amid their ranks, 
The new-made witch with Sathan pranks. 

Furious grows their revelry, — 

But see ! — within tlie eastern sky, 
A bar of gold proclaims the sun — 
Hark! the cock crows — all is donel 

lyUh a wliiHlle and a whoop. 

Vanish straight the wizard truoji i 

Oh the bare and blasted ground, 

Horiicd lioofs no vioic resound: 

Caldron, goal, and broom are flown. 

And Montjaucon claims its own. 

" Thou hast sent for me," said the hag, as she conchuled her 
song ; " Avhat wouldst thou ? Be brief. Ashtaroth liath called 
me twice ; the third summons I must obey. There are mortals 
here whose presence frets me ? They are not marked "svith the sign, 
or baptized with the baptism of hell. Besides, I am in haste to 
rejoin the revel 1 have quitted. My aching bones are unanointed, 
and the caldron boils over. Speak, and let me go." 

" Daughter of darkness ; foul hag that thou art," cried Rug- 
gleri, in a voice of thimder ; " was it to hear thine accursed strains 
that I summoned thee hither ? — no, thy master may call thee, but 
I will detain thee at my pleasure." So saying, he sprinkled 
some liquid upon her face. " Now," he continued, as the Avitch 
howled with pain ; " art thou content to tarry ?" 

" What wouldst thou ?" demanded the hag, fiercely. 

** I would have the potion which thou alone of all thy brood of 
Tartarus canst prepare," returned the astrologer ; " the draught 
which will turn love to hate, and hate to love. Hast thou that 
philter by thee ? If so, give it to me, and thou art free to depart." 

" I have that will serve thy purpose better," responded the hag, 
drawing from her girdle a silver ring Ihshioned like a wreathed 
serpent ; '^ this enchanted hoop — thou shall have it — but take 
lieed upon whom thou bestowest it ; thy boon may prove unlucky 
to thyself, for 

Little thrift 

Hath the witch's gift. 

Ila, ha!" 

" Leave that to me," cried Ruggieri, impatiently. 

" Ah ! there again," exclaimed the witch, " Ashtaroth calls, his 
tone is wrathful. A moment, master, a moment, and I come. The 
wizards are shrieking, the fiend is piping, the imguent is seething I 
Well, well, I will be there anon. Take it — take it, 

K 2 



180 CRicnTON. 

With a bliglit ami witli a ban 

On love of maid, and I'aitli of man — 

Take It witli the witch's bcnison, or mahson, \Yhich you will, tiTia 
listen to me — 

Wlicn the moon was in her trine. 

And the star of love benign ; 

When a j)nr[>le gleam was sent 

F"rom red Mars beneticent ; 

And one ray from Saturn flowing, 

Struck tiie cusp of Scorpio glowing; 

Wa-i this wizard ring confected, 

And the potent charm perfected. 

Gathered at propitious hour 

Stone and herb of sovereign power. 

Gray a;tites, coral white, 

Jasper green, and chrysolite ; 

Veivain. violet, and mvrrii, 

And all flowers that irenzv stir, 

Through this iin;r wereswiltix' [jassed. 

And in heaps around it cast. 

And the fragrant pile was lighted. 

And a magic verse recited, 

And the starry signs were sought, 

And their mystic symbols wrought. 

Hound witii spell —inscribed with sign — 

Take this charmed ring — 'tis thine; 

lie who wears it need not woo. 

Woman's will 'twill swift subdue." 

And with a wild scream of laughter the witch vanished. 

The cavaHer, meantime, had witnessed Ruggieri's magical cere- 
monials with impatience, somewhat curbed by astonishment. Pre- 
pared to treat the whole performance as the juggling exhibition of 
u charlatan, he was, nevertheless, greatly struck by the extreme 
ingenuity displayed by the astrologer in his contrivances — nor less 
surprised at the extent of his resources and the nature of the con- 
federacy required to give due effect to his impostures. But when 
lie reflected upon the length of time which Kuggieri had supported 
the character of a magician, and that tlie turret he inhabited 
had been erected under his own direction, his wonder at his skill 
diminished, and his impatience to bring the scene to a close, re- 
turned with greater vehemence than ever. The delay which 
occurred Avas, in one respect, accordant with his wishes, as it 
cnabkid him to revolve over some meansofextricatinjr himself from 
tlie perilous situation in which he was placed, or, at least, of ac- 
complishing the purpose now dearest to his heart — that of com- 
municating to Ksclairmonde the secret of her birth. For some 
time he was lost in painful speculation. Suddenly a plan occurred 
to him — the expedient was hazardous — but it was the only one 
■which could be adopted, with any probability of success. Taking 
a packet from his bosom, he uniiistened his scarf, in tiie folds of 
which he placed the letters together with the knot of ribands given 



THE TWO MASKS. 181 

to liim by Escl.airmonde, and then culling Druid towards lilm, con- 
trived in the gloom, nnperceived, to swatlie tlic bandnge firmly 
rr;xd the body of the dog. This done, witli heart elate, he arose, 
and advanced towards the astrologer. At this juncture it was that 
the witch disappeared. Ruggieri heard his step, and, in a voice in 
which rage struggled with terror, exclaimed — 

" Retire — retire — signor — back, or you endanger soul and body 
— tread not within that magic circle — the girl is yours — be patient 
an instant. Take this ring — the witch's gift — it will render your 
suit resistless — and withdraw, or by Orlmasis, I will exert my art 
to enforce compliance witli my injunctions." 

So saying, Ruggieri thrust the ring upon the cavalier's fin- 
ger, and stamped upon the floor. The latter uttered an exclama- 
tion of impatience, but at that moment his mantle was seized 
behind with such unlooked for energy, that he was invokmtarily 
dragged several paces backwards. Placing his hand upon his 
poignard, the cavalier was about to free himself from his assailant, 
who, he doubted not, was the dwarf, but his design was checked 
by the relinquishment of the grasp, and by the sudden opening of 
a curtain disclosing to his view, within a small recess, the sleeping 
figure of the Gclosa. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE TWO MASKS. 

One of these men is genius to the other— 

Whifli is the natural man, 

And Avhich the spirit ?— Who shall decypher them ? 

COMKDY OF ErROKS. 

Suspended over the pallet upon which she lay, a lamp threw 
a faint light upon the features of the luifortunate singer. Her 
countenance was deathly pale ; and though her slumber was calm, 
it was evidently not the repose induced by " nature's best nurse," 
but the torpor occasioned by some medicated potion. Escaped 
from their confinement, her raven tresses wandered over her person, 
still clothed in the boyish garb of the morning ; and their dusky 
hue contrasted strikingly with the exceeding fairness of her neck 
and throat, now partially exposed by the disorder of her habili ' 
ments. Something there was in her situation so touching as power- 
fully to enlist the sympathies of the cavalier in her behalf ; and 
(shall we injure him in the esteem of our fair readers if we confess 
uo much ?) something so resistless in her beauty as to awaken in 



182 cnrcnxoN'. 

his bosom a momentavy emotion more akin to love than to pity. 
In palliation of this brief" disloyalty we may add that Catherine de 
jMedicis, hitherto a stranger to the attractions of the Golosa — as 
she regarded her features Avith some attention was so struck with 
her beauty, that she no longer felt any surprise at the extravagant 
passion with which she had inspired her iUustrious admirer. 

" Bv our ladv !" she exclaimed, ''the uirl is fairer than I 
thought her. Is it possible that that lovely creature can be lowly 
born ?" 

"It would seem not from the amulet I hold," replied the cava- 
lier. 

"Permit mc to examine tliat key more narrowly, signer," said 
Ruggieri, advancing towards them, " I maybe able to resolve her 
majesty's question, INIeantime I pray yoii take this phial. Tlie 
damsel sleeps, as you perceive, but let her breathe from this flagon, 
and her slumbers will at once be dissipated." 

"'Twere better she should awake no more than to dishonour," 
murmured the cavalier, as he took the phial, and restored the golden 
key to Ruggieri. " Poor girl 1" he mentally ejaculated as he 
approached the couch, — " my chance of rescuing thee from perse- 
cution, and from what is worse than death, is now slight indeed. 
But the attempt shall be made. I have vowed to accomplish thy 
rescue, and I icill accomplish it or perish in the effort !" 

And with these musings he employed the phial as directed 
by Ruggieri, nor had he to wait long for the result of his applica- 
tion. The Gelosa started and unclosed her eyes ; but as her gaze 
fell upon the cavalier's sable mask, Avith a scream of terror she 
hastily averted her head. 

" He here again," she shrieked, — " mother of mercy, shield me 
from this demon !" 

The cavalier bent his head over the shrinking maiden, and 
in a low tone breathed in her ear her name — " Ginevra." 

Not more suddenly does the falcon turn her wing at her master's 
call, than did the Gelosa start at the cavalier's voice. Trembling 
from head to foot, she raised herself upon the couch — she bent her 
gaze upon his figure — she peered into the holes of his mask as if to 
seek some further confirmation of lier hopes — she dashed aside her 
blinding tresses, passed her fingers rapidly across her brow, as if to 
collect her scattered senses, and in a low tone, exclaimed — " That 
voice — do I still dream ? — that voice coupled with that hideous 
phantom — methinks I heard my own name pronounced by tones, 
so loved, so tender ; but it must have been a dream — how should he 
know my name ? Oh I I am very faint." And she again sank 
backwards." 

The cavalier regarded her with deep commiseration ; but scarcely 
knowing how far in her present state of excitement it wotild be 
prudent to trust her with a knowledge of his plans, he deemed it 



THE TWO MASKS. 183 

advisable to resume the disi^uiscd tone of voice he had adopted in 
his conference with Catherine. " For whom do you take mc, 
Oinevra?" he asked. 

" For whom?" exclaimed the maiden, — *' I took you for ananfi-cl 
of Hght, but I find you are a spirit of darkness. Hence and 
leave me. Torture me uo longer with your presence. Have I not 
already endured agony at your hands ? JMust dishonour likewise 
be my portion. — Never. I have resisted all your eilbrts — your 
blandishments — your entreaties — 3-our force — and I will continue 
to resist you. I can yet defy your power, as I defied you in your 
palace at jMantua. Woman's love may be fickle, but her hate is 
constant. I hate you, prince, and I will die a thousand deaths 
leather than yield me to your embraces." 

As Ginevra spoke, she became, for the first time, aware of the 
disordered state of her apparel. If her complexion had been here- 
tofore as white as that of the mountain snow, its hue was as siiddcnly 
changed as that of the same snow when it is tinged by the purpling 
sunset. Neck, cheek, and throat were turned to crimson by the 
hot and blushing tide, wliile sirame, mingled with resentment, Avas 
vividly depicted upon her glowing countenance. 

*' Ah ! false and felon kniglit," she cried, bitterly, '^ thou hast 
done well to steal upon a maiden's privacy — upon her slumbers — 
but get hence, or by tlie Virgin I will tear oil' this bandage from 
my wound and breathe out my life before thine eyes. Ah ! why 
was not that blow more surely aimed — why did I not perish in 
saving Crichton !" 

" And do you love Crichton thus devotedly?' asked the cava- 
lier. 

" Do I love him?" repeated Ginevra — " do I love heaven — adore 
its saints — hate tkce? — Lo\e/nj/ir' she continued, passionately — 
" he is to mc life — nay, more than life. Understand me, — thou 
whose dark lieart can only couple love witii desire — the affection 
which 1 bear to Crichton is that of the devotee for the saint. He 
is my heart's idol, its divinity. I aspire not to Jus love. I ask for 
no return. I am content to love without hope. It were happiness 
too much to die I'or him: but having failed in that, think not I 
will live for another." 

"Then live for him!" said the cavalier in an under-tone, and 
resuming his natural voice. 

To describe tire effect produced upon the Gelosa by these words, 
and by the sudden change of tone, were impossible. She passed 
.her hand across her brow — she gazed upon her masked companion 
in doubt and amazement, and then exclaimed under her breath, 
and with a look, as if her life hung upon the issue of her inquiry 
—"Is it?" 

" It is," returned the cavalier. And her head declined upon his 
shoulder. 



184 CRICHTON. 

Catherine was not more surprised at this sudden change in the 
Gelosa's manner than the astrologer. 

" Thy spell begins to ^\•ork, good father," she said, " the girl 
relents." 

" Maledizione !" returned Ruggieri, furiously. 

"How! — art thou not satisfied with thine own handiwork?'* 
demanded Catherine, in surprise, " thou art distraught." 

" 'Tis because it is mine own handivrork that I am distrauglit,** 
returned the astrologer. '* My gracious mistress," he continued, 
throwing himself at the queen's leet, who viewed his conduct with 
increased astonishment, "I have served you faithfully — " 

*' Go to — what wouldst thou ?" 

"I ask a boon in requital of my long services — a light request, 
madam." 

" Name it." 

" Suffer not yon girl to quit the chamber to-night. Or, if she 
must go hence, let me accompany her." 

Catherine returned no answer, but clapping her hands together, 
the dwarf, in obedience to her signal, rushed to the trap-door. 

To return to the cavalier. His eff n'ts, seconded by his kindly 
tvords, speedily restored the Gelosa to consciousness. Gently dis- 
engaging herself from his (;mbrace, and casting down her large 
eyes, as if fearing to meet his gaze, she thus, in a low tone, 
addressed him : " Pardon me, noble signor, my late freedom of 
speech. My lips have betrayed the secret of my heart, but on my 
soul I wotdd not so have spoken had I deemed that my words 
would ever have reached your ears." 

'•' I need not that assurance, fair Ginevra," returned the cavalier, 
*' and it pains me to think that your love is fixed upon one 
who can only requite your devotion with a brother's tenderness. 
But listen to me. With this key you will pass, by a subterranean 
outlet, to the Hotel de Soissons. Escape will then be easy. Tarry 
without its walls, on the quarter nigh the church of Saint Eustache, 
for an hour. If in that space I join you not, depart, and go upon 
the morrow to the Louvre. Seek out the Demoiselle Esclairmonde, 
— do you mind that name, Ginevra ?" 

" 1 do — " gasped the Gelosa. 

" You will lind her amongst the attendants of the Queen Louise. 
Bear to her tliis paper." 

*' 'Tis stained witli blood," cried Ginevra, as she received the 
letter. 

•' 'Tis traced with my dagger's point," rejoined the cavalier. 
** Will you convev it to her?" 

" I will." 

*' And now," continued the cavalier, " collect all your energies, 
fliir maiden. You must leave this chamber alone." 

•'And you—?" 

" Heed me not ; a fate dearer than mine hangs upon that paper 



THE TWO MASKS. 185 

— i7pon your safety. You have said you love me. You have ap- 
proved your devotion. But I claim a further proof. Whatever 
you may hear or see, tarry not. When I bid you, go. You have 
a poiirnard — ha ?" 

" What Italian woman is without one?" 

" It is well. You who dread not to die, need fear nothing. 
Your hand. I am once more the mask. Be firm — ha — it is too 
late." 

The latter exclamation was uttered as the cavalier perceived 
the trap-door open, and Catherine's guard ascend. One by one the 
dark figures stepped upon the floor. At last the mask appeared 
bound, and conducted by Loupgarou and Caravaja. 

" What means this ?" inquired the affrighted Gelosa. 

" Ask not, but follow me," replied the cavalier, advancing 
quickly towards the queen. 

"Madam," he exclaimed, " before this execution takes place, 
I pray you suffer this maiden to withdraw. Let her await our 
coming forth within the corridor of your palace." 

" Be it so," returned Catherine. 

" Go," Avhispered the cavalier to Ginevra — "you have the key 
— there is the masked door." 

" She stirs not hence," said Ruggieri, seizing the maiden's arm. 

" What mean'st thou, old man," cried the cavalier. " What 
right hast thou to oppose her departure ?" 

" A flxther's right," returned Ruggieri — " she is m}'- child." 

" Thy child I" screamed the Gelosa, recoiling — " oli no — no — 
not thy child." 

"Thou art the daughter of Ginevra jNIalatesta — thou art like- 
■wise my daughter." 

" Believe him not, dear signer," cried the Gelosa, clinging to 
the cavalier — " he raves — I am not his daughter." 

" By my soul I speak the truth," ejaculated Ruggieri. 

'*My patience is exhausted," exclaimed the queen; "let the 
girl tarry where she is. I have not done with her. Crichton's 
execution shall no longer be delayed." 

" His execution !" cried the Gelosa, with a thrilling scream. 
" Is it Crichton whom you would put to death ?" 

" Be calm," whispered the cavalier — " Heed not me — but in the 
confusion make good your own escape." 

" Thou hast said it, maiden," returned Catheiine, sternly smiling 
— " that mask conceals thy lover's features — " 

" That mask !— ha !" 

At this moment Catherine again clapped her hands. There was 
an instant movement amongst the men-at-arms. Quick as thought 
the mask was dragged forwards. A block of wood was placed 
upon the ground by Caravaja. The sword of Loupgarou gleamed 
m the air. 



18G CRicnTOX. 

The cavalier placed himselt' between Cathcrric and tlie execu- 
tioners. His hand was laid upon his vizard. 

"You ha^■c said the withdrawal of your mask should be the 
signal of Cricliton's doom," cried the queen, addressing the cava- 
lier, " are you prepared, signer ?" 

"I am prepared, madamc," replied the cavalier, calmly, "to 
meet my own fate. Not against yon maek, but against me, must 
your vengeance be directed." 

And as he spoke, he withdrew his vizard. 

" ^Malediction ;" exclaimed Catherine, as she beheld the features 
of the Scot, '* traitor ! — have we then been thy dupe all this while 
— have I been betrayed into the avowal of iiiy most secret 
scliemes — into the commission of a grievous and scarce pardonable 
indignity to my nearest and dearest ally? Have I — but thy 
cunning shall avail thee little — Dieu merci ! — thou art still in my 
power. Don Vincenzo," she continued, turning to the mask, 
M-hose vizard having been in the confusion hastily removed by 
Caravaja, discovered dark and haughty lineaments, inflamed with 
choler, but strongly impressed with the lofty and peculiar character 
proper to the southern noble — (a character which the reader will 
at once understand if he will call to mind the grave and majestic 
Venetian faces of Titian) — " Don Vincenzo," said Catherine, ad- 
dressing the prince, who still remained surrounded by the guard 
— " what reparation can I ofTcr you for the affront I have thus 
unintentionally put upon you ?" 

" One only reparation will I accept," cried Vincenzo, proudly 
shaking off the grasp of Loupgarou, and advancing towards the 
queen. 

" Give me to understand your wishes," returned Catherine. 

"I claim the life of my adversary," returned Gonzaga. 

" Now, by my soul, prince," said Catherine, in a deep whisper, 
" you have asked a boon I cannot grant. Crichton's life is ne- 
cessary to ivy safety — to yovr safety. He must die.*' 

" He sJiail die, madam, upon the morrow," returned Vincenzo, 
in the same tone : " but the blazon of Gonzaga were for ever 
stained, — my honour as a knight for ever spotted, if he, whom I 
have defied to mortal combat, should be assassinated in my pre- 
sence. He must be set free." 

" Never," replied Catherine, " his death will lie at my door. 
He is in possession of my schemes — of Anjou's plot — and of a 
secret of vital import, which I deemed I had communicated to 
yourself ; no, he must die." 

" I had rather perish upon the block, by the hands of those mis- 
creants, than suffer my honour to be thus sullied," exclaimed Gon- 
zaga. " Hear me, madam," he cried, aloud. " Suilcr him to 
depart, and I will gage my princely faith that the Chevalier Crich- 
ton betrays no secret — reveals no plot. The laws of honour, im- 



THE TWO MASKS. 187 

perative on mo, arc not lc?s Linding upon him. Let liim depart 
without fear, and intrust the work of venp;eance to me. To-inor- 
row we meet as mortal enemies — to-night wc part as fair focmen." 

" Gage not your faitli for mc, prinee," said Crichton, Avho with 
sword and dagger fiercely confronted his assailants, " I can neither 
accept life nor freedom upon tlic terms you propose. If I depart 
hence, the secret I have obtained will be revealed — nay, if my 
voice be silenced in death, my last gasp will be cheered with the 
conviction that other tongues than mine will breathe it for me." 

" Ha !" exclaimed Catherine. 

" J^ vengeance will survive me, madam,"" continued the Scot; 
*'you may iloat this chamber with my blood — may hew me limb 
from limb — but that secret will escape you — nay, it lias already 
escaped you. I may never behold her more, may never exchan^•e 
word with her again, but, ere to-morrow's sun shall set, the proof 
of her birth will be laid before the Princess of Conde." 

" Thou liest !" cried Catherine. 

*' Where are the despatches of Tavannes, the letters of the 
Cardinal of Lorraine, your own written authority?" demanded 
Crichton. 

" Ha !" exclaimed Catherine, hastily glancing at the packet she 
held within her hand — " Traitor ! where are they ?'' 

" On their way to the Louvre," replied Crichton. 

** Impossible !" 

" I have found a faithful messenger — " 

" En verdad, sa magestad, this braggart's only messenger can 
have been the great dog who accompanied him," exclaimed Cara- 
vaja. "The accursed brute dashed down the trap door as we as- 
cended, and 1 remarked that he had a scarf twisted round his 
throat." 

"That scarf contained the letters," said. Crichton, with a smile 
of triumph. 

•' And the hound escaped you ?" demanded Catherine, of the 
Spaniard. 

" It is no dog, but a fiend in bestial shape," replied Caravaja ; 
*' the phantasm was out of '^v^\\t in a moment." 

" Chevalier Crichton," said Catherine, advancing towards him, 
and speaking in an imder-tone, " those papers are of more value to 
me than your life. I will capitulate with you. Upon the condi- 
tions offered to you by the Prince of Mantua, you may depart 
freely." 

" 1 have said that I reject them, madam. Bid your assassins 
advance. To Heaven and Saint Andrew I commit my cause." 

" I will die with you," murmured Ginevra. 

" Rash girl, thou hast no part in this fray," cried Ruggierl ; 
** hence with thy father." 

" Never," shrieked the Gelosa, " I will never quit the Signer 
Crichton's side — the blov/ which is his death, shall be mine likewise. 



188 CRicnxox. 

Let mc go, I say. I am not tliy cliilJ. Thou hast invented this 
story to betray me." 

" Here mc, Gincvra — 1 have proofs — " 

"No, I will not lislcn to thee. Thou wouldst have bartered my 
honour for the Prince of Mantua''s .cold. Was tliat a father's 
love ? But if thou art my father, leave me, and draw not my 
blood, as well as that of my mother, upon thy head ; lor, by our 
Lady of Pity ! I will plunge this steel to my heart rather than 
yiekl to thy llccntioiis master." 

" Ginevra, I would free thee from him. In mercy listen to me/' 
But ere he could proceed, the fiery girl drew her dagger, and ex- 
tricating herself from his grasp, onCe more took refuge by the side 
of Crichton. 

Catherine, meantime, despite the indignant remonstrances of 
,Gonzaga, who, being unarmed, could take no part in the conflict, 
had commanded the men-at-arms to assault the Scot. 

" Upon him, knaves," she cried, " what do you fear ? — he is 
but one — strike ! and spare not." 

Crichton breasted their Auy, as the rock resists and Imrls 
back the breakers. The gleam of their swords flashed in the 
eyes of the Gelosa; the clash of steel resounded in her cars. The 
stiife was terriflc. But amidst it all the Scot remained unin- 
jured ; not a thrust could reach him, while se^-cral desperate Avounds 
were received by his antagonists. The vociferations, the clamour, 
the trampling of feet were deafening. Suddenly the noise ceased. 
Catherine looked to see if her enemy had fallen, but she beheld 
him in an attitude of defence, calmly regarding his antagonists, 
who had drawn back to take breath and consider upon some new 
plan of attack. jMortified and dismayed, the queen began to 
apprehend the issue of the combat might yet determine in favour 
of Crichton, when she beheld a dark figure stealing behind him. 
It was the dwarf. With stealthy steps she saw him approach 
the Scot. He bounded forward — a dagger was in his grasp — when 
at that moment he was felled by the stiletto of the Gelosa. Cathe- 
rine could not restrain an exclamation of displeasure. 

" Cravens," she cried, " ye lack the nerves of men — give me 
a sword, and I will show you how to wield it." 

Thus exhorted, the ruffian band renewed the conflict, and 
with better success than before. A few blows only had been 
exchanged, when Crichton's sword, a light rapier, intended 
more for ornament than use, was shivered, and with the excep- 
tion of his poignard, a feeble defence against six trenchant 
blades, he lay at their mercy. A savage yell was raised by his 
opponents. A few moments more they saw would now decide the 
flght. Resolved, however, to sell his life dearly, Crichton darted 
forward, and seizing the foremost of the crew by the throat, plunged 
his dagger into his breast. The wretch fell with a deep groan. His 
comrades pressed on to avenge him. With his cloak twisted round 
his arm, Crichton contrived for some moments to Avard oft" their 




"Mh.. i 



:r:.,i:-* 






* 




THE TWO MASKS. 189 

blows and rid himself of anotlicr foe. But it was evident wlint 
must be the result of a contest so unequal: nevertheless, the Scot's 
defence was so jj:allant as still to leave his enemies in doubt, who, as 
he seconded a leint with a thrust at Loupgarou, his foot slipped upon 
the floor, now floating in blood, and he stumbled. Swifter than 
thought Ginevra interposed her own person between Loupgarou 
and Crichton, and the blow intended for him must have transfixed 
her, had not a loud cry from Ruggieri arrested the hand of the 
giant. 

" Sparc my child ! — spare her! my gracious mistress 1" ejaculated 
the distracted astrologer. 

But Catherine was deaf to his entreaties. 

*' Spare neither," she said, sternly 

Crichton, however, had recovered his feet. A word even in 
that brief interval had passed between him and the Gelosa. Ere 
his intention could be divined, he had flown together with the maid 
to tl:e recess — and the curtains iiiiling at the same moment to the 
ground, concealed them from view. An instant afterwards, when 
these hangings Avere withdrawn by Caravaja and Loupgarou, they 
had disappeared. A masked door wdthin the wall, half open, 
showed the means by which their flight had been eilected. " Sangre 
de Dios !" cried Caravaja, as this door was suddenly closed, and a 
bar, as was evident from the sound, drawn across it on the other 
side, " our purpose is frustrated." 

" Cap-de-diou !" ejaculated Loup2:arou, "whither doth tliat 
outlet lead?" 

As he spoke, the giant felt his leg suddenly compressed by a 
nervous gripe, while, at the same time, a noise like the hissing of a 
serpent sounded in his cars. Starting at the touch, Loupgarou 
beheld the red orbs of Elberich fixed upon him. The unfortunate 
manikin, mortally wounded, had contrived to crawl towards 
liim. The stream of life, flowing in thick and inky drops from his 
side, was ebbing fast — but the desire of vengeance lent him strength. 
Directing the giant's attention towards a particular part of the 
wall, he touched a spring and another but a smaller door flew open. 
Through this aperture the dwarf crept, beckoning Loupgarou, who 
-with Caravaja and his two remaining followers instantly went after 
him. 

Scarcely had the party disappeared, when the door through 
"which Crichton had approached the turret from the queen's palace, 
revolved i;pon its hinges, and the Vicomte de Joyeuse, accom- 
panied by Chicot, and attended by an armed retinue, entered the 
<;hamber. He cast a quick glance round the room, and his coun- 
tenance fell as he beheld the bloody testimonials of the recent fray. 

" Monseigneur," he said, advancing towards Gonzaga, who 
rem.ained motionless with his arms folded on his breast, " I have 
it in his majesty's commands to assure myself of your person till the 
morrow." 



1 00 CPJcnxox. 

" A prisoner !" exclaimed Gonzaga, his liand vainly searcliing for 
his sword, — " know you whom you thus address ?" 

" I know only that I address one whom I hold to he a loyal 
cavalier," returned Joyeuse, quickly, " hut when I gaze around this 
chamher, and behold these marks of butchery, doubts arise in my 
mind which I would fain have removed. Whom have I the 
honour to place under arrest ?'' 

" The Prince of Mantua," replied Catherine ; " the king's arrest 
cannot attach to him." 

" Vive Dieu !'' exclaimed the vicomtc, " I am indeed much 
honoured. But you arc mistaken, madam — his majesty's arrest 
does attach to the prince. Messieurs, to your cliargc I commit his 
highness. My dutv, however, is only half fulfilled. ^Nlav I crave 
to know where I sliall meet with the Chevalier Crichton, if he be, 
as I conjecture, within this turret ?" 

" You will scarce need to assure yourself of his person, mon- 
seigneur," replied Catherine, smiling ; " my attendants have already 
saved you that trouble." 

" How, madam !" exclaimed Joyeuse, starting. 

" Outcries and footsteps resound from this doorway," ejacidated 
Chicot. " Mcthinks I hear the voice of Crichton — there Hgain — 
to the rescue. Monsieur le Vicomte."" 

" Prince," cried Joyeuse, " you shall answer to me for the life 
of the Chevalier Crichton. In his quarrel v.'ith you I was chosen 
his parrai/i, and by Saint Paul, if he have perished by assassi- 
nation in your presence, I will proclaim you felon and craven, 
throughout every court in Christendom." 

" Monsieur le Vicomte, you do well to threaten a prisoner," 
replied Gonzaga, haughtily. '* But a season will arrive when you 
shall answer to iiie for these doubts." 

" And to7nc likewise," added Catherine, haughtily. " Monsieur 
le Vicomte, I command you and your followers to withdraw, on 
pain of incurring my deadliest resentment." 

" I am his majesty's representative, madame," returned Joyeuse, 
proudly, *' and invested with his authority to seek out and detain 
a noble cavalier, somewhile distinguished as ' the mask,' together 
■with iho Chevalier Crichton, during his sovereign pleasure. You 
are best aware what account you will render of the latter to his 
majesty." 

" To the rescue ! to the rescue! monscigneur," screamed Chicot, 
** I hear a female voice." 

" My daughter I my daughter !" ejaculated lluggierl. 

" Some of you take charge of yon caitiff," exclaimed Joyeuse, 
pointing with his sword to the astrologer; " he is concerned, I doubt 
not, in this foul transaction — and now follow me who may ? 
jMontjoIe ! Saint Denis ! — on ! — " 

So saying, he dashed through the narrow portal, and sprang 
swlt'tly up a dark and winding staircase, down which the echoes of 
oaths and other vociferations now distinctly resounded. 



191 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE COLUMN OF CATHERINE DE MEDICIS. 

On luy attachoit ung: cable en quelque haute tour pcndaut en terre : par icelluy 
avecques deux mains niontoit, puis devaloit si roidement, et si asscuroment, que 
plus ne pourriez parmy ung pre bien e<,'all6. 

IIabelais. Garyantua. Liv. I. Cli.. xxiii. 

Opposite the Rue de Viarmcs, and reared against the circular 
walls of the Halle-au-Ble — with its base Avashcd by a fountain, — 
its shaft encircled by a cylindrical dial, and huge gnomonic projec- 
tion, and its summit surmounted by a strange spherical cage of iron 
— stands, at this day, a tall, fluted, richly decorated, Doric column; 
bearing upon its aspect the reverend impress of antiquity. The 
fountain and dial are of modern construction ; the spherical crest 
is ancient. Tradition assigns this observatory, for such it is, to 
Catherine de Mcdicis. From hence she is said to have nightly 
perused, Avithin the starry scroll of heaven, the destinies of the 
great city stretched out at her feet — while, from the same situa- 
tion, Ruggicri is reported to have gathered the lore by which he 
was enabled to avert the stroke of danger, and strengthen and 
consolidate his mistress's power. 

The iron cage alluded to, and which is supposed to have some 
recondite allusion to the mysteries of astrology, was, in all proba- 
bility, contrived by the Florentine seer. Its form has given rise 
to much speculation. Consisting of a circular frame-work of iron, 
crossed by other circles, and supported by a larger hemispliere of 
iron bars ; — " des cercles et des demicercles entrelacis^^ says M. Pin- 
gre ; — the object of which it is diflicult to conceive, unless they 
were intended as types of the science, to the uses of which the 
structure Avas devoted; and erected after the designs of the cele- 
brated Jean Bullan, this pillar situated, at the period under con- 
sideration, in the angle of a lateral court of the Hotel de Soissons, 
is the sole remnant now existino- of that vast and magnificent edifice. 
Its history is remarfcable — but it may suffice to say, that it was pre- 
served from the general demolition of Catherine's palace by the 
generosity of a private individual, Le Sieur Petit de Bachaumont, 
by whom it was redeemed at the price of 1500 livres. The effect of 
the observatory is materially injured by its contiguity to the Halle- 
au-Ble, and its symmetry destroyed by an horologiographical 
contrivance, as well as by a tasteless tablet placed above its plinth ; 
but notwithstanding these drawbacks — viewed either in connexion 
with its historical associations, or with the mysterious and exploded 



192 CRICiAiON. 

science of wliicli it is a relic, — the column of Catherine de ^ledicig 
can scarcely be regarded with inditFerence. Within its deeply-cut 
chamfering, now almost effaced by time, are still to be traced em- 
blematic device?, similar to those heretofore mentioned as adorning 
the walls of Iluggieri's laboratory. The elevation of the pillar 
from the ground is nearly a hundred feet, and its diameter some- 
what more than nine feet. 

^V hen Ciichton and the Gelosa disappeared through the recess, 
their course was for a few moments shaped along a low, narrow 
passage, evidently contrived within the thickness of the wall, which, 
after a brief but toilsome ascent, conducted them to what appeared, 
I'rom the increased height of the roof, and greater space between 
the vails, to be a sort of landing-place. AVliether there was any 
further outlet from this spot, the profound darkness in which all 
was involved, left them no means of ascertaining; but as they tarried 
I'or an instant to recover breath, Crichton took advantage of the 
occa ion, warmly to express his thanks to his fair companion for the 
succour she had so opportunely afforded him. 

'' But for you," he said, " fair Ginevra, I had perished beneath 
tlie daggers of Catherine's assassins. To you I owe my life a second 
time, — how — how shall I requite your devotion ?" 

" By suffering me to be your slave," cried the impassioned girl; 
bathing his hand with tears, — " to remain ever near you." 

" You shall never leave me," returned the Scot, kindly, carry- 
ing his gratitude to a scarce allowable length; for as ho spoke, his 
lips sought the burning mouth of the Gelosa, while his arms pressed 
he'- closely to his bosom. 

"Santa Madonna!" exclaimed Ginevra, hastily drawing back 
her head, deeply abashed at the impulse to which she had yielded, 
** our pursuers are at hand.^' 

At the same moment, also, Crichton became aware of the sound 
of hoarse voices, and approaching footsteps. 

" There is — there must be a further outlet — this chamber com- 
numicates with the queen's observatory," cried the Gelosa, " I 
remember I was dragged to some such place as this, by him who 
falsely calls himself my father, a few hours ago. Each wall 
in this frightful turret is perforated, like a state dungeon, with secret 
passages. Step forward, sweet signor, and you will find the 
outlet" 

With outstretched hand Crichton guided himself rapidly along 
the wall. The aperture was instantly discovered. His foot was 
on the flight of steps. 

" Follow me, Ginevra," he cried, extending his hand in the 
direction of the damsel. But a grasp was laid upon her, from 
wlilch she could not extricate herself. At the same moment a 
lii.-sing laugh proclaimed lier captor to be the vindictive dwaif. 
With supernatural force the mannikin twined himself" round lier 



THE COLUMN OF CATHERINE DE MEDICIS. WS 

person. The maiden felt herself sinking. His hot breath was 
upon her face — his horrible mouth approached her throat. She 
experienced a sharp and sudden thrill of pain. The vampire having 
no other weapon, sought to fix his teeth in her neck. In this ex- 
tremity, as she gave herself up for lost, Elberich's grasp relaxed, 
and the monster sank an inert mass to the earth. Crichton's poif- 
nard had freed her from her foe ; while his arm bore her up tlie 
spiral stairs, just as Loupgarou and his crew reached the landint^- 
place. The giant heard the struggle between Ginevra and Elherich 
— he heard also the fall of the latter, and with a bound sprang Ibr- 
ward. He was too late to secure his prey, and stumbhng over 
the prostrate body of the dwarf, impeded with his huge person the 
further advance of his followers. Muttering deep execrations, he 
then arose and began to ascend the column. After mounting some 
forty or fifty steps, a dull light, admitted through a narrow slit in 
the pillar, cheered his progress. 

" By my fay,'' cried Loupgarou, as be gazed through this loop- 
hole upon the gardens of the Hotel de Soissons, just visible by the 
uncertain light of a clouded moon, "we are within her majesty's 
observatory — those are the royal gardens — and yonder arc the old 
towers of Saint Eustache." 

" En verdad companero," replied Caravaja, thrusting forward 
liis visage, and surveying in his turn the scene, *' thou hast said it. 
It must be tlie structure I have so often gazed at from the Rue des 
Etuves, with the cage in which folks say Ruggieri keeps Seuor 
Satlianas confined. Many a time have I seen that sooty imp, whose 
carcase we have left in the room below, practise a thousand fantastic 
trickeries upon those iron bars. There used to be a rope from 
which he would fling himself headlong from the summit, and 
swing backwards and forwards like an ape or a juggler, to the terror 
of all pious observers. — Ha ! — What means that clamour and clash- 
ing of swords? There are others at work besides ourselves. 
Vamos camarada !" 

" Softly," replied the lethargic giant, pausing to take breath — 
*' we do not need hurry ourselves, quo nun/is -proyerare stadeo, eo 
me impedio maijis — as we say in the schools ! We are certain our 
Scot is in this turret — we are certain, moreover, that he cannot 
descend without passing us — we are furthermore certain, that we 
are four, and that he is but one ; er«jo we may safely reckon upon 
his head — and upon our reward." 

" Concedo consequeniiam^' returned Cai'avaja, '' but proceed, 
most redoubted Goliath, or this puissant David may prove too much 
for thee after all. Ha ! hear you that shot ? Some one has dis- 
covered him from below — mount! — despatch!" 

Thus urged, Loupgarou recommenced the ascent. Another and 
another loophole showed him the elevation he had attained, and 
at length his raiglity head came in contact with a plate of iron, 

O 



104 CRICHTOX. 

■wLich proved to be a trap-door opening upon the summit of the 
■column, but Avliich was now fastened on the other side. Here was an 
unexpected dilficulty thrown in their path, not entirely, however, 
to the dissatisfaction of the giant, who, despite his bulk and sinew, 
like all other men of vast proportions, was of a somcwliat craven 
nature at bottom, and regarded the approaching struggle with con- 
siderable misgiving. He deemed it necessary, however, to conceal 
his gratification under a mask of oath and bluster, and seconding 
his words with a show of resolution, applied his shoulder to the 
trap-door with so nnich good-will, that, to his astonishment, it at 
once yielded to his ellbrts. To recede was now impossible. Cara- 
vaja and his comrades were swearing m the rear; so putting a bold 
face upon the matter, he warily emerged. What was his surprise, 
4ind we may say delight, to find the roof deserted. In proportion 
to his security his choler increased. 

"Hola! — my masters," he roared, ''we arc tricked — duped — 
•deceived. This Crichton is in league with the liend. He has made 
liiinsclf a pair of wings, and flown away with the girl upon his 
back — Cap-de-diou ! we are robbed of our reward." 

" San diablo I" exclaimed Caravaja, as he also emerged from the 
trap-door. " Gone ! — ha — higados ! — I perceive the device." 

To return to the Scot and his fair charge. Sustaining the 
terrified girl, wlio was so much exhausted as to be wholly un- 
:able to assist herself, within his arms, Crichton rapidly threaded 
the steps of the column. Arrived at the summit, he gently 
■deposited Ginevra upon tlic roof, and stood with his dagger in hand 
prepared to strike down the first of his assailants who should appear 
at the mouth of the staircase. The cold fresh air now playing upon 
her cheek in some degree revived the Gelosa. She endeavoured to 
raise herself, but her strength was unequal to the effort. At this 
moment an outcry was heard below. It was the voice of Blount 

■ calHng to his dog. Crichton uttered an exclamation of delight. 
The packet liad reached its destination — it would be delivered to 
Esclairmonde. Scarcely liad this thought passed through his mind, 
when the sudden report of an arquebuss was heard — succeeded by 

■a deep howl. Blount's shouts, mingled with those of Ogilvy, arose 
loud and stunning. The clash of swords succeeded. Crichton 

■ could no longer resist the impulse that prompted him to glance at 
the combatants. He leaned over the edge of the pillar, but all that 
he could discern was the Englishman engaged in sharp conflict with 
^several armed figures partially concealed from his view by the inter- 
vening shrubs of the garden. Druid was by his side, foaming, furious, 
and with his teeth fastened upon one of his master's assailants. 
The scarf was gone. But whether or not it was in Blount's posses- 
sion, lie was vmable to ascertain. As he turned in doubt and some 
dejection towards the trap-door, his eye chanced upon a coil of rope 
^attached to one of the linlcs constituting the larger hemisphere of 



THE COLUMN OF CATHERINE DE MEDICIS. 195 

iron bars by whicli lie was suiToundcd. A means of escape at once 
presented itself to his imagination. Swift as thought he tried the 
durability of the cord. It was of strength sufficient to sustain his 
•weight ; and of more than sufficient extent to enable him to reach 
the ground. He uttered an exclamation of joy ; but lie suddenly 
checked himself. The plan was relinquished as soon as formed. 
He could not abandon the Gelosa. 

Ginevra divined his intentions. Collcctinnj all her euerfies, she 
threw liersclf at his feet, beseeching him to avail himself of 
the opportunity that presented itself of safety by fli'dit. 

" And leave you here to lall into the hands of your pursuers — of 
Gonzaga — never," replied Crlchton. 

" Heed me not — heed me not — noble and dear signor," replied 
the Gelosa. "I have /?/?/ means of escape lilvcwise — go — -go — I 
implore of you. "What is my life to yours ? By the Virgin !" 
she continued, with passionate earnestness, " if you do not obey me, 
1 will fling myself headlong from this pillar and free you from 
restraint, and myself from persecution."" 

So saying, she advanced to the brink of the column, as if 
resolved upon putting her threat into instant execution. 

" Hold, hold, Ginevra," exclaimed Crichton, " we may both 
avoid our foes. Give me thy hand, rash girl." And ere she 
could advance another footstep, the Scot detained her with a 
powerful grasp. Ginevra sank unresistingly into his arms. 
Crichton's next proceeding was to make fast the trap-door, 
the bolt of which presented such feeble resistance to the llercu 
lean shoulders of Loupgarou. He then threw tlic cord over the 
edge of tiie column, and advanced to the brink to see that it 
had fallen to the ground. As he did so, he was perceived and 
recognised by Ogilvy, who hailed him with a loud shout, but as 
that doughty Scot was engaged hand to hand with a couple of 
assailants, he was not in a condition to render his patron any effi- 
cient assistance. Having ascertained that the cord had dropped in 
the way he thought desirable, Crichton again assured himself 
of the firmness of the knot, and placing his dagger between his 
teeth, to be ready for instant service on reaching the ground, 
and twining his left arm securely round the person of the Gelosa, 
whose supplications to be abandoned to her fate were unheeded, 
he grasped the rope tightly with his right hand, and leaning over 
the entablature of the column, puslicd himself deliberately over its 
ledge. 

For a moment the rope vibrated with the shock ; and as she 
found herself thus swin^^ins: to and fro in mid air, Ginevra could 
scarcely repress a scream. Her brain reeled as she gazed dizzily 
downwards, and perceived the space intervening between her 
and the earth. Her head involuntarily sank over her shoulder, 
and she closed her eyes. Had her safety depended on her own 
powers of tenacity, she had certainly fallen. 

o 2 



19G CRICIITON. 

The rope, mcanwlule, continued its oscillations. With one arm 
only disengaged, and the other encumbered by his fair burden, it 
was almost impossible for Crichtou to steady it. The architrave 
and frieze crowning the capital, projected nearly two feet be- 
yond tlie body of the shaft. For some time he could neither 
reach the sides of the pillar so as to steady his course by its fluted 
channels, nor venture to trust himself to the guidance of the 
shifting cord. His peril appeared imminent. The strain upon 
the muscles was too ^reat to be lonj; endured. But Crichton's 
energies were inexhaustible, and his gripe continued unrelaxing. 
At leniith, alter various inellcctual efforts he succeeded in twininy; 
his legs securely round the rope, and was about to descend, Avhen 
an incident occurred that rendered his situation yet more 
perilous. 

Filled with astonishment at the daring attempt they witnessed, 
as Crichtou launched himself Irom the column, the combatants be- 
neath — friend and foe, as if by mutual consent — suspended hosti- 
lities. It was a feat of such hair-breadth risk, that all gave him up 
for lost. But, Avhcn he had made good his hold, their admiration 
knew no bounds. Blount loudly hurraed, and threw his cap into 
the air. Even the adverse party uttered a murmur of applause. 
Ogilvy rushed forward to seize and secure the rope — and all had 
been well, but at the same moment he was grappled by one of his 
antagonists, and in the struggle that ensued, the cord was so 
violently shaken that Crichton had need of all his vigour to main- 
tain his position. The rope whirled round and round ; but con- 
triving, amid the gyrations, to insert the point of his foot in the 
fluting of the pillar, he once more regained his equilibrium. 

" Villain," cried Ogilvy, as he threw his enemy to the earth, and 
plunged his dirk within his bosom ; " thou, at least, shall reap the 
reward of thy treachery. Ah, what is this?" he cried, as from the 
Iblds of a scarf, which had dropped from the man's grasp, a packet 
of letters met his view. He was about to pick them up, when his 
attention was diverted by a loud cry from Blount. 

" Ha! have a care, noble Crichton!" shouted the Englishman, 
" have a care, I say ! St. Dunstan and St. Thomas, and all other 
good saints protect thee ! — Desist, craven hound, what wouldst thou 
do ? The curse of St. Withold upon thee !" The latter part of 
Blount's ejaculation was addressed to Loupgarou, whose huge 
person might now be discovered leaning over the architrave of the 
pillar, and who was preparing to hew the rope asunder with his 
sword. " Oil for a sling!" roared Blount, "to smite that accursed 
Philistine betwixt the temples." 

Directed by these outcries, and, at the same time, perceiving the 
eflect of a blow upon the rope, Crichton looked upwards. He 
beheld the malignant and exulting aspect of Loupgarou, who, it is 
needless to say, through the agency of Caravaja, had discovered 



TIIK COLUMN OF CATHERINE DE MEDTCIS. 197 

the mode oi' flight adopted by the Scot, and instantly resolved 
upon tlie only revenge in his power. It was evident from his 
gestures and ferocious laughter, that the giant had resolved to 
exercise his utmost ingenuity in torturing his enemy. Before he 
attempted to sever tlie cord, he shook it with all his force, jerking 
it vehemently, first on the right hand, and then on the lelt ; but, 
finding he could not succeed in dislodging the tenacious Scot, he 
had recourse to another expedient. Taking firmly hold of the 
iron bar, by dint of great exertion he contrived to pull the cord up 
several leet. Uttering a loud yell, he let it suddenly drop. Still 
Crichton, though greatly shaken, maintained his hold. Loupgarou 
then proceeded slowly lo saw the cord with his sword. Crichton 
gazed downwards. He was still more than sixty feet from the 
ground. 

" Ho, ho !" bellowed Loupgarou, " not so fast, fair sir — f/ui 
viilt perirc pereat — ho, ho! You shall reach the ground without 
further cllbrts of your own, and somewhat more expeditiously — 
sternitur etvanimisqiie tremens procumhit fmmi — ho, ho! — " 

" That fate shall be thy own, huge ox," screamed the shrill voice" 
of Chicot in his rear ; " ho, ho ! ' laughed the jester, as the giant, 
%vhom he pushed forward with all his might, rolled heavily o\er 
the entablature ; " not so fast, not so fast, my Titan." 

*' Quitn adelante no mira, atrcis se queda,'' exclaimed Caravaja, 
springing upon the jester with the intent of throwing him after the 
giant ; " thou shalt reverse the proverb ; look first and leap after." 
The words, however, w^ere scarcely out of his mouth, Avhen he 
found himself seized by the Vicomte de Joyeuse, who suddenly 
appeared on the roof of the column. 

Loupgarou made an effort to grasp at the architrave of the pillar 
as he was precipitated over it, and then at the rope, but he missed 
both. His ijreat weight accelerated his fall. He descended head 

r* ^. ^ . "Ill • - 

foremost. His skull came m contact with the sharp, projectmg 
edge of the plinth, which shattered it at once ; and his huge frame 
lay without sense upon the pavement of the court just as Crichton 
and his now senseless burtlien alighted in safety upon the ground. 

" ]iy my bauble !" cried Chicot, as he hailed Crichton from the 
summit of the column, " the gi'eat gymnastic feats of Gargantua 
€qual not your achievements, compere." 

But Crichton was too much occupied to attend to the jester. 
He had now to defend himself against the assault of Gonzaga's 
followers, whose object was to possess themselves of the Gelosa. 

At this moment the call of a trumpet sounded from the summit 
of the pillar, and the next instant some dozen men in arms, in the 
livery of the Vicomte de Joyeuse, made their appearance at its 
base. 

*' Down with your swords, in the king's name," cried the ser- 
geant of the guard. " Chevalier Crichton, in the name of his 
most Catholic majesty, Henri IH., you are our prisoner." 



19^ • • • CRICHTON. 

•• Wlicrc is your leader ?" (leimuuk-cl Crlehlon, sternly, " to him 
alone "will I yield myscltl" 

" He is ]\ere, moit cher" cried Joyeusc, from the top of the 
pillar, " and rejoices to find you in safety. I will join you, and 
render all needful exi)lanations. Meantime, you must, perforce, 
continue my prisoner. Your adversary, Prince Vinccnzo, hatli 
yielded liimself Avitliout demur." 

" 'Tis well ;" replied Crieliton, throwinp; down liis poii^nard. 

It is needless to describe the rapturous conyratulations of 
Ogilvy and Blount. The former appeared so an.xious to relieve 
his ]iatron from the hm-then of the fair singer, that lie at length 
committed lier to his care. The disciple of Knox gazed at her 
■with admiration, and Ids hoscm heaved witli strange but inex- 
pressible emotions as he held the lovely player-girl in his arms. 

"Ha!" exclaimed Crichton, turning hastily to lUount, "thy 
dog — hath he )"eached thee Y' 

" He is here," replied Blount, patting Druid, " he has becrk 
slightly hurt in this fray, poor fellow, the ball of an arqucbuss hath 
grazed his side — ' 

'' There was a scarf twined around him — tlio'a liast it?" demanded 
Crichton. 

" I saw nothing,'' answered Blount, staring in astonishment at 
the question. 

'' A scarf," ejaculated Ogilvy, " did it contain a packet ?" 

" It did," rejoined Crichton. " Have you seen it?" 

" 'Tis liere," answered Ogilvy, springing forward, and once 
more committing the Gclosa to his patron. " Ha ! here is the 
sash," he cried, " and a knot of ribands — but the packet is 
gone.'' 

" Search !" said Crichton — " it may have escaped thy regards." 

" It is nowhere to be f nind," replied Ogilvy, after a vain quest. 

"Ah!" exclaimed Crichton, in a tone of anguish, "all my 
exertions then are fruitless. Tlie prize is lost as soon as obtained." 



1^9 



1300K THE THIRD.— CHAPTER I. 

H I C B I B I T U 11. 

Or, dist Pantagrncl, faisons iing transon de bonne cliicre, ct bcuvons, jo vou» 
en prie, enfans— car il fiiict beau boire tout cc niois. 

Kabelais. Gar(jantaa. Liu. II. Cli. xxx. 

On tho day succeeding the events previously related, and about 
two hours belbre noon, the interior of the Falcon in the Rue Pe- 
lican, presented a scene of much bustle and animation. The tables 
■were covered with viands; the benches with guests. The fijrmer 
consisting of every variety of refection, liquid and solid, proper to 
a substantial Parisian breakfast of the sixteenth century ; from the 
"well-smoked ham of Bayonne, and savoury sausage of Bologna, to 
the mild potage de levrier, and unctuous soupe de prime. The 
latter exhibiting every shade of character, from the roystering 
student (your scholars have always been great tavern hunters,) 
and sottish clerk of the Basoche, to the buff-jerkined musqueteerj. 
and strapping sergeant of the Swiss guard. 

The walls resounded with the mingled clatter of the trencher,, 
the flagon, and the dice-box — with the shouts of laughter, and 
vociferations of the company, and with the rapid responses of the 
servitors. The air reeked with the fumes of tobacco, or, as it Avas 
then called, Iierbe a la rente, pimento, and garlic. Pots of hydro- 
mel, hippocras, and wine, served to allay the thirst which the 
salt meats {cowpidsoires de heuvctles, according to Rabelais) very 
naturally provoked, and many a deep draught was that morning 
drained to the health of Dame Eredegonde, the presiding divinity 
of the Falcon. 

In saying that the wines of Dame Fredegonde were generally 
approved, we merely repeated the opinion of every member of 
the University of Paris, whose pockets were not utterly exhausted 
of the necessaiy mttal ferrugiiie, and in averring that her charms 
were the universal theme of admiration, Ave reiterated the senti- 
ments of every jolly lansquenet, or Gascon captain of D'Epernon's 
* Qunrante Cinq^ whose pike had at any time been deposited at 
her threshold, or whose spurs jingled upon her hearth. 

Attracted by the rcjiort of her comeliness, half the drinking 
world of Paris flocked to the Falcon. It was the haunt of all lovers 
of good cheer, and a buxom hostess. 



200 CRIOIITON. 

Ah ! coiiimc on cntrait 
Boire a son cabaret! 

Some women tlicic are wlio look old in tlieir youth, and grow 
young again as tlicy advance in life : and of these was D<iine Fre- 
(K'gondc. At eighteen she did not appear so young, or so inviting, 
as at eight-and-tiilrtv. Her person might be somewhat enlarged — 
what of that ? Many of her admirers thought her very embonpoint 
an improvenif nt. Her sleek blaek tresses, gathered in a knot at the 
back of her head — her smootJi brow, Avhieh set care and time, and 
their furrows, at defiance — her soft dimpled chin — her dark laugh- 
ing eyes, and her teeth, white as a casket of pearls, left nothing to 
be desired. You could hardly distinguish between the ring of your 
silver real upon lier board, and the laughter with which she received 
it. To sum up her perlections in a word — she was a widow. As 
Dame Fredegonde, notwithstanding her plumpness, had a very 
small waist, and particularly neat ancles, she wore an extremely 
tight boddice, and a, particularly short vertugardln ; and as she was 
more than suspected of flivouring the persecuted Huguenot party, 
she endeavoured to remove the impression by wearing at her girdle 
a long rosary of beads terminated by the white double cross of 
the League. 

Among her guests, upon the morning in question. Dame Frede- 
gonde numbered the Sorbonist, the Bernardin, the disciples of 
Harcourt and .Montaigu, and one or two more of the brawling and 
disputatious fraternity, whose companionship we have for some 
time abandoned. These students were regaling themselves upon a 
Gargantuan gammon of ham, and a flask of malvoisie. At some 
distance from this party, sat Blount, together with, his faithful 
attendant Druid, who with his enormous paws placed upon his 
master's knees, and his nose fainiharly thrust upon the botird, re- 
ceived no small portion of the luige chine of beef destined for the 
Englishman's repast. Next to Blount, appeared Ogiivy, and next 
to the Scot, but as far removed irom his propinquity as the limits 
of the bench would permit, sat a youth whose features were con- 
cealed from view by a broad hat, and who seemed, from his general 
restlessness and impatience of manner, to be ill at ease in the society 
in wh.ich accident, rather than his own choice, had thrown him. 

Passing over the remainder of the company, we shall come at 
once to a man-at-arms of a very prepossessing exterior, who had 
established himself in close juxta-position with the buxom hostess. 
There was nothing very remarkable in the costume of this hero. 
A stout buff jerkin, a coarse brown serge cloak, a pointed felt hat 
with a single green featlier, a long estoe, and bulf boots with great 
spurs, — this was the sum total of it. But there was an ease and 
grace in his deportment, a fire in his eye, and a tone in his voice, 
that seemed scarcely to belong to the mere common soldiei-, whose 
garb he wore. His limbs were well proportio.ncd — his figure tali 



niC BIBITUR. 201 

and manly — his complexion ruddy and sunburnt — his bearing easy 
and unrestrained, and his look that of one more accustomed to 
command than serve. He had immense moustaches — a pointed 
beard — a large nose slightly hooked, and eyes of a very amorous 
expression, and taken altogether, he had the air of a person born 
for conquest, whether of tlie fair sex or of kingdoms. His way 
of making love was of that hearty straightforward kind which 
carries all before it. Assured of success, he was, as a matter of 
course, assuredly successful. Dame Frcdegonde found him perfectly 
irresistible. Her last lover, the strapping Swiss sergeant, who saw 
himself thus suddenly ?upplanted, was half frantic with jealousv, 
and twisting his Ihigeis in tlic long black beard that descended to 
his belt, appeared to meditate with his I'alchion the destruction of 
his fortunate rival. 

So far as splendour of accoutrements went, the Swiss had 
decidedly the advantage. No magpie Avas ever finer. His casaque, 
"which gave additional width to his shoulders, already broad enough, 
was slashed with red and blue stripes, and girded with a broad red 
band, tied in a knot and hanging down in points. One of his 
stoekinn's was red, the other white. A red u'artev crossed liis knee. 
His barret cap had a projecting steel neb like that of a modern 
chasseur, with a tuft of scarlet-dyed horsehair dangling behind. 
Around his throat he wore a huge ruff, down which his beard flowed 
like a dark river. His sword resembled a Moorish scimitar, 
while against the table by his side rested a halbert with a double- 
axe liead. But neither his parti-coloured raiments, his beard, nor 
his "gestures could draw from Dame Fredeixonde a sinirle smile of 
encouragement. She was completely monopolised by tlie invin- 
cible owner of the buff jerkin. 

Meanwhile, the scholars had finished their malvoisie, and were 
calling loudly for a fresh sujjply. " Hola ! pulchra tabernaria 
— queen of the cellar!'' shouted the Sorbonist, drumming on the 
table to attract Dame Fredegonde's attention. " More wine here 
— Bordeaux, I say — ex templo ! Leave off love-making for awhile 
— tear yourself from tlie arms of that jolly gendarme, if you can, 
like Helen from the embraces of Paris, et nobis viondfiivde Falerna 
Tnaiiii. To the cellar, good dame — sine Cerere et Bacc/io—you. 
know tlie rest ; et amphoroin capucein fir cito. Draw it neat and 
stint not: respite perso/iain, pu/ie pro duo; bus von est in usii, as 
the good Grandgousier saith. We are in a great hurry, and as 
thirsty as sand-beds. Sang de Cabres ! compaings, our hostess is 
deuf. The combat v.'e came to see will be over before we have done 
breakfast. Hola ! — hola — ho !" 

" And we shall look as foolish as we did yesterday," added the 
Bernardin, thumping upon the board with allhis might, " wdien we 
found ourselves on the wrong side of the gate of the college of 
Navarre, during Crichton's disputation. Body of Bacchus ! I fiiint 



202 CPacHTOX. 

like a traveller in Arabia tlie Stony, Have compassion, speciosis- 
sima Fredegoiida — your cups are as flir apart as the trietcric orijies. 
The tourney ^vas proclaimed by the heralds to take place at noon, 
and it is now nine o' the clock. By the love you bear the Bejaunes 
ol' the L nivert^ity, use some despatch, or surrender to us the key 
of the cellar." 

" The scaiFoldings are erected, and the barriers raised," cried 
Harcourt. " I saw the carpenters and tupestry-makers at work : 
the whole facade of the Louvre looking towards the gardens blazes 
Avith silk and scutcheons. Cavaliers and pages are thron<'in<T^ 
thither in all directions. 'Twill be a glorious sight I I would not 
miss it for my bachelor's gown." 

" Nor I," rejoined ^lontaigu — " Mordicu ! we shall sec how 
Crichton comports himself to-day. It is one thing to war with 
■words, and another with swords. He may find the brave Prince of 
M-.intua a better match for him than our sophisters." 

" He has only to deal with Gonzaga, as he dealt with some 
dozen of your classes yesterday," observed Ogilvy, in a scornful 
tone, " to ensure himself as cheap a victory as he then ob- 
tained." 

" Ah ! — are you there, mon brave Ecossois," cried the Sorbonist 
— " I did not notice you before. But one has only to Avhisper the 
name of tlicir patron saint, Cricliton,and up starts a Scot, when one 
least expects such an apparition. However, I am glad to see you, 
Sicur Ogilvy — we have an account to settle together." 

" The sooner we arrange it then, the better,"' cried Ogilvy, draw- 
ing his dagger, and springing across the bench. " I thought you 
and your rascal rout had met witli your deserts at the scourge of 
the hangman of the Petit Chiltelet; but I care not if your chastise- 
ment be reserved for my liands. Defend yourself, villain." 

" Not till I have eaten my breakfast," replied the Sorbonist witli 
considerable phlegm — " As soon as I have finished my meal, I 
■will assuredly do you the honour of cutting your throat. Sede 
interim, (piaso. We are not now in the Rue de Feurre, or the 
]'*re-aux-Clercs, but in the jurisdiction of the Provost of Paris — and 
under the noses of the watch. I have no intention of baulking 
your humour, Messire Ecossois, but I have no fancy ibr exhibiting 
myself in the Pilori des Halles to please you." 

" Dastard," cried Ogilvy, " will not a blow move you ?" And 
he was about to deal the Sorbonist a bullet, when Dame Frede- 
gonde, Avho had witnessed this altercation with some alarm, sud- 
denly iking herself between tlie disputants. 

_ *' Holy Saint Eloi I" she cried, in a loud tone — "a brawl at this 
time^ ot the day — and in my reputabh house too. I can scarcely 
credit my senses. Put up your swords instantly, mcssires, or I will 
Euinmon the watch, and give you all into its charge. Ah ! you 
think I only threaten — you shall sec. Maitre Jacques," she added, 



HiC 313ITUR. 203 

rtddressing the Swiss sergeant, " this is your business. Let tran- 
quillity be restored." 

Maitre Jacques, somewhat gratified to be at lengtli called iiito 
notice by his inconstant mistress, stretched out his hand, and 
without altering his position, dragged Ogilvy towards liim, and 
instantly disarmed him with as much ease apparently as another 
"would have taken a stick from a child, or removed its sting from a 
"wasp. Blount, who was a great admirer of feats of strength, could 
not refuse a murmur of approbation at the sergeant's singular 
exhibition of vigour. 

" You shall have your sword again when you have recovered 
your temper," said Maitre Jacques. *' By my beard," he added, 
scowling at the scholars, " I will brain with my halbert the first of 
you who draws his sword." 

Ogilvy regarded the athletic Swiss for an instant, with eyes 
glowing with indignation, and as if meditating a reprisal. But 
a gentle voice from the bench recalled him to his seat ; and tran- 
quillity was once more restored. 

The soldier, Avho had watched the dispute and its issue with much 
nonchalance, now addressed Dame Fredegonde, as she returned to 
his vicinity. 

"What tourney is this, 7;2a niie !' he said, **of which these 
brave scholars have just now spoken? You know I am only 
just arrived in Paris with the King of Navarre's envoy, and know 
nothing of court news. Who is this Crichton ? What doth the 
Prince of Mantua, if I have heard yon student aright, in Paris? 
And above all, what are the grounds of quarrel between the com- 
batants?" 

" Do you expect me to answer all those inquiries in a breath, 
messire?" replied Dame Fredcgonde, laughing. " You need not 
assure me you are a stranger in Paris, since you question me about 
the Seigneur Crichton. Who is he ? He is handsome enouijh to 
be a prince. But I believe he is only a Scottish gentleman. He is, 
however, the finest gentleman eyes were ever set upon. The Seig- 
neurs Joyeuse, D'Epernon, and Saint-Luc, and others of his 
majesty's I'avourites are not to be compared with him. He is as 
wdtty as he is handsome, and as wise as he is witty. Yesterday he 
had a great disputation with the heads of the University, and they 
have not had a word to say for themselves since. To-day he jousts 
with the Prince of Mantua in the gardens of tlie Louvre at noon, 
and I warrant me, he Avill come off victorious. In short, he has but 
to speak and you are dumb-founded — to draw his sword, and his 
enemy drops at his feet — to look at alady, and straightway she falls 
into his arms." 

" Of a verity, a most accomplished cav.alier," said the soldier, with 
a smile, " but you have not yet told me the occasion of his difference 
with the young Prince of Mantua. What is their cause of quarrel, 
sweetheart ? Tell mc that ?" 



2U CniCHTON. 

•' No one can tell to a certainty,"" replied Dame Fredcgonde, 
mysteriously; " buttlie cliullcnLje was given last night at the Louvre. 
Some say it is about an Italian mistress — (here the youth near 
O^ilvy was observed to start) — some tliat the Seigneur Crichton 
lias discovered a plot against the king's life, in which Cosmo Kug- 
ificri, and a great lady — whom nobody dares to name — together with 
this prince are concerned, and that in consequence the Prince of 
Mantua, Vincenzo, who has been for some time at the court in 
disguise, has defied him to mortal combat. Certes, there were 
strange doings at the Hotel de Soissons last night, as the Chevalier 
du Guet informed me when he made his rounds. But that's no 
business of mine. They do say, also, that the Seigneur Crichton's 
life was twice endangered — first at the banquet l)y the jealousy of 
another great lady who is in love with him, and who poured a dose 
of poison into Ids wine." 

"What great lady do you mean, ma mie ? Surely not the 
queen-mother I" 

" Holy Virgin ! no," cried Fredegonde, with a scream of 
laughter ; " the Seigneur Crichton is hardly likely to be in love 
with lici-y 

- Who then?" 

" You are very inquisitive, mcssire. How can it concern you 
to know in what way queens and other great dames revenge them- 
selves on their lovers' infidelities?" 

" Ventre -saint-gris ! It may concern me more nearly than you 
ima^-ine. You know I am from the court at Pau — from Henri of 
Navarre. You do not mean Ins queen?" 

" I do not mean the Queen Louise, and you may, therefore, form 
a shrewd guess whom I do mean," replied Dame Fredegonde, sig- 
nificantly. " There you will have a pretty piece of scandal to take 
back to your monarch. And, as 1 five, he could not look more 
blank than you do at tlie intelligence — ha — lia — ha I" 

" Peste!" exclaimed the soldiei-, biting his li]>. " And it is for 
this adventurer that Marguerite refuses to leave her brother's court, 
and to rejoin her husband." 

" To be sure ! — she would find your psalm-singing Bearnais 
rather dull after the gay galliard Crichton. But you look serious, 
messire?' 

" Your sex is enough to make one so," replied the soldier^ 
forcing a laugh. 

" Femmcs sont secretes 
Eti amour discretes 
Doiilces myi^iiotinettes 
Et taut bieii pailantes, 
Mai soiit pr(ititable.s, 
Ki fort variaMes 
Y sunt tons les diables. 

Our ffood Henri v/lU care no more about the matter than I do 



nJC BIBITUIJ. £05 

And hark ! — those- scholars nrc still clamorous for Avino. Allow 
mc to attend you to the cellar? You will want some help to cany 
that mighty ilagon." 

To return to Ogilvy and his companions. Blount continued 
sedulous in his attentions to the chine ; but tlie Scot's appetite 
was gone. He swallowed a deep draught of wine, and bean 
to hack tlie table with a knife. To a casual remark, addressed 
to hi in by the Englishman, he returned a sullen response. It was 
evident he was deeply ollended. But Ijlount did not take his 
petulance in lunbrage, but continued his repast in silence, ever and 
anon bestowing a morsel of fat upon his dog. The Gelosa now 
drew nearer to the wrathful Scot, and laid her hand gently upon 
his arm. Ogilvy turned his inllamed cheek towards her, — 

" What would you ?" he asked. 

'• I would quit this place," said Ginevra, *' a presentiment of 
misfortune, which 1 cannot shake oll^ oppresses me. The clamour 
distracts me, and I am fearful those reckless scholars may recognise 
me. Besides," she added, with somewhat of reproach in her ac- 
cent, '*you but ill fulfil your patron's injunctions — you were to 
protect me — not to endanger my safety by provoking hostili- 
ties." 

"Pardon my rashness, fiir maiden,' replied Ogilvy, with some 
confusion; " I was Avrong in giving way to this foolish display of 
passion ; but where the honour of Crichton is concerned, my feelings 
arc irrepressible.'' 

*' I honour you for your devotion," returned the Gelosa ; " and 
let not any thought of risk to me deter you from its manifestation. 
Conduct me hence, and return, if you see fitting, to avenge yourself 
upon yon insolent scholar." 

"Impossible!" replied Ogilvy, "the escort from the Vicomto 
de Joycuse which is to conduct you beyond the gates of Paris, 
and place you on the route to the frontiers of Italy, is not yet 
arrived. AVe must await its coming. It was the Chevalier 
Crichton's desire that we should do so. Fear nothing, fair maiden. 
1 will defend you with the last drop of my blood ; nor shall 
you again have to reproach my intemperate zeal in my patron's 
behalf" 

" My heart misgives me," replied Ginevra, " but since it was 
his Avish, I will remain here. I ieel as if I were not yet out of 
the power of that terrible Gonzaga. And then," she added, timidly, 
and blushing deeply as she spoke, " shall I confess to you, signor^ 
that I would willingly hazard my safety by remaining in Paris — 
nay, within the precincts of the Louvre, to witness this tourney. 
If Vincenzo fall, I have nothing to fear." 

" But from Ruggieri — from Catherine you may still apprehend 
peril," returned Ogilvy, " besides know you not that the king has 
commanded a combat a pluisance and not a outraiice ? The prince 



206 cnrcnTox. 

innv be worsted, therefore — Lut not si nn. Your clangor will not 
be diminished by the result of this conllict." 

A burst of noisy merriment iVom tlie scholars here broke upon 
them, and the following irreverent Bacchanalian lay was chanted at 
the top of his voice by the Sorbonist; the other students join- 
ing in chorus. 

rJcnitc ^Jotcmus.* 
I. 

IV/H/e, jovial sons of Ho>npr, 
Who from matin imto vesper, 

Roam abroad .suh Doiiiino: 
Beiu'dictine, Carmelite, 
Quaff we many a flask to-night 

Sahtlari nostra 
If tlie wine be, as I fliiiik, 
Fit for reverend lips to drink 

Jubilemux ci. 
Ecce bonum vinum, venite potcmvs / 

II. 
Ilcdic, when cups are full, 
Not a thougiit or care sliould dull 

Curd'i rc'stra — 
Eat your fdl — the szoblet quafT, 
Sufficient is the wine thereof 

Secundum diem : — 
What care I — if huee in size 
My paunch siionld wax ? — it testifies 

Opera niea. 
Vimte pot emus ! 

III. 

Qiiadrngiiifn years and more 

I've seen ; and jolly souls some score 

Pioximus liii ; 
And life throughout, have ever thought, 
That they, who tipple ale that's naught, 

Krnint cordc : 
Yea, in mv ciioler waxing hot, 
1 sware sour beer should enter not 

In requiem ineam. 
Ecce bonum vinum, venite poitmus! 

The re-appearance of Dame Fredegondc, and the soldier bearing 
a capacious stoup of claret, had given rise to this effusion of the 
Sorbonist ; and as each goblet was now filled to the brim, after 
having been previously emptied, general hilarity prevailed among 
the thirsty scions of the university. The Bernardin insisted upon 
the soldier taking a seat beside Idm, and tlie Sorbonist deemed it 

• Adapted from an old French Imatatoyre Bacldque. 



niC BIBITUR. 207 

incuinbcnt upon liim to present a fla_<^ou of tlic ruby fluid to 
Maitre Jacques, who drained it in a breath. 

" Lans tringue !" cried the scholar of Harcourt, slapping the 
soldier on the shoulder, " I drink to thee. Thou hast given us 
good measure and good -wine, i'faith. iMay our buxom hostess 
never want such a cellarist — nor ourselves such a drawer — ha — 
ha! 

Remplis ton verre vuide 

Viiide ton verie plein." 

'* I will not refuse thy pledge, comrade," replied the soldier, 
"though my brain Avill not brook many such strong assaults so 
early in the morning, Hei'e is to thy election to the dignity of 
chaplain at the next Fete des Fous." 

"Jest not with me, compaing, but drink," retorted Harcourt, 
angrily, " it were thy safer course. Ah ! thou refusest. I discern 
something of the Huguenot about thee. I heard thee tell our 
hostess just now thou wert from the head-quarters of the Bcarnais. 
One might guess as much from thy neglect of the flask, and devo- 
tion to the petticoats — dignum -patella operculum. Ah ! if it were 
ever to occur that thy master shoidd be King of France, a pretty 
time we should have of it ! The good old days of Francois f. 
would be revived with a vengeance. Not a husband in Paris could 
rest in his bed. The saints defend us from such a consummation. 
Well, I bear him no ill-will — here's to Alcandre.'-' 

"Maranatha!" exclaimed the Sorbonist, " that must not pass. 
We will be Catholic even in onr cups. Thy pledge is heretical 
and schismatic. Rather let us drink confusion to the Bearnais, the 
Reform, and the Church of Geneva; and success to the League, the 
true Church, and the brave Balafre !" 

" To the Holy Union!" cried the Bernardin. 

" To the Pope !" shouted IMontaigu. 

" To Beelzebub !" roared Harcourt. " I will hurl my wine-cup 
in his face who refuses my pledge — Henri of Navarre, and the 
Huguenot cause !" 

" By the mass, I scent heresy in thy pledge, and refuse it," 
returned the Sorbonist. The words were scarcely out of his mouth 
when he received the contents of the scholar of Harcourt's fla2:on 
m his face. 

In an instant all was confusion. Swords were drawn and crossed, 
and the table nearly upset in the confusion that ensued ; but, by 
the united efforts of Blount, who had now formed one of the 
party, and the Swiss sergeant, the combatants were separated, and 
tranquillity for the second time restored. The cause of the dis- 
turbance, meantime, our nonchalant soldier, so far from taking any 
share in the struggle, leaned back in his chair, and indulged in an 
immoderate fit of laughter. 

" How now, thou insensible varlet!" cried Harcourt, whose 



208 CRicnxoN. 

furious countenance and ruffled demeanour presented a singular 
contrast to his companion's apathy; "hast thou never a sword to 
draw in thy sovereign's behalf, or grace enough to thank him who 
is ready to fight thy battles f)r thee? liy my soul, I was wrong. 
Brotlier of the Sorbonne, thy hand. Thou wert in the right to 
object to my rascal pledge. Ventre-saint-Quintin ! from a Hugue- 
not one gets neitlier aid nor acknowledgment." 

" The quarrel was of tliine own seeking, comrade," returned the 
soldier, with increased merriment; " I pressed thee not into my 
service — the good c-..use of the Reformed Faith needs no such 
blustering advocate as thou ; and the Bearnais will not laugh a 
whit the less loudly because one sot drinks to his success, and 
another to his confusion." 

'• Fairly spoken," cried Montaigu, " for a Huguenot our re- 
formado hath the air of an honest fellow. A truce to raillery, 
comrades ! Favete Unguis. These brawls interfere with drinking. 
Let us have a song to restore us to harmony. Chantons, beuvuns 
wi(j motet, as glorious old Kabelais liath it." 

" Entunvons,^^ cried the others, laughing. 

" What shall it be?" asked the soldier. 

" Le clianson de la rernnellc, 

La vie do Monsieur Saint I'Van^oys, 
La Confiteor des Angloys, 

or tne merry burden of some farce, sotie, or joyous discourse?'' 

"Za H (for VI ere sue, I'or instance,*' retorted JNlontaigu, vociferating 
at the top of his voice — 

" To Paris, that good city, 

Navarre's young king is come. 
And flock forth the damsels pretty. 

At the heating of his drum. 
But the fairest 'mid tlie crowd, sirs. 

The loveliest of the lot, 
Is a nymph, who cries aloud, sirs. 
To the churcli, sire, you go not, 
Hiiguenot I 

*' E'en give us Avhat thou Avilt, my puissant Hector : so thy 
strains savour not of the nasal melodies of Theodore Beza, or the 
canticles of Clement oNIarot, they will be right welcome." 

" Lend me your voices in full chorus, then," replied the soldier, 
*' and respond to my litany." And, in a deep tone, he sang as 
follows : — 

From all men, who, counsel scorning. 
To the tavern hie at morning 
With Latin base their talk adorning, 
Libcianos Dom'ine. 

From all tliose, who night and day, 
Cards and raiment cast away, 
At cards and dice and otlier play, 
Libera nos Dominc. 



HIC BIBITUR. 201> 

** Satis stipergue" shouted Montaigu, " tliy rogation toucheth 
me too nearly, as testificth the tattered state of my exponiblesy to 
be altogether satisfactory — Hei mihil 

Alea, villa, Venus, Iribus his sum factus egcuus. 

Sed parum est. I have still a few Hards left, and wlien my pouch 
is utterly evacuate, I can turn Huguenot or hang myself — it mat- 
ters little whicli. In the meantime ;" and here the reckless youth 
once more broke into song : — 



^ong of ti)c ^cf)oIar.* 
I. 

A jolly life enough I lead — tluit is seivpcr quam possums 
\\ hen mine host inviteth me, I .Tnswer ecce assiim! 
Women, wine, and wai:-sailry lubens libeuter colo, 
And after meals to pass the time chartis ludlsque volo, 
Uuluckily tliese games are not omnino sine dolo. 

II. 

Wine to tipple I conceive quod fui gcnerattis. 
Treasure to amass, indeed, 1 doubt if I was 7ialus, 
Never yet with coin enough was I locupletatus. 
Or, witli a superfluity, vehementer excilalus — 
Despice diiilias si vis animo esse beatus. 

III. 

Whither are mj' raiments fled? amice mi! — si queens f 
Quaffed they were in flowing cups in tempore Uieu!) verisf 
Thus am I obliged to roam subliorridns per vicos. 
Herding amidst truaiid rogues et n/iot iniqiios : 
Cumfuerisfelix mullos numcrabi^ amicos ! 

** Bellisslme 1" cried the soldier, " thy case is a hard one, I must 
needs admit, comrade. But thou art u likely lad, and I promise 
thee, if thou wilt accompany me to the King of Navarre's camp, 
whither I set out this morning, and wilt forswear thy roystering 
habits, and embrace the true doctrine, I will put thee in a way of 
lining thy pouch with weightier pieces than any it now holds, and 
of replacing thy threadbare apparel Avith the hacquetoon and 
habergeon of the Bourbon." 

" Weighty blows are said to abound more than weighty pieces in 
thy king's psalm-singing camp," returned Montaigu, '* and I must 
be bribed by present payment if I vend my soul to Messire Sa- 
thanas. But come," he added, filling his goblet; " let us drink 
between our songs, and sing between our draughts. iEdipol ! my 

• An adaptation of a few verses of a Macaronic poem of little merit, entitled 
Tfes fames, des dez, et de la taverne, appended to the last edition of the Fabliaux, e£ 
Cont£s des Fot'les i'rani^ois. 

r 



2 1 CEICnTON. 

jolly nilssloncr ad partes iiifideUum, tliou hn?t tlie throat of a 
nightingale, and warblcst a sonir divinely; and as thou art chary 
oi' the llask, -wilt have the more leisure to divert us with another 
stave." 

" Ventre-saint-irris," muttered the soldier, smiling to himself ; 
" could my ftiithful Rosni have foreseen, that, during his absence, 
I should play the lover to a buxom aubcrgiste, the bullbon to a 
pack of losel scholars, and the rebel to myself, I had not escaped 
a lecture as long as ever John Calvin pionounccd from his pulpit 
at Geneva. Ko matter: the monotony of lile must be relieved; 
and he is a wise man who makes the most of the passing mo- 
ment." 

With this philosophical reflection, he yielded to the scholar's 
importunities. It has been observed before, that his countenance 
was remarkable for its frankness and cordiality. It had, besides,. 
an indescribable expression of comic humour, which broadened 
and brightened as he proceeded with his vocal performance, intO' 
a glow of such irresistible drollery, that his auditors were almost 
convulsed with laughter; and, as real mirth is always contagious, 
tlie infection was speedily communicated to eveiy guest of the 
Falcon, the pensive and dolorous Ogilvy not excepted. 

Z\)i (i!^\)XQ\\it\t of Garganlua: 

anowiNG HOW he took a\v.\y the gueat bells of notee-dame. 

I. 
Gmndgoiisier was a toper boon, as Rabelais will tell ye, 
\\ ho. once upon a time, got drunk witli his old wife Garaamelly : 
Right royally the bout htgan (no queen was more punctilious 
Than Gargamelle) on chitterlings, botargos, go(lel)iIlios!* 

S'ing, CTnrimart, cnrimava ! gohjnohj, golijnolol 

II 
They licked their lips, they cut their quips — a flask then each selected; 
And with good (ireek, as satin sleek, their gullets they humected. 
l{ang stave and jest, the flask they pressed — but ere away the wine went. 
Occurred most unexpectedly (^ueen Gargamelle's confinement I 
Sing, CCarimari, tarimara ! gulijnoln, gohjnolo! 

III. 

No sooner was Gargantua born, than from his infant throttle. 
Arose a most melodious cry to his nurse to bring the bottle! 
AVhereat Grandgousier much rejoiced — as it seemed, unto his thinking, 
A certain sign of a humour tine for most immoderate drinking! 
Sing, CTarimari, carimara ! goltjnolv), golynolo ! 

• Gaudebiilaux sent grasses trippes dc coiraux. Coiraux sunt bonufz engresscs 
a la criche, et prts guimuulx. Prts guimuulx sont qui i)ortent herbu deux Ibys 



HIC BIBITUR. 211 

IV. 

Gargantua shot up, like a tower some city looking over! 
His full-moon visage in the clouds, leagues off, ye migiit discover! 
His gracious person he arrayed — 1 do not mean to laugli at ye — 
With a suit ol" clothes, and great trunk hose, of a thousand ells of tafTety. 
Sing, ©arimcirt, carimara ! golnnohj, gohjnolo ! 



V. 

Around his waist Gargantua braced a belt of silk bespangled. 
And from his hat, as a platter flat, a long blue feather dangled ; 
And down his hip, like the mast of ship, a rapier huge descended. 
With a dagger keen, stuck his sash between, all for ornament intended. 
Sing, CCnrimnri, carimara ! golynoln, golijnolo ! 



VI. 

So learned did Gargantua grow, that he talked like one whose turn is 
For logic, with a sophister, higlit Tubal Holofernes. 
In Latin too he lessons took from a tutor old and seedy. 
Who taught the " Quid Est," and tlie " Pars," — one Jobelin de Bride I 
sing, ©atimari, carimara ! golijnoli], golunolo ! 



VII. 

A monstrous mare Gargantua rode — a black Numidian courser — 
A beast so droll, of filly or foal, was never seen before, sir! 
(ireat elephants looked small as ants, by her side — her lioofs were cloven! 
Her tail was like the spire at Latiges — her mane like goat-beards woven ! 
Sing, CTarimari, carimara ! golnnoli), golijnolo I 



VIII. 

Upon this mare Gargantua rode until he came to Paris, 
Which, from Utopia's capital, as we all know, rather far is — 
The thundering bells of Notre-Dame, he took from out the steeple. 
And he hung them round his great mare's neck in the sight of all the people! 
Sing, CTarimari, carimara ! goljjnolij, gohjnolo ! 

IX. 
Now, what Gargantua did beside, I shall pass by without notice. 
As well as the absurd harangue of that wiseacre Janotus ; 
But the legend tells that the thundering bells Bragmardo brouglit away, sir. 
And that in the towers of Notre-Dame they are swinging to this day,sir! 
Sing, CCarimava, carimari f golynoly, golpnulo ! 

X. 

Now the great deeds of Gargantua, — how his father's foes he followed — 
How pilgrims six, with their staves and scrips, in a lettuce leaf he swallowed — 
How he got blind drunk witli a worthy monk. Friar Johnny of the Funnels, — • 
And made huge cheer, till the wine atid beer flew about his camp in runnels— 
Sing, G^arimari, carimara ! gohjnoljj, golnnolo ! 

P2 



212 CRicnxoN. 

XI. 

How he took to wife, to cheer liishfe, fat Hadebec the nioper ; 
And by her begat a lusty brat, Pantagnicl the toper! 
And did other things, as tlie story >ings. too long to find a place here. 
Are they not writ, with matchle^s wit, by Alcofribas Nasier ?* 
Sing, CTarimnri, tarimnra ! golynoly, gohjnolo ! 

As the soldier brouij^lit liis «onn; to a elose, amkl tlie tluinder- 
in^ applause and inextinguishable laughter of the scliolars, his own 
exhilaration was considerably damped by the sudden appearance of 
two new comers, who had entered the cabaret, unobserved, during his 
performance; and with looks sufliclently expressive of their disap- 
probation of his conduct, held themselves aloof until the termina- 
tion of his strains, when they slowly approached the table. 

The foremost of these personages was a man of middle age, and 
severe aspect, fully equipped in the accoutrements of a military 
leader of the period; but his breast-plate, though of the brightest Mi- 
lan steel, was wholly destitute of ornament, and resembled rather, in 
its heavy and cumbrous form an antique cuirass, of the age of Bayard 
and Gaston de Foix, than the lackered and embossed armour worn 
by the knighthood of the court of France. A tall plume nodded 
upon his morion, and a long two-handed sword, called in the language 
of the tilt-yard a gagne-pain, was girded to his thigh. Tlie hand, 
able to wield such u blade with ease, could not, it was evident, be 
deficient in energy. From his right hip hung the long and 
trenchant dagger, termed, i'rom its use in combat, a miscricorde. 
His companion was habited in the black Geneva cloak and band, 
constituting the attire of a preacher of the Reformed Faith. He 
was a venerable man, with silver hair streaming upon his shoulders 
from beneath his black silk calotte. His figure was bent by age 
and infirmities, and his steps needed the support of a stafl'; but the 
iirc which yet blazed in his deep-seated gray eye, showed that the 
ardour and enthusiasm of his youthful spirit was still unextin- 
guished. 

" Diable !" mentally exclaimed the soldier, pushing aside his seat 
and rising to greet th(; strangers, " Rosni here — and my old pre- 
ceptor Doctor Florent Cl>retien. Parbleu ! their arrival at this 
juncture is unlucky. But I must put the best face I can upon the 
matter." And, as these thoughts passed rapidly through his mind, 
he reverently saluted the minister, and exchanging a significant 
look with tlie knight, the party adjourned to a more retired part of 
the cabaret. 

" I did not expect to find your majesty tlius occupied," observed 
Rosni, in a tone of reproach, as soon as they were out of hearing oi 
the company. " Methinks the wise and valiant Henri of Navarre 
might have more profitably as well as worthily employed his 

• The anagram of Fran9ois Rabelais. 



HIC BIBITUR. 213 

leisure, than by admiuistennp^ to the ainusements, and sliarinn- in 
the pastimes of these unlicensed and idolatrous brawlers." 

" Tush, Rosni," replied Henri of liourbon, " I am not a mo« 
narch with these revellers; and were I to vouch any explanation 
to tliee, with whom I am a king, I could offer such reasons for my 
conduct as would convince thee, that what I have done has been 
without impeachment of my ' valour and wisdom,' and was merely 
undertaken to sustain my character as a soldier." 

" Your character as a soldier would have been better sustainecj 
by repressing licence than abetting it, sire," returned Rosni, 
bluntly. " Had 1 been in your mnjesty's place, and these riotous 
Edomites had pressed me to make music for them, I would have 
treated them to a psalm, such as our pious Calvin hath himself 
appointed for the recreation of the faithful, or to one of those 
mournful ballads so displeasing to the enemies of our religion, 
when in their own sanguinary atrocities are sternly set forth, and 
the sullerings of our martyrs painfully recorded." 

" And have been laughed at for thy pains," said Henri. " Trust 
me, my expedient was the wiser one." 

At this moment the voice of the scholars again rose loud in song; 
and the following chorus reached the ears of the Kin<i" of Navarre 
and his compimions: — 

A merry com pan j' are we 

\\ lio spend our lives in revelry, 

Self-tiick-nanied Eiifawi-aans \ouci! 

Ci ic, cioc, ciic, erne, la, la ! 

" Ohe ! soldier cf the true faith," shouted ISIontaigu, " another 
song before we start for the tourney! Heed not thy captain's 
reprimand. We will bear thee harmless." 

" Thou hearett," said Henri, smiling, " those evfans-sans-souci, 
as they not inaptly term themselves, are clamorous for my return. 
Ventre-saint-gris ! Rosni, I am half disposed to send thee to them 
as my substitute. I would gladly see what effect one of thy doleful 
ditties would have upon their high-flown spirits. Wilt take my 
seat at yon table .'" 

" I will obey your majesty's behests," replied Rosni, gravely — 
" but I wash my hands of the consequences." 

"Go then," replied Henri, laughing, "thou deservcst some 
punishment for thy imprudeiice. What, in the devil's name, in- 
duced thee to bring old Chretien to this ' meeting of the mockers,' 
and ' seat of the scornful,' as he would call it? Thy former ex- 
perience might have led thee to expect some such untoward acci- 
dent as the present ; and it should be rather thy business to draw a 
veil over thy sovereign's foibles than to betray them." 

" I shall observe more caution in future," returned Rosni, in a 
tone of irony, " but after his own involuntary promise of amend- 
ment, it ill becam.e me to doubt my sovereign's maintenance of 



214 CRICHTON. 

his word. Doctor Florcnt Chretien, whom I chanced upon at 
the Protestant consistory in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, this 
morning, hath a matter of importance to communicate to your 
majesty's private ear, and to that end I ventured to bring him 
hither." 

" Thou hast done well, Rosni," replied the king, *' nevertheless, 
I cannot pretermit the punishment I have imposed on thee. Hark ! 
my comrades call thee — go and join them." 

Again the chorus of the scholars arose above the general clamour j 
and the Sorbonist was heard vocifcratinn; the followinGT verses :— 



^ong of tDc ^orbonist. 

Death to the Ilugiicnot ! fa<;ot and flamo ! 
Death to the Huguenot ! torture and shame ! 

Deatli! Death! 

Heretics' lips sue for mercy in vain, 

Drown their loud cries in the waters of Seine! 

Drown ! Drown I 

Hew down, consume them with fire and with sword 1 
A good work ye do in the sight of the Lord ! 

Kill! Kill! 

Hurl down their temples ! their ministers slay! 
Let them bleed as they bled on Barthelemv's dav ! 

Slay I'Slay! 

A roar of insolent laughter followed this effusion. Henri of 
Navarre bit his lips. 

" Go," he said, frowning, " leave me with Chretien." 

" By the holy evangel ! I will make these accursed mass-mongers 
such sport as Sampson showed the Philistines," returned Rosni. 
" But before I quit your presence, sire, I must acquaint you that 
yoiu- escort is in readiness at the Porte Montmartre, and that two 
of niy followers with your steed await yoiu* coming forth at the 
door of this cabaret." 

" Let them wait," answered the king, sharply, " I shall not set 
out upon my journey till the evening." 

" How, sire?'' asked llosni. 

"It is my intention to attend the jousts held this morning at 
the Louvre." 

" But your majesty — " 

" Is resolved to have my own way — so thou mayest spare me 
further remonstrances on that head. Rosni. Not only will I witness 
this tourney, but break a lance at it myself in honour of the queen 
my spouse ; though I freely confess she deserves no such at- 



niC BIBITUR. 215 

tcntion at my hands, after her refusal to join mc where she 
deems I noAV am, at my court at Pau. But let that pass. There 
is a Scottish cavalier, who hath boasted, as it seems to me, some- 
what indiscreetly, of Margucrite''s favours towards him, wlicther 
truly or not signifies little, as I hold sccresy to be the first duty of 
a gallant. I have a fancy for lowering this prattling mignon's 
•crest, the rather that he is reputed an expert tilter, and as such not 
iinwoTthy of my lance. And it may chance if Marguerite sees her 
favourite laid low, she may change her mind as to returning with 
me. At all events I shall attend this tourney in the quality of a 
knight-adventurer. Thou shalt ride forth with me anon, and pro- 
cure me suitable equipments. My own steed will bear mc bravely 
through the day." 

" Your majesty shall commit no such folly," replied Rosni, 
bluntly. 

" Baron do Rosni," exclaimed Henri, haughtily, '* v/e liave 
honoured thee thus lar with our friendship — but there arc limits to 
our good-nature which even yon shall not exceed.'^ 

" Pardon my bluntness, sire," returned Rosni, '* but at the 
hazard of forfeiting your favour I would step between you and the 
peril to which you expose yourself thus rashly. When your faith- 
ful counsellors reluctantly consented to your coming liither on this 
fruitless embassy to a queen who loves you not, but who partakes 
of the perfidious and inconstant nature of her family — when, I 
say, they consented to your accompanying your own messengers, 
in disguise, my life Avas pledged for your safe return. That life is 
nothing. But upon your security, sire, hangs the fate of a king- 
dom, and the prosperity of a pure and holy faith of which you are 
the defender and champion. Bethink you of the cause in which 
you have embarked — of your zealous followers — of the whole Pro- 
testant world, whose eyes are fixed upon you — bethink you also of 
the risk you run — of the inevitable consequences attendant upon a 
discovery of your presence — of your long captivity in the walls of 
the Louvre from which you liave so recently escaped. Think of 
all this, and blame (if you can?) the zeal which prompts me to speak 
thus boldly." 

" Leave me, sir," replied Henri, "I would speak with my old 
preceptor. You shall know mv determination anon." 

Rosni bowed, and took the place assigned to him by the m.onarch 
at the table of the revellers. His arrival was greeted with loud 
laughter, and many muttered allusions from the reckless crew to his 
Huguenot principles. 

"Hark ye, messires," said Rosni, "you have prevailed upon 
one of my troop to sing for you, and in return have favoured us 
with one of those ferocious melodies which your brethren howled 
to the thundering tocsin of the bloody day of Saint-Barthelemi. 
Ye shall now have my response. But first I charge ye let your 



216 CUICHTON. 

goblets be filled to the biim, and drink tlic pledge I sliall propose 
to you — ' The downfiill of Antichrist, the externrlnation of the 
Leaiiuc, and the universal establishment of the True Faith.' Ila ! 
you hesitate. By the evangel ! messires, I "vvill thrust my poignard 
into his throat who refuses my pledge." So saying he drew 
bis dagger and glanced fiercely round the group. 

Astern silence succeeded this speecli. The mirth of the scholars 
was suddenly checked. Each one glanced at his ncighlx^iu', as If 
be expected he would resent the insult. But no one dared to do so 
openly. 

*' 1 am with you, Sir Knight," exclaimed Blount. " I will see 
that all obey you." 

" The pledge !"* said Rosni, seizing the scholar of Ilarcourt bv 
the throat, and foix-ing him to pronounce the hateful words, and 
afterwards to wash them down with a deep draught of wine. 

" By Saint Thomas, thou escapest not," cried Blount, grappling 
lN-ith the Sorbonist. 

" Not one shall escape me," said Ilosnl — " he shall drink It, or 
die the death." 

Accordingly, seeing resistance was in vain against armed force 
like that of tiie knight, the scholars sullcnlv coni])lied. 

" I have not yet done with you, messires," said Rosni, In a tone 
of mockery — " I will not insult the religion I profess, by allowing 
blasphemers, like yourselves, to take part In Its holy psalms; but 
as you have rung in my ears the death-knell of our slaughtered 
saints, ye shall listen to the judgment culled down from on high for 
that offence upon the head of the late treacherous and blood tliirst}^ 
sovereign, Charles IX. Stir not, neither offer any Interruption, as 
ye would avoid a sudden and speedy doom." 

" Lend me your dagger. Sir Knight," said Ogilvy, unable to 
control his choler, and springing towards the table; "and I will 
compel as attentive audience to your strains as ever was accorded 
to the sermons of our pious Knox." 

" And as willing," said the Benardin, with a sneer. 

*' Take that in earnest of the chastisement I will Inflict upon him 
who shall disobey the knight's commands," said Ogilvy, bestowing 
a sounding buffet upon the scholar's cheek, adding fiercely, as he 
recei\'ed the inisiricorde from Rosni, *' the first of you who speakcth 
a word of oflence breathes his last." 

Amid the glances of defiance and suppressed rage cast upon 
him by the scholars, the knight, in a deep stern tone, sang fcbe 
following ballad :— 



niC BIBITUE. 217 

Cftarlcs 3:.^. at illomfnucon. 
I. 

'• To liorse — to liorse!" thus spake King Charles, " to horse, my lords, with me- 
Unto Moiitfaucoii will we ride — a sight you there shall see." 
" ^Montfaucon, sire!" said his esquire — "what siglit, my licije, how mean ye?** 
" The carcase stark of the traitor dark, and heretic Coligni." 

II. 

The trumpets bray, their charjrers neigh a loud and glad revei'le — 
And plaudits ring, as the haughty king from tlie Louvre issues gaily 
On his riglit hand rides his motlier, with her dames — a gorgeous train- 
On his left careers his brother, with the proud Duke of Lorraine. 

III. 

Behind is seen his youtlifui queen — tlie meek Elizabeth* — 
With her damsels bright, whose talk is ii^lit of the sad, sad show of death ; — 
Ah, li)vely ones! — ah, gentle ones! from the scoffer's judgment screen ye !^ 
Mock not the dust of the mart}r'd just, for of such was good Coligni. 

IV. • 

By foot up-hung, to flesh-hook strung, is now revealed to all, 
Mor.ldering and siirunk, the headless trunk of the good old admiral : 
Gash-visaged Guise tlie sight doth please — fierce lord, was naught between ye? 
In felon blow of base Poltrotf no share had brave Coligni. 



" Now, by God's death !" the monarch saith, with inauspicious smile, 
As laughing, group the reckless troop round grav Montfaucon's pile ; 
" From off that hook its founder shook — Enguerrand de Marigni — f 
But gibbet chain did ne'er sustain such burthen as Coligni," 

* Elizabeth of Austria, daugliter of the Emperor Jraximilian, an amiable and 
excelleii"? princess, whose genuine piety presented a striking contrast to the san- 
guinary fanaticism of her tymnincal and neglectful spouse. " O mon Dieu!" 
she cried, on the day of the massacre, of wliich she had been kept in ignorance ; 
" quels conseWers sont ceu.i-la, qui ont dunne le >oi tel ads ? Mon Dieu ! je te snpplie, 
etje lequkrs de lui pardonner, car situ nen as pitie j'ui grand peur quecetie offense ne 
lui soit pas paidonnte." 

t Jean Poltrot dt. ^More, the assasin of Francois de Guise, father of the Bah/re, 
probably, in order to screen liimself, accused Coligni and Beza of being tlie in- 
stigators of his od'ence. His flesh was afterwards torn from his bones by red-hot 
pincers, but Henri of Lorraine never considered his father's deatli fully avengeii 
until the massacre of the admiral. Culigni's head was sent by Catherine de 5le- 
dicis to Home as an offering to Gregory XIII. Upon this occasion the pope had 
a medal struck off, stamped with an exterminating angel and subscribed — Ugo- 
notorum Strages. 

X Pereat sua arte Perillus. Enguerrand de Marigni, grand chamberlain of 
France during the reign of Philippe-le-Bel, constructed the famous gibbet of 
Montfaucon, and was himself among the first to glut its horrible /bw/cAes pati- 
bulairts, whence originated the ancient adage — Plus mulheureuT que le bois doitt on 
fail le gibet 



218 CRICHTOX. 

VI. 
" Back ! back ! my liege," exclaimed a pa^e, " with death the air is tainted. 
The sun iirows hot, and see yoii not, s;ood sire, tlie queen has fainted." 
" Let those retire," quoth Charles in ire. " who think they stand too nigii ; 
To ns no scent yields such content as a dead enemy."* 

VI [. 
As thus he spake the kini; did quake — he heard a dismal moan — 
A wovnidcd wretch had cre|)t to stretch h\i bones beiu'ath that stone : — 
*' Of dying man," groaned he, " tlie ban, the Lord's anointed dread, 
My curse shall cling to thee, O king! — much righteous blood thou'st shed." 

VIH. 

** Now by Ciirist's l)lood I — by holy Rood !" cried Ciiarles, impatiently; [die.** 
" Witii sword and pike — strike, liegemen, strike ! — God's death ! tliis ma.i shall 
Straiglit halbert craslicd, and matciiiock flasiied — but ere a sh.ot was tired — 
With laugh of scorn that wight forlorn had suddenly expired. 

IX. 

From the Louvre gate, with heart elate. King Charles that morn did ride; 
With aspect dern did he return, quenched was his glance of pride : — 
Remorse and ruth, with serpent tooth, thenceforth seized on his breast — 
With bloody tide his couch was dyed — pale visions broke his rest !f 

As the Baron dc Kosni concluded his sonp:, a sullen murmur 
amono;st the scholars, deepenini^ as it proceeded, until it took the 
character of" an angry groan. 

" Par la Porte d'Enf'cr, Avhich once conducted the neophyte to 
our h.alls," muttered Harcourt, " I would a=! soon die Avith the Con- 
fesi^ion of Augsburg upon my lips as listen to such another 
ditty. Coligni's own epitaph would make a sprightlier lay : — 

Cv gist, maisc'est mal entendu, 
Ce mot pour hiy est troj) honiieste. 
Icy lAdmiral est pendu 
Par les pieds a faute de teste !"' 

" Pas les pieds a faute de tcte !" chorusscd the others, with a 
roar of derisive laughter. 

" Peace, on your lives," cried Ogilvy, with a threatening gesture, 

" By the memory of the good 'Ihomas Cruce, who slaughtered 
eighty of tliese schismatics with his proper hand,'* whispered the 
Sorbonist to the scholar of Harcourt; " I will wash out the affront 
put upon us, in the blood of that accursed Scot — offensam eiise 
vinriica/>o." 

" My blade shall second you," returned Harcourt in the same 
tone. 

* I^nsuite Colignifut traine aux fimnlies patibnlaries de Montfaucon. Le Roi 
vint jouir de ee spectacle, et s'cn montra insatiable. On ne eoncevait pas qu'il 
put n'sister ii line telle odeur ; on le prcssait de se retircr. Aon dit-il, le cadavre 
d'un cnncmi sent toiijuiirs bon ! — Lacuatei.le. 

t Lamaladie de Charles IX. etait accompagnt'e de symptomcs plus violens qu'on 
n'en remanpie dans les maladies de langueur ; sa poitriiie I'tait particulicrement 
affectte ; mais son sang eoulait par tons les pores ; d'aOVeux souvenirs perseeu- 
taient sa penste dans un lit toujours baigne de sang ; il voulait et ne pouvait pa3 
6'arraeher de cette place. — Lacuaelll. Histoire de France pendant les Giierres de 
Jieliyion, 



219 



CHAPTER 11. 

THE HUGUENOT. 

!!liaqiie mot qii'il disait etait un trait de flammed 
Qui jieiietrait Henri jusqu'au fond de son ame, 
II quitte avec rei^ret co vieillard vertuoux ; 
Des pleurs en leiiibrassant coultrent de ses yeux, 

VoLTAlUE. Henricuk; Clumt. J. 

No sooner had Rosni quitted his sovereign's presence tlian the 
venerable Flo rent Chretien, approaching Henri, took his liand and 
pressed it fervently to his lips. As the king withdrew liis fingers 
from the old man's grasp, he perceived they were wet with his tears. 

" Nay, by my faith, my excellent friend," he said, in a tone of 
great kindness, *' this must not be. Tears from such eyes as yours 
are reproaches too cutting for endurance. I had rather you would 
chide me in the harshest terms you could employ, than assail me 
with the only weapons against which I am not proof. What 
would you have me do?" 

'' Does not your own great and generous heart, my liege," re- 
turned the minister, " which prompts you to interpret the overflow- 
ing of an anxious breast into rebuke, tell you what course you ought 
to pursue ? Does it not point out to you that your life, precious 
in itself — but oh ! of inestimable value to all members of our pure 
religion, to whom you are as Joshua or Maccabreus, may not be 
lightly imperilled by your own act Avithout manifest departure from 
that high course, which the King of kings hath appointed you to 
run; and which in due season, if you remain true to yourself, and 
to your cause, you will doubtless gloriously accomplish. Well and 
truly hath your fliithful follower the Raron de Rosni, spoken, when 
he averred that on your safety depends that of the true Church 
of Christ ; and not in vain will my tears have been shed, if they 
avail to turn you from these vanities, and recall your nobler nature. 
Better I should lament than your enemies rejoice. Better one 
should blush in secret than a whole kingdom be turned to shame 
for its sovereign's defection. Cast off this slavery of the senses. 
Yield not to the devices and snares of the Prince of Dai'kness. 
You are our guardian, our bulwark, our tower of strength. 
Pause ere you wantonly expose our decimated flocks to the further 
ravaijes of these devouring wolves." 

As he spoke, the old man's eyes glistened, and his looks kindled 
till his glowing countenance wore an air of apostolic fervour that 
produced, more than his words, a strong impression upon the king. 

"Rest assured, my good friend," replied Henri, " I will in no 
way compromise my own security, or that of the church over whose 
welfare I watch, and in whose behalf I have raised my banner. 
I have other and stronuer motives than the mere love of such a 



220 CRICHTON. 

pageant wliicli attract inc to these jousts, but I give you my wonl 
as 11 kinij-, tliat 1 will place ncitlier my life nor my personal sal'etv 
in needless jeopardy. And now," he added, with a smile, " thank- 
ing you for your admonitory counsels, which, as you well know, are 
seldom pleasant in royal ears; and having scarce leisure for a 
longer homily, or even for further conference at this moment, let 
us turn to your own peculiar concerns. If you have any commu- 
.nication to make, delay it not. I am impatient to know how I can 
serve you." 

" It is not in my own behalf that I would claim your majcstv''s 
services," rejoined the preacher, " but in that of one in whom you 
yourself are nearly interested. Know, sire, that a sister of the 
Prince of Conde is at this moment a captive in the hands of the 
bloody Jezabel of France. It is for her deliverance from thraldom 
and oppression that I solicit your aid; and if you are resolved 
to expose yourself to needless risk, let it be to efleet the liberation 
of a princess of your own royal blood, a zealous believer in our 
creed, and in the eyes of a searcher of knightly adventure, for 
as such I must regard your majesty, a distressed and forlorn 
damsel." 

" If this, indeed, were as 3'ou rej)rcsent it, my good friend," re- 
plied Henri, '* you should have my instant aid, even though it were 
needful to bear her from tlie Louvre with my handful of men. 
But you have been deceived by some false statement. Our cousin 
of Conde has no sister at the court of France." 

" The prince believes s!ic perished in her infancy, sire," returned 
the preacher, " but her preservation from the sword of those fierce 
Amalekites, who beset the good Louis de Bourbon on his fliglit to 
Ilochelle was little less than miraculous, as you will find wlien I 
relate to you the history of this unfortunate princess, as it was de- 
livered to me by one of the att'.ndants of the queen-mother, who 
hath recently become a convert to our faithi."" 

" Your information is derived from a suspicious quarter, messire," 
returned the king with a smile of incredulity. " Catherine's 
comeiiere are as deceitful to the full as the daughters of the Philis- 
tines. I know them of old. Your proselyte may prove a Delilah 
after all, and her specious story only a snare laid to entrap you. 
Our uncle, Louis de Bourbon, it is true, hath often spoken of the 
hapless fate ol his infant daugh.tcr in the mountain defiles near San- 
cerre, but he believed, nay. was assured, that she perished.^' 

" Credit me, sire, she lives," replied Chretien. And he then 
succinctly detailed such particulars of Eselairmoude's story as are 
already lamiliar to the reader — adding that the princess had been 
hitherto kept in ignorance of her illustrious origin from a fear lest 
some inadvertence, not unnatural on the part of one so young and 
inexperienced, should betray her consciousness of her real rank and 
condition to the suspicions of Catheiine, and militate against any 
plans formed for her deliverance. The preacher likewise stated 



THE HUGUENOT. 221 

that lie had been summoned at an early hour on that morning to 
the Louvre by Annunzlata (the attendant from whom he had 
cbtanied his knowledge of this important secret), to visit Esclair- 
rnonde — that she had revealed to him, without reserve, the events 
of the preceding night — imploring him to free her from the perse- 
cution of her royal lover, who, it appeared, had despatched a htllet^ 
stating that if she offered further opposition to his passion he would 
denounce her as a heretic to theinquisition of the Catholic priesthood. 
*' She was bathed in tears when I entered the chamber," said 
Chretien, " and at first refused to be comforted, but deeming the 
proper period arrived for its disclosure, I acquainted her with the 
illustrious stock from which she sprang, and besought her to 
comport herself like a descendant of that royal house." 

" Ha ! corblcu ! how received she the intelligence ?" 

" Like a daughter of the race of Bourbon," replied Chretien — 
** her grief was at once checked, and she conferred calmly and deli- 
berately with me upon the means of her evasion. One circumstance 
alone appeared to give her uneasiness — but I doubt whether I am 
at liberty to mention it to your majesty." 

" Do not mention it, then, my good friend," returned the king, 
*' if it is aught the princess would not wish to be divulged to me." 

" It is, however, desirable, I think, that your majesty should be 
acquainted with the state of her heart, the rather that you may 
form a judgment — " 

" Whether the alliance be suitable, ha! messire. What cavalier 
has been so fortunate as to ingratiate himself into the good opinion 
of this captive princess?" 

" A Scottish gentleman, my liege, who hath greatly distinguished 
liimself at the court of your royal brother of France — the Cheva- 
lier Crichton." 

" iMort de ma vie!" exclaimed Henri, angrily; "doth lie aspire 
4o her hand?" 

" Your majesty forgets that he knew her only as one of Queen 
Catherine's maids of honour." 

" True," replied the king, sternly, " but she is now our cousin, 
and as such no mate for an adventurer." 

*' It was her sense of this change in her condition, my liege, and 
of the impassable bar placed between her and her lover that gave 
her so much pain : nor was her uneasiness diminished, when she 
learnt, as she shortly afterwards did, from a missive conveyed to her 
from the Chevalier Crichton, that he had by accident made the 
•discovery of her exalted origin, and at the peril of his life 
wrested the proofs of it from Catherine's own hands ; but in his 
•endeavour to transmit the packet to her, while he was yet in the 
power of the queen-mother, it had been irrecoverably lost." 

" Ventre-saint-gris !" exclaimed Henri ; " were there such 
{proofs ?" 

** The Chevalier Crichton affirmed that the packet contained 



222 CRicnTON. 

letters from the queen-mother, the Marcclial do TavanncSj and tlie 
Cardinal of Lorraine." 

" Diablo !" cried the king, ^vith vivacity, " those letters were 
■well wortli the risk of a life, and Avould have obviated the neces- 
sity of bring forward the scarce credible statement of your proselyte 
Annunziata. Heaven grant they have not iidlen again into Cathe- 
rine's clutches ! It was a bold deed to tear her prey from the 
lioness, and this Crichton hath proved liimself a cavalier of no 
mean prowess. One question more, good Chretien, did not this 
Scottish knight promise to finish his adventure by delivering our 
captive cousin?" 

" Of a verity, my liege, lie did so," returned the preacher with 
some reluctance. 

" I knew as nmch," said Henri, smiling; " Esclairmonde is now 
at the Louvre ? — ha !" 

" In the train of Queen Louise, whom she accompanies at noon 
to the lists, where, bv his majesty's commands, she presides as 
sovereign arbitress. To-night there is a new fete and masque at 
the Louvre. Before that time she must be delivered from thral- 
dom, or her late is sealed." 

" Before that hour she shall be delivered," replied the king, " or 
I will myself proclaim her rank before Henri and his assemhled court. 
But time presses, good Chretien, and I must to the tilt-yard." 
" Your majesty — " 

"Is peremptory — headstrong — what you will? But waste no 
more words upon me. Tarry here till the jousts are over, and I will 
rejoin you." 

As he spoke, the king made a sign to the Baron de Rosni, who, 
with a glance of ineffable disdain at the menacing gestures of 
the scholars, instantly rejoined him, and after a little further 
conversation with the preacher, and a valediction, which greatly 
scandalised the good old man, proffered to his buxom hostess,. 
Henri and his follower quitted the cabaret. 

They were about to mount the steeds awaiting their coming 
forth, at the door of the tavern, when a band of equerries, pages,, 
and gentleman-ushers in superb liveries of crimson velvet, slashed 
with yellow satin, accompanied by a crowd of trumpeters and haut- 
boy-players blowing loud flourishes, rode furiously down the Rue 
Pelican, shouting as they passed "Make way for the queen-mother 
— stand back — stand back." Henri drew his cap closely over his 
brow at this intimation, and appeared to busy himself about the 
saddle of his charger. Presently Catherine appeared mounted upon 
a beautiful Spanish jennet, and attended by her ^^ petde bande des- 
dames" all on horseback, on their way to the Louvre. It was im- 
possible to conceive a gayer or more attractive sight than this 
brilliant troop of youthi'ul dames, each attended by a page habited 
in her colours, presented. All were masked in demi-vlzards of vari- 
ous dyes, and th.e beholder therefore could do little more than guess, 
at the loveliness of their lineaments. But the brightness of the orbs 




o 



fIHE HUGUENOT. 2?3 

flaslilng tlirougli the -apertures of those wltchinfr tourcts de uez — tho 
splendour of" tlieir attu'C — the grace they displayed on their steeds 
— the waving of their silken tresses — tlie elegance and lightness of 
their figures, left him in little incertitude as to the charms of feature 
thus enviously concealed from view. In spite of the risk incurred 
by sucli a proceeding, Henri could not resist the temptation ot 
stealing a glance at the fair equestrians as they passed in review 
before him ; and as the person of one, who seemed to be more ex- 
quisitely proportioned than her companions attracted his ardent gaze, 
the damsel (it was La Rebours) remarked to lier companion — 
" Sainte ]\Iarie ! La Fosseuse, only see how much that soldier resem- 
bles the King of Navarre !" 

** Nenni !" returned La Fosseuse pertly, " I discover no likeness 
— or if there is any, the soldier has decidedly the advantage over 
the monarch — his shoulders are broader." 

*' Perhaps so," sighed La Rebours; " but the resemblance is very 
remarkable." And as she turned her head to satisfy herself of the 
fact, the king had disappeared. " How very singular !" she 
thought, musing on the circumstance as she rode along. 

We will now return to tlie cabaret and inquire after the Gelosa. 
With difficulty the unhappy maiden mastered her terror Avhen she 
perceived Ogilvy engaged in a second brawl with the scholars, and 
found herself deserted by both her protectors ; but her alarm was 
greatly increased, when after the departure of the Baron do Rosni^ 
the menaces of the scholars assumed a more determinately hostile 
shape, and the Scot was loudly threatened with death on all sides^ 
Neither could the strong arms of Blount and the Swiss sergeant,, 
nor the peaceful interposition of the preacher, avail to allay the 
storm. They cried out loudly for his blood, and swords and daggers 
were drawn — tables and benches overturned — glasses broken — 
deep and vindictive oaths uttered ; and a sanguinary conflict must 
have ensued, had not the Chevalier du Guct and his two lieutenants 
armed with partisans, and accompanied by several other personages 
in sable dresses, whose sallow countenances as Avell as certain pecu- 
liarities in their costume, proclaimed them to be Italians, suddenly 
entered the tavern. The chief of tlie watch commanded peace in 
the king's name; and apprehensive of the consequences of a refusal 
to obe}' his order, the combatants were compelled to sheath their 
blades. But in the meantime another event occurred, which gave 
a new turn to the affair, and served to re-awaken their suspended 
anim.osity. As her eye rested upon the new comers, Ginevra could 
not repress a faint scream, and attracted by the sound, one of the 
foremost of their number instantly rushed towards her, and ere the 
hapless maiden could offer any resistance, she found herself in the 
power of the followers of Gonzaga. To rush to her assistance, to- 
extricate her from the grasp of her assailant, was with Ogilvy the 
work of a moment. But his assistance was ineffectual. Ginevra 
only escaped from one hand to be retaken by the other. The 



■*i24 CRicnxoN. 

Sorbonist twined his arms round the form of the fiying girl and 
bove lier hack to her captors. Ogilvy nicanv>'hilc had Jiot relin- 
quished the grasp he had fixed upon the Itahan. In the struggle 
that succeeded, a pat;ket fell from the doublet of the latter, Tlie 
Scot recognised it at once. 

" Ah !" he exclaimed, setting his foot upon tlie papers, " to the 
rescue, Blount — to the rescue — there is the object oi' our patron 
Crichton's search — the documents establishing the Princess Esclair- 
monde's birth — to the rescue — to the rescue !" 

" Gracious heaven 1" exclaimed the preacher, " to his aid, young 
man. 1 would fain wield a sword in such a cause niyself — help ! — 
help!" 

Blount needed not this incitement to draw sword. He threw 
bimself resolutely upon the Italians, whose weapons were all 
directed against Ogilvy's breast, and struck the foremost of them 
to the ground. But his purpose was checked by a sudden and fatal 
issue being put to the combat. One of the followers of Gonzaga, 
watching his opportunity, plunged his stiletto deeply into Ogilvy's 
breast. Without a groan, though he felt himself mortally 
wounded, the Scot now stooped down, and receiving, as he did, 
mumberless wounds from his adversaries, obtained possession of the 
packet. 

" Take it," he said, as with a dying effort he reached the English- 
man's side, "you know its destination — heed me not — away — my 
strength will not avail me to fly, but my heart goes with you and 
to my patron — tell him — but 1 cannot speak — go — go." 

Uttering these words, he committed the packet to Blount's 
■ custody, and suddenly tiu'ning, confronted his adversaries with a 
look so fierce and desperate, that the boldest of them shrank back 
;ipj)alled. 

♦' Follow me, messire," whispered Dame Fredcgonde, who, under 
cover of the protecting arm of the Swiss sergeant, had ventured to 
approach the combatants, " follow me," she said, plucking Blount's 
sleeve, " and you too, worthy sir," addressing the preacher, " you 
can render little assistance to that dying man, and your presence 
will only incite these murtherous students to further acts of violence. 
Holy Virgin ! — blessed Lutlier, I mean — but I scarcely know 
what I am saying — that such a fray as this should dishonour my 
dwelling. Maitre Jacques, look to their swords — mercy upon us! 
— ward them off'— I Avill lind means to requite your valour — come 
. along, messires — quick — quick, this way — this way." 

Blount looked irresolute, 

" By Saint Ben'et," he said, " I never yet turned my back 
upon an enemy; and I sec not why I should ffy for the first time 
when I have a friend to avenge." 

*' If thou wouldst indeed avenge me, tarry not," cried Ogilvy. 
And as he spoke, the sword of one of his antagonists was thrust 
through his body, and the Scot fell to the earth. 

"Let them not wholly triumph," gasped the dying man, — "aui 



THE HUGUENOT. 225 

he escapes," lie crieJ, turning his glazing eyes in tlie direction of 
Blount, who defended by the nervous arm and huge falchion of the 
Swiss, as well as by the dreaded fangs of his dog Druid, and guided 
by the friendly hostess, speedily effected his retreat, together with the 
preacher, through a small doorway, not hitherto observed by the 
guests. As this door was closed and barricaded by the stalwart 
person of Maitre Jacques, a smile of exultation liglited up Ogllvy's 
features: " I die content," he murmured. 

At this moment a piercing shriek rent the air. It proceeded 
from the Gelosa. Her captors were about to bear her off, but find- 
ing her outcries continued, one of them twisted a scarf round 
her throat in such a manner that it was impossible for the wretched 
maiden to utter further sound. This done, regarding neither the 
entreaties of Dame Fredegonde, nor the impotent threats of Ogilvy, 
they disappeared with their prey. At the same time the Chevalier 
du Guet and his attendants quitted the tavern. 

" liecreants,"" cried the Scot, who had raised himself upon one 
arm — " will none lend a hand to the rescue ? — will none help her? 
— That youth, as you deem him, is a maiden in disguise, — will ye 
stand by and see wrong done to a woman — to the rescue if ye be 
men !" 

" Tliink you we will defend thy leman, fool," said the Sorbonist, 
with a derisive laughter, as he passed him ; " our vengeance is now 
fully complete — thou art robbed of life and thy mistress — ha — ha. 
— Come, comrades, let us to the lists. This augurs well. This 
Scot's countryman may chance to meet a like downfal. We shall 
see. And hark ye, messires, if we can lay hands upon that heretic 
preacher, we will see if there is a fagot to be found in the Pre-aux- 
clercs : 

Death to the Huguenot ! — fagot and flame I 
Death to the Huguenot ! — torture and shame ! 

Death !— -Death !" 

And all joining in this menacing chorus, the scholars quitted the 
cabaret. 

Scarcely had the reckless troop gained the street, when a band 
of men, wearing the livery of the Vicomte de Joycuse, entered the 
chamber. 

" Where is the youth whom we are to conduct from Paris?" 
asked their leader, "■lancino; around in astonishment and alarm. 

" In the hands of ," gasped Ogilvy. 

But ere he could complete the sentence, the brave Scot becaine 
for ever silent. 



226 cniciiiox. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE PUOCESSION. 

Genets, conrsiers, riches bardes, houssurcs, 
Pluniars veinplis J'orpliavories fines, 
Cluunt'rains ilores a Lrrans entrelassures, 
Armets luysans, bicciuoquets, capelincs, 
Bucques de pris, tres riclies niantelines — 

Andue de la Vigne. Le Vcrgier iVHvnneur. 

As the hour for opening the lists drew nigli, all the avcnuea 
iincl approaches of the Louvre were thronged Avith eager and 
curious crowds hurrying from each quarter to behold the chival- 
Tous pageant. This concourse consisted of every class of society 
to be found in the vast and miscellaneous population of Paris, from 
the sedate citizen and his demure spouse, to be distinguished by 
propriety of gear, (costume being then regulated by sumptuary 
laws), down to the rough half- clothed boatmen who plied \\\)Q\\ 
the Seine, and the sturdy artisan who haunted its banks. Nor 
must we omit a host of Jews, beggars, truands, and other non- 
descript vagabonds who usually formed the mass of a Parisian 
crowd at the period of our narrative. Amongst these the magis- 
trates of the city, the provosts of the merchants, the echevins and 
their followers, in bipartite robes of crimson, and tawny-coloured 
stuffs embroidered with a silver ship (the civic cognizance), the 
sergeants, archers, cross-bowmen, and arquebusiers of the town-guard 
cut a conspicuous figure. As usually happens, however, where a 
crowd is collected, the softer sex predominated. For one steel or 
felt cap there were ten coifs of silk or linen. Nor were the mem- 
bers of the various religious fraternities wanting: the gray or russet 
frock — the cowl, or shaven head — and the long staff — might be 
detected amid the dense assemblage. Cordeliers, Carmelites, and 
Minims were mingled with the higher dignitaries of the church. 
The students of the university, ever on the alert wdren a spectacle 
was about to take place, herded thither in vast bands. Here came 
a courtly abbe — it was our acquaintance, Pierre de Bourdeille — upon 
a mule with its .'^uperb housings, followed by a train of richly-clad 
lacqueys. 

The mob doffed their caps as Brantome ambled on. Next 
appeared what in our own time would be regarded with much mer- 
riment, but which was then a matter of too frequent occurrence 
to excite either surprise or ridicule, a couple of gaily-attired 
youths mounted upon the same steed — then a cavalier and dame, 
likewise on horseback, the latter seated on a velvet pillion, 
her features concealed, as was the universal mode with the 
ladies when out of doors, by a demi-mask. The housings of the 



THE PROCESSION. 227 

charger were unusually superl) ; his broad martingal and wide- 
reined biidle being of crimson leather richly ornamented Avith gold. 
Next followed a company of singly-mounted cavaliers, with a' host 
of valets and attendants arrayed in the extremity of the court 
fashion, with nodding leathers and lluttering mantles ; the curvet- 
ing of their coursers, and the blows of their lioussinrs, as they dashed 
recklessly onwards, occasioned considerable confusion amongst the 
foot-passengers ; and the smiles and compliments they lavishediipon 
the fair citoyennes and their daughters, hardly compensated Avith the 
bhiJF burgesses for their own sprained shoulders and broken heads. 
Nevertheless, in spite of the jostling and hustling, the striving, 
straining, and squeezing, the utmost good humour prevailed ; but 
this, indeed, might be attributed to the presence of so many armed 
authorities. 

Loud shouts were now raised, and the multitude was pushed 
backwards and driven into more compact masses as the magnificent 
litter of the Queen of Navarre was borne along to the Louvre. In 
vain did the spectators endeavour to catch a glimpse of the features 
or person of the lovely Marguerite. A mask defied their scrutiny, 
and she leaned back in her carriage as if anxious to elude observa- 
tion. Not so her attendant, Torigni. The swan-like throat of the 
sprightly Florentine might be observed above the sides of the 
vehicle, and her snowy hand, divested of its glove, and covered 
with rings, negligently arranged a raven ringlet. Marguerite's litter 
swept by, and was followed by the huissicrs and guard of the go- 
vernor of Paris. Rene de Villequier boasted the most magnificent 
■caroche in Paris; and the vehicle which, upon this occasion, con- 
veyed the portly person of the marquis, was little inferior in deco- 
ration and gilding, though somewhat dilierent in construction, from 
our own Lord Mayor's state equipage. 

Then came the trampling of hoofs, and the loud fanfares of 
trumpets, and the superbly-accoutred band of Gascon gentlemen — 
lorty-five in number, whence their designation — commanded by 
the Baron d'Epernon, wheeled into sight ; the sun-beams brightly 
^glancing upon their corslets, and upon the tips of their lances. The 
last fourteen of this gallant company were sheathed in complete 
steel, Avith yelloAV scarves crossing their burnished cuirasses. Two 
pages succeeded in the violet-coloured livery of the baron, Avith 
his blazon displayed upon their sleeves and doublets. Then came 
his esquires sustaining his shield, charged likcAvise Avith his cogni- 
jjar.ce ; and lastly appeared D'Epernon himself, in a costly suit or 
russet armour, enriched Avitii chiselled arabesques and deep reliefs 
of gold. 

Scarcely had the admiration excited by the baron's retinue sub« 
.sided, ere the spectators Averc attracted towards a further display ol 
knightly splendour. A fiourish of trumpets bloAvn by six mounted 
juen-at-arms, Avhose clarions Avere ornamented with silken bandrola 
fruiii'ed Avith i^old, displaying th'^ princely scutcheon of the family 

Q2 



228 CRicnxoN. 

of Gonzaga, announced tlic approacli of the Duke of Ncvers. 
The duke rode a noble Arabian courser, and proceeded at a slow 
and stately pace. His valets and pages were more numerous than 
those of the Baron d'Epernon, and he was attended by four gen- 
tlemen ushers, who walked by his side bareheaded, with wands in 
their hands. He was fully armed in a suit of ^Nlilan steel, of the 
finest workmanship. His breast-plate was brighter than silver, and 
reflected the rays of the sun as from a dazzling mirror. His bur- 
ganct, and his corslet, were crusted -with gold and pearls, and 
from his neck, suspended to a chain of the same metal, hung the 
order of the Saint-Esprit. A plume of white ostrich feathers nodded 
on his crest. 

His demeanour was so dignified, and his train so sumptuous, 
that his a])pe'arancc was greeted by the assemblage with deafening 
acclamations — acknowledged by the proud duke with a haughty 
inclination of the head. Nor was the popularity of the wily Italian 
diminished, as his attendants showered amongst the mob broad 
silver pieces, for Avhich they Ibught and scrambled. By his side, in 
full ecclesiastical costume of scarlet silk simar Avith lawn sleeves 
and snowy rochet, and upon a sleek, well-fed mule, led by two 
attendants, each of whom had a hand upon the bridle, rode Pierre 
de Gondi, Bishop of Paris; a prelate in high favour with the queen- 
mother, to whom, indeed, he owed his elevation. There was 
something sinister in the dark and shifting glance of this Floren- 
tine churchman, which seemed to confirm the horrible reports 
that prevailed as to the motives of Catherine's predilection for 
him. But be this as it may, the hypocritical smile which now lit 
up his sallow features was construed by the observers into an ex- 
pression of infinite benevolence, the rather that his almoner, who 
Ibllowcd closely at his heels, distributed a dole with no sparing hand. 

Immediately behind the suite of the Due de Nevers came an 
esquire ot Vincenzo de Gonzaga, bearing a small triangular shield, 
painted Avhite, on which appeared the device of a sable mask, in- 
scribed with the motto Vendetta. This esquire wore the livery of 
the pj'ince (the combined hues of red and yellow) displayed in the 
flowinir satin housinos of his steed, traversed with broad cross-bars 
of orange and crimson, in his slashed velvet doublet, haut-de-chausses 
of different dyes, and parti-coloured plumes. Next advanced a band 
of youthful pages magnificently attired, and mounted on coursers 
caparisoned in cloth of gold, barred like the housings of the esquire, 
the stripes being described upon their gorgeous trappings by alter- 
nate lines of frieze-wrought and smooth-beaten tissue. Upon the 
silken just-au-corps of each page Avas embroidered in golden thread 
the ducal badge of Mantua and Montferrat. So gorgeous were 
their appointments in detail, that their bonnets, shoes, saddles, 
bridles, and even the scabbards of their rapiers blushed Avith crimson 
velvet. 

Then folloAVcd a host of lacqueys on foot, similarly, though less 



THE riiOfESSlON. 229 

splendidly armyecl ; tlicn another esquire sustaining the tri-coloured 
lance ot" tlie prince, decorated with silken pennoncel ; then two 
loot-pages attiied in habiliments of" cloth ot" gold and silk, leading 
his steed — a mighty Allemaync charger with eyes of llamc, ex- 
panded nostril, and pawing hoof — furnished for Gonzaga's use by 
the provident Due do iS'evers. Thick crimson velvet housing, 
enwoven witli the ducal cognizance, covered this noble animal, and 
descended almost to his pastern joints; the saddle was of velvet of 
the same hue as the rest of the harness — the chamfrin, or head- 
piece was of gilded mail, with a short projecting steel pike, and 
tufts of scarlet, and salFron-stained plumes adorned his front and 
croup. 

Lastly, armed cap-a-pee, in a suit of black mall embossed with 
gold and precious stones, rode the Prince Vincenzo. A garde-bras, 
or liaide-jncce^ as it was subsequently termed, covered the front of 
his cuirass, and defended his throat and left arm, so far as the 
gaiuitlet; but being of a single piece, and introduced in those 
later days of chivalry, for the better security of the jousters, the 
posture assumed by the knight, who adopted this saf"e-guard in the 
combat, became fixed and unalterable as that of a statue; his riglit 
arm alone being left at liberty. A tall egret of sable f"eathei-s sha- 
dowed his helm ; and with his vizor closed, and maintaining, of 
necessity, a stern and moveless attitude, Gonzaga passed slowly 
onwards. His cortege was completed by anotlier band of gaudy 
valets, and the minstrels, who enlivened the procession with the 
tambour, the cornet, and the clarion. 

A f"resh clangour of trumpets admonished the spectators that 
other comers were at hand ; and tlie announcement was speedily 
followed by the brilliant retinue of the Vicomte de Joyeuse, which, 
if it could not vie with that of Gonzaga in magnificence, surpassed 
it in number and consequence, consisting of a throng of lordlings 
and youthful gentlemen of tlie best families of France, Avho were 
eager upon this occasion to array themselves under the banners of 
their monarch's chief favourite, and to distinguish themselves with 
the snowy scarf which he had adopted as his ensign. It was true 
the same prodigality of cloth of gold and velvet was not here ex- 
hibited, as in the preceding cavalcade ; — 

Mais de liarnois, ne d'armure de joiiste, 
Ne leiir failloit une petite piece. 

There was no lack of " tilting furniture, emblazoned shields." A 
gayer troop was never seen. Nor could a greater contrast have 
been found to that which preceded it. The vivacity of their 
hilarious leader seemed to have diffused itself throughout his com- 
pany. Success appeared to be written in their beaming features. 
Nothing was heard but shouts of laughter, and the jingling of arms; 
nothing seen but the waving of plumes and banners, the glitter 
of helm and spear, and caracoling of coursers. 

Completely armed in a suit of polished steel, Joyeuse rode a 



230 CRICHTON". 

clungcr bardetl ■\vitli ii7ig Icl et grand couxrecldef of silver tissue, 
edged with azure fringe; and Avore a scarf of wliitc silk, richly em- 
broidered, thrown across his left shoulder. From his morion^ 
lloated a lambrequin of slashed satin, and his surcoat was decorated 
with his armorial bearings. His liandsome countenance was radiant 
with gaiety; and he conversed in an animated manner with a 
knight, who careered by his side, and upon whom, even more than 
the vicomte, ths attention of the gazers was fixed. Nor Avas the 
appearance of this cavalier undeserving the admiration he excited. 
He seemed the very mirror of chivalry. The experienced horse- 
man applauded the consummate grace with which he sat his courser 
(a powerful and beautifully-formed bay, wdiose skin shone almost 
a^' brigiitly as his rider's coat of mail), and the ease with Avhich he 
ever and anon compelled him to perform the balotades, croupades, 
and other graces of the high man^<re, alluded to in the following: 
alliterative verses — 

Vite virade, 

Pompante pannade, 

Saiit soulevant, 

Frompte petarrade, 

while the female portion of the assemblage marvelled at the exceed- 
ing beauty of feature, disclosed by the open vizor of his casque, 
and the manly symmetry of the limbs, defined by his light and 
curiously-fashioned breastplate, " brassards, cuissards, jamb and 
solleret." The housings ol his steed were of white damask, diapered 
with gold, and bordered with minever. His cliamfrin was decorated 
like that of Gonzaga, with a superb hoitpc cle plumes, and similarly 
accoutred. From the crest of the knight depended a lambrequin 
of slashed silk; and his surcoat was woven with his blazon, a lion 
rampant azure, armed, and langued gules. 

Following this preux chevalier, rode two esquires, in liveries of 
azure and white; the one carrying his painted lance, on the coronel 
of which Avas fastened a knot of ribbands; the gage, doubtless, of 
the dame in whose honour he was about to run a course: the 
other bearing a silver shield wutli the device of a dragon vert> 
spouting out tire, and the motto Loyal au mort, inscribed in blue 
characters upon a scroll. 

When it became known to the assemblage that this knight, in 
whom all felt so much interest, was no other than the Admirable 
Crichton, the adversary of the Prince of Mantua, their acclamations 
were so loud and deafening, and the efforts of those in the rear so 
strenuous to obtain a nearer view of his person and features, that it 
required the application of both partisan and sword on part of the 
attendants to keep back the rabble ; while the object of their curi- 
■>sity, apprehensive of some such tumult taking place, as occurred 
»n the preceding day at the university, was fain to set spurs to his 
charger, and to urge his companions into a quicker movement, in 
order to escape from observation. 

*' liy my halidom 1" exclaimed Joyeusc, as they reached the grand 



THE rnocESSiON. 231 

portal of tlic Louvre, and found tlie space before it invested with 
a gay confusion of litters, carochcs, steeds, lacqueys, and pages in 
various and resplendent liveries — " to judge from this rout we shall 
have a goodly attendance at our jousting. You must do your 
devoir gallantly, vion clicr, for you will have the eyes of all the 
chivalry and beauty of France upon you. There is not a magnate 
of our court, whose colours I do not discern amidst yon rout of 
servitors. But we are late. Those knaves in the slashed doublets 
form part of the train of our challenger's padrino. Gonzaf^a is 
already in the steccato.'^ 

'* Better be the last to enter the field than the first to quit it," 
replied Crichton, smiling. " But whom have wc here? By Saint 
Andrew ! my gossip, Chicot. So ho 1 Bayard," he cried, patting 
tlie neck of his charger, who, obedient to his voice, instantly stood 
still, but evinced his impatience by arching his neck, champing at 
the bit, snorting and pawing the ground. " What wouldst thou?"^ 
demanded the Scot, as the jester aj)proached him with an odd 
serio-comic look. 

" I am the bearer of a cartel to thee," replied tlie jester, in a tone 
of mock defiance. 

" Gramercy — gossip — a challenge!" ejaculated Crichton; "from 
tliy brother, Siblot, to shiver a inarotte against his cock's-comb? 
Ha ! But knowst thou not, that by the laws of honour, I am 
restrained from entering into a second quarrel until my first be dis- 
posed of ?" 

" I know it," answered Chicot, in an under tone. " But you 
must oiler some response, yea or nay, to my appeal. Here is the 
missive," he added, delivering a perfumed note, sealed and secured 
with a silken thread, to the Scot; " peruse it, and deliver me your 
answer without wrong or supersticerie." 

" The cipher of the Queen of Navarro," exclaimed Crichton, as 
he regarded the billet; " nay, then, it is indeed a combat a inttrance." 

" I would advise you to decline the encounter, or rather peace- 
ably to arrange it," returned the jester; " but in the mean time will 
it please you to read the cartel, and furnish me with some token of 
your intentions to convey to my royal mistress." 

Crichton hastily broke open the seal, and as his eye glanced over 
the contents of the note, a slight flush of anger rose upon his cheek. 

" I will rather perish than accept the terms she proposes," ho 
murmured, tearing it in pieces, and scattering the fragments to the 
breezes. 

" Hold, gossip," cried Chicot; "reserve that thread of gold; 1 
am to take that to her majesty as a sign of your acquiescence." 

" Never," answered Crichton, sternly; " tell her I have burst 
her chains. She would have some token — 'tis well," he added; 
withdrawing his gauntlet from his hand, and giving the bezoar-ring 
to the jester, " let this gem be a proof to her that I neither fear 
her threats, nor will accept of her tenderness." 



232 CKICHTON. 

" Par Suinct Fiacre en Brie!" cried Chicot, looking after him 
with a smile of derision, as he dashed swiftly through the gate- 
■\vay, " I will prove a better friend to thee tlian tliou deservest. 
This ring will well beseem my own linger, Avhile this thread," he 
added, picking up the fastening of the billet, " will perfectly 
content her jealous majesty of Navarre. For what saith the good 

Pantagruel — 

Paternostres et oraisons 

Sont pour ceux-la qui les reticnncnt: 

Urig fiffrc allant en fenaison?, 

Est plus fort que deux qui eu viennent. 

And chanting this wholesome advice " de hi marraine de vioji 
ffrajid-phe" he entered the lofty portal of the Louvre. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE LISTS. 

Ce jour de may en beau harnois de guerre, 
Nous joustamos assez doucettement, 
Et de iioz fais qui en voudroit enquerre 
Icy n'en fais niencion autrenient. 

Louis DE Beauveau. Le Pus de la Bergiere. 

Accompanied by tlie Vicomte de Joyeuse, Crichton now rode 
into the clianip clos appointed for the combat. Erected within a 
court, at the back of the Louvre, the lists were elevated to the 
height of the thigh-piece of the jousters. and extended to the 
length of sixty yards; while the space within the barriers, being 
carefully sanded and cleared of all impediments, ollered a very ad- 
vantageous arena for the exhibition of knightly prowess. 

Along the facade of the palace, on a level with the windows now 
thrown open, for the convenience of the spectators, was raised a 
temporary balcony, descending in wide steps, and hung with mag- 
nificent tapestry. Divided, at certain distances, into open canopies, 
I'ashioned of the richest brocade, decorated with fleurs-de-lys ciphers 
and escutcheons, and fluttering with silken streamers, this balcony 
occupied one side of the quadrangular court. At the further ex- 
tremity of the lists stood a grand roofed gallery, supported by heavy 
pillars, destined for the reception of the three queens, their atten- 
dants and dames of honour. The curtains and hangings of this 
splendid structure were of gridelin velvet, flowered with ciphers of 
silver ; displaying in the centre a vast argent shield, emblazoned 
with the royal escutcheon of France. At the right of the tilt- 
yard was placed a scaffold, with paHsades reserved for Montjoie, 
the klng-at-arms, the marshals and judges of the field; and next 
to it, under a canopy fretted Avith gold, ran a line of tabourets, 
cct apart for the favourites of Henri HL ; in the centre of which 
was a raised velvet fiiuteuil for his majesty's own occupation. 



THE LISTS. 233 

At either end stood two pavilions of striped silk for the use of 
the esquires, armourers, and other attendants of the combatants. 
Upon a low scaffold to the left of the grand gallery, guarded by 
four officials, disguised in the ghastly leaden-coloured hood called 
the chaperon, and surrounded by a band of halberdiers, stood Rufi^- 
gieri; with his hands folded upon his bosom, and his eyes fixed 
upon the ground. 

Indicating to his retinue the position they were to occupy, Jov- 
cusc rode through the entrance of the lists and joined the marshals 
of the field. Crichton followed more slowly. The breast of the 
Scot beat high as he gazed on the inspiring scene. The morning 
was bright and beautiful ; the sunbeams glanced on casque, and 
corslet, and on the thousand dyes of banner and blazon ; the soft 
breeze, tempered by tlie genial warmth of approaching spring, 
served with its freshening breath to give enthusiasm to the heart, 
and vigoiu" to the frame; and so fully did Crichton feel the influ- 
ence of these stirring thoughts, that spurring his charger, he com- 
pelled him to perform a demi-voltc in the air, and then to career 
round the arena. All was animation and excitement. The rustle 
of silks, the pleasant sound of gentle voices, the flash of brilliants 
from above, announced the ariival of the avges de paradis (as they 
were rapturously termed by the minstrels) in the balconies. Each 
casement of the Louvre poured forth its stream of beauty ; and as 
the Scot gazed upon those lovely and high-born dames, whose natural 
charms were heightened to the utmost by the aid of costliest orna- 
ment and dress, he felt his bosom beat with redoubled ardour. 
Reining his steed, he paused to look around. On all sides were 
ranged dense masses of spectators, over whose uncovered heads 
bristled the glancing pikes and halberts of the sergeants. On the 
right of the royal gallery were arrayed the fourteen followers of 
D'Epernon, glistening in steel, and headed by the baron him- 
self: on the left, behind the scallbld of the astrologer, stood the 
sumptuous retinue of the Due de Nevcrs. Bands of cavaliers, who, 
on the appearance of the dames on the balcony, regardless of the 
interdiction of the heralds, had dashed into the course, were 
now seen extending their lances towards its sides, whence fell a 
shower of wreaths, bracelets, and scarves, which were speedily at- 
tached to salade and spear. Much occupation was thus given to 
the king-at-arms and the marshals, whose province was to maintain 
a clear field ; and the champions, waving their hands to the mis- 
tresses of their hearts, quitted the ring. Amid the subordinate 
officers of the tilt-yard, must be enumerated the pursuivants, the 
trumpeters with their clarions dressed with silken flags, and troops 
of minstrels stationed at each outlet. 

A shout was now raised by the crowd, and the Scot's attention 
was directed towards the grand gallery, in which the Queen Louise 
and her demoiselles made their appearance. Amid the latter 
Crichton at once distinguished Esclairmonde. The Princess of 
Conde was perfectly pale ; but her want of bloom in nowise 



234 CPJCHTON. 

detracted from her loveliness. On the contrar}', slie had never 
before appeared so eminently beautiful in the eyes of her lover; 
nor had he heretofore, as lie thought, remarked so much dig- 
nity and self-possession in her demeanour. In fact, the events 
of the last night, and the knowledge so recently and mys- 
teriously acquired of her exalted origin, had worked a sudden 
but entire change in Esclairmonde's character. She was no longer 
an orphan maiden without name, and without family. Slie now- 
felt a pride, of which slie had been hitlicrto imconscious, kindled 
•s\-ithin her bosom; and a resolution, as yet wholly luiknown to her, 
animate and sustain lier spirits against the perils and difficulties to 
which she was exposed. This new-sprung courage was the more 
fully proved in the ordeal to which she was shortly afterwards 
subjected in an interview with Catherine de Medicis and jMargue- 
rite de Valois; both ol" whom, with their attendants, now entered 
the gallerv. But her firmness did not fail her in this trial; and she 
returned the scrutinising look of the queen-motlier witli a glance 
as lofty as her own. jNIarguerite was all smiles and courtesy : but 
the smile of a rival is little to be trusted, and Crichton, who Avas 
well acquainted with ]\Iarguerite's talent for dissimulation, read in 
her professions of friendship, and winning attentions, the deadliest 
treachery. These greetings concluded, Esclairmonde, at the request 
of Queen Louise, took the throne appointed for her as sovereign 
arbitress of the tourney, — a chair placed a little in advance of 
the royal seats, and so situated as to make her the principal object 
of attraction to the spectators. Her costume was a robe of white 
damask, flowered Avith silver, with sleeves of snowy silk of the 
ample mode of the period, embroidered with roseate and green 
pearls. Never had Queen of the Lists appeared so attractive ; and 
a murmur of admiration arose from the multitude as she became 
more fully revealed to their view. 

At this moment the gaze of tlie princess fell upon the knightly 
llgure of her lover, who, bending to his saddle-bow, gracefully 
tendered his homage. As she returned the salutation, Esclair- 
monde trembled, and her courage entirely forsook her. Crichton 
perceived the change in her deportment; and anxious, if possible, to 
dissipate her anxiety, compelled his steed into its liveliest caracoles; 
and was about to quit the field, when his progress was arrested by 
loud cries of" Noel! Noel! — vice le roi! — vive le roi!'^ Fanfares 
of trumpets and the clash of cymbals succeeded, and Henri, fully 
and magnificently armed, entered into tlie arena. He was attended 
by the Marquis de Villequier, Saint Luc, and a courtly throng. 
The royal charger (a snowy Arabian) was caparisoned with sweep- 
ing bardcs of crimson velvet, — 

Toutes chargecs de riche orphaverie, 

and figured with golden fleurs-de-lys. Courteously saluting the 
Scot, and bidding him prepare for the signal of the combat, which 
would be shortly given, Henri directed his course towards the 



THE LISTS. 235 

grand gallery, and addressing Esclairmonde, solicited Si favour at 
her hands, that he miglit break a lance in her behalf. Unable to 
refuse liis request, Esclairinondc took a string of pearls from her 
rich auburn tresses, and despatched it to the monarch bv a pa"-e. 
Acknijwledging the boon with a smile of gratification, and passing- 
many well-turned compliments upon her charms, Henri proceeded 
to hold a brief conference with the Due de Nevers. 

Crichton, meantime, rode into the pavilion appropi-iated to his 
attendants ; the hangings of which were closely drawn after him. 
Dismounting from his steed, he was presently joined by the Vicomte 
de Joyeuse, Montjoie, and Pierre de Gondi, by the latter of whom 
the customary oatlis of the combat were administered. Kissino- the 
crucifix and the Te if/itur, the Scot next submitted himself to his 
armourer, wlio riveted upon his cuirass a placcate of shlnIn<T^ steel, 
similar to that borne by Gonzaga. Being thus fully equipped for 
the light, notwithstanding the increased weight of his armour, he 
A'-aulted into the saddle without the aid of the stirrup; and taking 
his lance from his esquire, awaited the signal for the combat. 

Henri having by this time taken liis seat beneath the canopy, 
gave with his baton a signal to Montjoie, the king-at-arms, who, 
attended by two heralds, advanced, amidst a flourish of clarions 
and hautboys, towards the centre of the arena ; and, commanding 
silence, proclaimed in a loud voice the names and titles of the ap- 
pellant and the defendant, together with their cause of quarrel, 
]^rohibiting all persons whatsoever from ofiering interruption, 
by word or sign, to the combat. Fresh fanfares of trumpets 
succeeded this ceremonial, during which all eyes had been 
fixed upon Ruggleri, who, though pale as death, maintained a 
composed and resolute demeanour, ever and anon stealing a glance 
towards the gallery, in which sat the queen-mother. Silence being 
once more restored, Montjoie cried aloud, '■'' Faites vos rlevoirs, chc- 
valiersT 

On the third call, the curtains of the pavilions were swiftly drawn 
aside, and both knights issued forth, each taking up a position at 
the right of the barriers. Esclairmonde's bosom palpitated with 
emotion as slie beheld the stately figure of her lover cased in steel 
thus suddenly set before her, and recognised her own gage upon his 
lance's point. Any fears she might have entertained for his safety 
vanislied in liis presence; and with a heart throbbing with expec- 
tation, she heard the first blast of the clarion sound ibr the hostile 
career. A profound hush now reigned throughout the assemblage. 
Even the royal tenants of the gallery rose and advanced towards 
its edge, and Marguerite de Valols, disregarding Montjoie's injunc- 
tion, leaned over the side of the balcony and waved her hand. 
Crichton perceived the action; and, unable otherwise to account 
for it, attributed it to some return of tenderness on the part of the 
impassioned queen. Again tiie trumpet sounded, and as the blast 
was blown, Cricliton struck his spurs into his steed, executing a 
demi-volte to the right, while he slightly raised his lance in the air, 



236 CRICHTOX. 

bringini:; tlie trunclieon witliln a few inches ot his thigh, in readi- 
ness for tlie career. In this action Avere displayed the unequalled 
grace and dexterity in the manafroment of his steed, for which the 
Scot was so eminently distinguished. The martial notes of the 
clarion now resounded for tlie third time, and hurling a gauntlet 
to the ground, iVEontjoie shouted in a voice of thunder, " Laisscz- 
ItS oiler — laissez-les (tiler.'' 

Swift as bolt from cloud, Crichton, at this signal, speeded from 
his post. As the steed started on liis rapid career, the Scot, 
quick as thought, raised the truncheon of his lance to a level with 
liis line of vision, and then (irmly fixing it in its rest, declined its 
point towards the left ear of his charger as he approached within 
some half-dozen paces of his adversary, and directed his aim against 
the upper part of his helm. Both lances were shivered as the 
champions met in mid career. Gonzaga's mark had been tlie same 
as that of his antagonist, but the point of his lance glanced from the 
sharp gorget of the plastron ; while the blow of Crichton, taking 
place upon the crest of the prince, carried off' the panache with 
Avliich it was surmounted, am.! scattered the plumes liir and wide 
over the (ield. Neither, however, had been dismounted; and as 
each knight gracefully brought his steed to a rest, and hurled away 
the trunclieon of his broken lance, he opened his gauntlet to show 
that he had sustained no injury from the encounter. 

Snatching^ fresh lances from the attendants, the combatants again 
started on a new career. In this second attaint, the advantage was 
decidedly in favour of the Scot; his lance striking his adversary's 
visor, and staggering hini so much, that he could with difficulty 
rein in his charger. Notwithstanding the shock he had sustained, 
the prince seized a sharp-pointed lance from his esquire, and bidding 
a pursuivant communicate his intentions to his opponent, prepared 
for the final course. 

The excitement of the spectators was now raised to the highest 
pitch. On the issue of this trial depended the fate of the accused, 
and the movements of the combatants were watched with intense 
interest. For the tliird time they started upon their career. Upon 
this occasion the steel edge of Gonzaga's lance drew sparkles from 
the beaver of the Scot, as it came in contact with his helm; but 
the blow, though well directed, could not shake the firm horseman 
in his saddle. Not so was it with Gonzaga. The stroke ol Crich- 
ton, into which he had thrown all his force, was dealt with such 
resolution upon the visor of Vincnzo, that, unable to resist its 
violence, and still maintaining his hold of the bridle, horse and rider 
were hurled backwards upon the dust. 

Instantly recovering his feet, and unclasping his visor, with a 
countenance flushed with shame and fury, the prince walked across 
the lists to the tribunal of the judges, and claimed, in a haughty 
<nne, to be allowed tlie privilege of the combat with the sword. 
This request was peremptorily refused, but Crichton, riding up at 
til'.' same moment, generously seconded his adversary's request, and 



THE LISTS. 237 

refusin<]f to consider the triumph he had obtained as decisive, IMont- 
joie's objections were overruled, and tlic combatants retired to 
renew tlieir conflict witli ditlerent weapons. The cheers, niean- 
wliile, from the lookers-on, were almost stunning; and the courtesy 
of tlie Scot was on all hands loudly applauded. 

Crichton now withdrew to the pavilion, wlicre his armourer 
unbraced liis liaute-pitce, and furnished him with another and 
lighter morion of Damascus steel, crested with a tall clust^'r of white 
feathers. A long estoc was girt to his side, and to the jnimmel of 
his saddle was fastened a keen, well-tempered misericorde. Thus 
accoutred, he mounted a light agile barb, sent to him bv the 
Vicomtc de Joyeuse, as being fitter for the rapid and furious pas- 
sades he would now have to perform, than his own charger, and 
returned to the li^ts " hien gentemeiit ferant de Vesperon.'" 

Meanwhile, the barriers traversing the arena had been re- 
moved, and the space was left vacant for the combat. As the Scot 
passed through the outer pales, his visor was raised, and he cast a 
look towards the gallery in which Esclairinonde was seated. The 
princess rose as he appeared, and gracefully saluted him. Crichton 
returned her greeting, and unsheathing his sword, kissed the hilt 
as If vowing to draw it in her name. The action was not un- 
observed by Marguerite de Valols, over whose countenance came 
a sudden and fearful change. The Vicomte de Joyeuse on the one 
hand, and the Due de Nevers on the other, had in the interim 
marked out upon the sand of the tilt-yard a circular space, within 
the limits of which it was necessary that the combatants should 
keep. Armed in all respects like his antagonist, and similarly 
mounted, Gonzaga now rode into the lists. Making a motion to 
the Due de Nevers that he desired an instant's speech of the Cheva- 
lier Crichton, apart from their parrains, he rode towards the Scot, 
wlio sheathed his sword as he drew nigh, and advanced to meet 
lilm. This proceeding on the part of the prince was watched with 
great anxiety by the spectators, who were apprehensive lest they 
should lose the most interesting part of the anticipated spectacle. 
Their doubts, hoAvever, were quickly relieved on noting the impe- 
rious gestures of Gonzaga, and the corresponding haughtiness with 
which they were received by his adversary. 

" Chevalier Crichton," said the prince, in a deep, low tone, " I 
am aware that by the laws of arms I am already vanquished, and 
not more so by your address than by your generosity. So much 
am I beholden to you for the opportunity you have afforded me of 
redeeming my honour, that I would evince my sense of your liigh 
and chivalrous conduct by the proffer of my friendship, if you 
will accept it in lieu of doing battle upon a quarrel which, raethinks, 
might be easily adjusted." 

" Prince of Mantua," replied Crichton, courteously, " I should 
be proud to accept your friendship If I could do so without im- 
peachment of my honour. But it may not be. I have denounced 



238 CRTCHTO^f 

Ruggieri as false and pcijurcd; an enemy of G;,(l, and a trailer to 
his kinir. You have falsilled my cliar^-e — and 1 must make good 
the accusation with my sword." 

" Enough," rephed the prince, haughtily; " once and again, I 
thank you. You have now liberated nie from the weight oi'obliira- 
tion under which my spirit laboured. The combat which ensues 
must be a duel to the death. Your generosity might have restrained 
my arm. It is now free to strike — and, by Saint Paul, I charge 
you to look well to yourself." 

"To your post, then, prince," replied Crichton, sternly; "and 
by tlie aia of God, our Lady, and Saint Andrew the good knight, 
I. will approve with my body against your body the justice of my 
quarrel." 

So saying, with a proud salutation, he closed the visor of his 
helm, and backed his charger till he brought him in a line with 
the Vicomte de Joyeuse, while Gonzaga, turning his horse's head, 
rejoined his sponsor and second, the Due de Ncvers. 

After some little further delay, the combatants, placed about 
forty paces asunder, awaited with rapier drawn and beaver up the 
fuUllmcnt of the trumpeter's devoir. As the third charge was 
sounded, grasping the rein firmly with his left hand, plunging his 
spurs up to the rowel in the flanks of his steed, and raising his 
sword-arm in the air, each cliampion dashed furiously against the 
otlier, dealing, as he passed him, a mandritta, or blow from right 
to left, on his antagonist's casque, and then wheeling suddenly 
round, performed a demi-volte with curvets, and returning with the 
same fury as before, reiterated his stroke. Upon the third en- 
counter, executing a shorter demi-volte, Crichton turned sharply 
round and faced his assailant. Continuing their curvets and 
voltes, each champion then discharged a succession of imbrocatas 
and riversas upon his enemy's morion and breastplate. No attempt 
on either side, on the onset, appeared to be made to ward off those 
blows, but on the third volte, Crichton directed a heavy stramazone 
^or cutting blow) against Gonzaga's crest. The prince raised his 
estoc to beat away the blow, but the weapon flew from his grasp, 
and so terrible was the stroke, that Crichton's own blade shivered 
to tlie hilt. Plucking his dagger from its sheath, and grasping it 
in his light hand, each now spurred his steed close to that of his 
antagonist. Accustomed to this species of encounter, the animals 
stood stock still. Crichton then grasped the left hand of his enemy, 
and a deadly struggle ensued. 

It was evident to the spectators that a few more blows would 
now decide the conflict, and their interest rose in proportion. Not 
a bi-eath was drawn. Esclairmonde leaned over the balcony with 
a look as if her own life hung upon that of her lover. Nor could 
Catherine de Medicis, whose cause was leagued with that of the 
opposite party, control lier anxiety. At this moment, a voice soft 
and low, in v.diosc tones, altered as they were by passion, she yet 



THE LISTS. 239 

reco^'pised tliose of Mai;i;-iiei-itc de Valois, reached the oar of 
liie Princess of Conde. 

" I would g-Ive my soul to perdition," said the Queen of Navarre, 
*' to see the poignard of Gonzaga pierce the heart of his enemy." 

" For pity's sake — wlierefore ?" asked the princess, without re- 
moving her gaze from the combatants. 

" To be avenged of thee," answered Marguerite, in a hollow voice. 

" Gracious heaven!" exclaimed the princess, " thy horrible wish 
is accomplished — he falls — he falls.^' 

In the struggle it appeared that the dagger of the prince, glan- 
cing from the corslet of the Scot, had dangerously wounded the 
steed of the latter in the neck. The blood gushed in torrents from 
the deep gash, and the hoisc reeled with faintness. Pursuing an 
advantage obtained contrary to the laws of the combat, which for- 
bade hurt to be done to the charger, Gonzaga threw himself furi- 
ously upon his antagonist, endeavouring to drive him beyond the 
boundary described upon the arena ; but Crichton, feeling his steed 
totter under him, avoided the blow by leaning backwards ; and 
disengaging at the same moment his feet from the stirrup, leapt to 
the ground, and ere the prince could regain his balance, seized him 
by the arm, and dragged him from tlie saddle. 

The coniiict was now continued on foot. Blow after blow was 
•dealt upon helm and ciurass. The tilt-yard rang like the forge of 
nn armourer. Hacked off by the trenchant edges of the poignards, 
chips of the gold embossments and enamel strewed the arena, pro- 
inisinn' a rich harvest to the heralds. Gonzaga displayed all the 
address of a finished man-at-arms. In strength he was evidently 
inferior to his antagonist, but so expert was he in the use of the 
dagger, so dexterous in avoiding foyns and thrusts wdiich must have 
proved fatal, had they taken effect, that the spectators felt doubtful 
as to the issue of the strife. At length, the poignard of Crichton, 
driven through the vantbrace of the prince, but without inflicting 
more than a trifling scratch, snapped in twain, and he appeared at 
the mercy of his opponent. Kuggleri lifted up his hands, and 
uttered an exclamation of joy. 

" Now Heaven be praised !" cried Catherine de Medicls, " the 
right will triumph." 

" He is not yet vanquished, madam," exclaimed Esclairmonde, 
" and trust me, the right toill triumph." 

As she spoke, the prince advanced his dagger's point to the throat 
of Crichton, and glancing at him through the bars of his visor, 
commanded him to yield. 

" Yield," replied Crichton, fiercely, " it is a word I have never 
pronounced. Let this decide the combat." 

And, with the broken blade of his poignard he delivered so 
terrible a blow upon the morion of the prince, that head and 
casque appeared to be crushed by it. Gonzaga fell without cn.'se 
or motion ; a stream of gore flowintj from out his visor. 



240 CRiCiiroN. 

*' Yield, prince," cxcLiimed Crichton, stooping over him. and 
snatchinfj the daugcr from his loosened grasp, " or by fcainr 
Andrew ! yoii have breathed your last." 

But Gonzaga answered not. 

At this moment the Due de Nevers and the Vieomte de Joyeuse, 
followed by Montjoie and his attendant, spurred their horses to tho 
spot. 

" The victory is yours, Chevalier Crichton ; slay him not," 
cried the duke, flinging himself from his steed. " Ila !" exclaimed 
he, as he regarded the motionless ibrm of the prince, " you have 
destroyed the hopes of my brother of Mantua. By Saint Francis ! 
you shall answer for the deed." 

" If the prince is slain, he hath perished in the quarrel he him- 
self provoked," replied Crichton, sternly; " to yourself, my lord, or 
to others of his house, I will answer for what I have done." 

" The prince, your nephew, has been fairly vanquished, my 
lord," said Joyeuse; "and the only felon stroke dealt during the 
combat, was that by which yon bleeding charger was Avounded." 

" And that was accidental," said Crichton. 

By this time the attendants had unclasped Vincenzo's helmet, 
and though stunned and wounded by the concussion, his life was 
evidently not in danger. Satisfied with this examination, the duke 
became eager in his apologies to the Scot for the impatience he 
had exhibited; and his excuses being courteously accepted, he 
next directed his followers to remove the senseless body of the 
prince from the field. A\'hlle this took place amid the shouts of 
the spectators, and a loud flourish of trumpets, Crichton proceeded 
to the canopy occupied bv the king, and prostrated himself before 
him. Henri greeted him with a smile, and raising him from 
the ground, passed many encomiums upon the bravery he had 
displayed. 

" You have approved yourself a loyal and valiant knight. Che- 
valier Crichton," he said, " and have fully established the truth of the 
charge you brought yesternight against the traitor Ruggieri, whose 
guilt admits of no further justification. Quia transivit in rum 
judicutuin, et judicaturn debet vtvioUibiliter oiserra;?, as is appointed 
by the ordinance of our predecessor, the good King Philippe le Bel, 
respecting the judicial combat. Par la iMort Dieu! the Place de 
Greve shall blaze this night with his funeral pyre. Let him be 
removed to the Chatelet, and sec whether the question will extract 
the truth from his lips." 

" ^^y gracious liege," said Crichton, " I crave a boon at you? 
hands." 

" Name it," replied the king; " if it refer not to one whom 
we will not name, it is yours ere asked." 

" Let the puni.-hment to which you have condemned the truito? 
i;ggieri be commuted into perpetual exile." 



THE LISTS. 241 

*' Do I hear you rightly?" asked Henri, in surprise. 

" Grant me lils life, sire, upon the terms 1 shall propose to him," 
continued Crichton. 

" He is in your hands — deal with him as you see littlnp;,'" re- 
turned Henri. " Bring liither the traitor," he added, speaking to 
his attendants, " and let him now be conCronted witli his accuser." 

And half dead with terror, the astrologer was dragged by his 
hooded attendants into the king's presence, amid tlie execrations of 
the spectators. 

*' Cosmo Ruggieri, thy guilt is fully approved," said Herri, 
sternly; " thy sentence, whether of death or banishment, rests with 
the Clievalier Crichton. It is with him to pronounce thy doom. 
Down on thy knees, miscreant, and sue for grace. To me thou 
pleadest in vain." 

Crichton approached the astrologer, who cast himself abjectly al 
his feet, embracing his knees, and striving to move his compassion 
■\viih floods of tears, " Mercy," he cried, in a piteous tone. 

" Thou wilt find none, unless thou provcst obedient." replied 
Crichton; •' arise, and listen to me." And as lluggieri obeyed, 
Crichton whispered in his ear the conditions upon which he might 
lOok for clemency. The astrologer started and trembled. 

" I dare not," he said, after a moment's pause, during wdiich he 
stole a troubled glance towards the gallery. 

" To the rack with him," said Crichton. 

The hooded officials instantly darted upon him like kites upon 
carcase. 

" Hold ! — hold !" cried Ruggieri; " I cannot brave that dreadful 
engine. I will do as you command me." 

" Take him hence, tlien," commanded Crichton, " and let him 
remain with a sufficient guard within my pavilion until after the 
tourney." 

" Your own lives shall answer for him," added Henri, as the astro- 
loger was removed; " and now, mon clier Crichton," he added, "if 
you would efTect the liberation of a captive princess from an en- 
chanted castle, in which she is detained by magic arts, haste and 
et[uip yourself in fresh armour. Joyeuse will find you another 
steed in lieu of the one slain by the felon blow of your antagonist. 
Away, arm yourself, and join our ranks. And now, messeigneurs, 
for the Chatel de la Joyeuse Garde ! What, ho ! Du Halde— my 
horse — my gallant Papillon." 

Crichton joyfidly departed to array himself for this new en- 
counter; while the king, mounting his snow-white Arabian, pro- 
ceeded to superintend the preparations for the grand estour. As he 
rode across the arena, a billet was presented to him by a page in 
the livery of Catherine de Medicis. Henri knit his brow as he 
perused it. 

" Peste !" he muttered, " am I ever to be a puppet in my mother's 
tu^nds? — By Saint Louis ! this shall never be. And yet, all things 

\i 



242 CUICHTON. 

considered, it may be better to concede tliis trifle. Du Ilalde." 
he added, beckoning to the chief" valet, and speaking in an under 
tone — " get thee to Crichton's pavilion, and contrive some means 
lor Ruggieri's instant escape. We desire not to be known in this 
matter. — Thou understandest — about it quickly." 

Du Halde departed on his mission, and Henri, turning to his 
courtiers, Avith a smile that but ill-concealed his moriidcation, said, 
" It is our mother's pleasure, messcigneurs, that tlie grand melee be 
deferred till night. The del'ence of tlie chatel will, therefore, take 
place, as at first designed, by torchlight. Joyeuse, do thou give 
orders to this effect. Her majesty hath desired instant speech 
\vith us — on aflairs of state," he added, in a sarcastic tone, " we 
presume — no matter — after our conference, which we shall cer- 
tainly not prolong, it is our intention to essay a course with this 
preux Scottish knight, in lionour of our fair Queen of the Lists." 

With this, the monarch pressed forward, and dismounting from 
his charger, entered the royal gallery. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE PAVILION. 

La reine vouloit persuader que ce pauvre prince, son fils, avoit conspire, afin 
dc le rendre odieux a chacun. 

Henri Etiknne. Discours MervcUleux. 

When the armourer had completed his office, and Crichton, 
attired in a magnificent suit of russet-coloured mail sent him by 
the Vicomte de Joyeuse, was about to place his plumed casque 
upon his brow and return to the tilt-yard, a page in the royal 
livery suddenly appeared at the entrance of the pavilion, and an- 
nounced the queen-mother. Ere the Scot could recover from the 
astonishment into which lie was thrown by this uulooked-fbr visit, 
Catherine stood before liim. 

" My presence occasions you surprise, messire," said the queen, 
with a gracious salutation, which Crichton hauglitily returned, 
" nor will tliat surprise be diminished when you learn the motive 
that has brought us hither." 

" To whatever motive I must attribute your majesty's [)resent 
condescension," returned Crichton, coldly, " I am well aware, from 
your smiles, that some new danger is to be apprehended." 

" You wrong me by your doubts. Chevalier Crichton," rejoined 
Catherine, in a tone of great courtesy, and apparent candour; '*my , 
enmity to you exists no longer. In vanquishing Gonzaga you have 
vanquished me. I am liere to acknowledge my defeat; and I am 
assured that your nature is too chivalrous to refuse mercy to a 
prostrate ioc.^^ 

'* Your majesty forgets our interview last night," said Crichton,. 



THE PAVILION. 243 

regardin<; the queen distrustfully, " and the INTacliiavelian pre- 
cepts with which you unintentionally favoured nie. Need I re- 
mind you that ' words are the cloak 'neath which the sword is 
hidden;' need I add, that under your present fair profes.^ions, I dis- 
cern a dark and deadly purpose. Your majesty is no prostrate foe. 
And it is lor me — not for yourself — to sue for clcmencA'." 

" You have nothinrif more to apprehend from me, messlre," said 
Catherine, a slight shade passing across her majestic features, " unless, 
indeed, you wantonly provoke my resentment. I pledge my royal 
word, that I am come hither to confer with you in amity." 

" That royal word was plighted to the brave and trusting 
Collgni," rejoined Crichton; "liow it was kept, the goiy gibbet of 
Montfaucon best can answer." 

" Grant me patience, heaven !" exclaimed Catherine, in an altered 
voice — "you will not then accept my assurance of friendship?" 

" No, by the Saint Bartheleml, madam," answered Crichton, 
sternly. 

Catherine's quivering lip proclaimed the struggle she underwent 
to repress her almost uncontrollable indignation. Skilled, however, 
in the mastery of her emotions, she did instantaneously repress it; 
and waving her hand to the attendants, who had withdrawn to the 
outlet of the tent at her approach, she was left alone with the 
Scot. 

" Chevalier Crichton," she said, in a deep low tone, " you are 
brave — but your bravery amounts to folly. Of what avail are these 
idle taunts? — We understand each other." 

*' We do, madam," replied the Scot. 

" And with this understanding, why should we not act in unison? 
Our interests require it. As friend or foe our purposes are so indis- 
solubly connected, that to separate one were to destroy the other. 
So far you have succeeded. You are in a position to make terms with 
me. Propose them. Let not your ambition dread too high a flight. 
You have boasted that your ancestry is noble — regal — " 

" The blood of the Stuart Hows in my veins," said Crichton, 
proudly. 

" If I have heard aright, your sire is — " 

" Sir Robert Crichton, my father, is sole advocate to James ot 
Scotland," interrupted Crichton; "our religious opinions are at 
variance, or I had never quitted my native land." 

" You did ill to leave it in its season of calamity," said Catherine, 
" a prey to heresy and rebellion. One hand like yours, one voice 
potent as your own, might have availed to check, if not avert, this 
widely devastating storm. Your energies would, indeed, have been 
beneficially displayed in crushing that serpent brood which the per- 
nicious zeal of the fanatic Knox has called into life. Had the 
tocsin of Saint Barthelemi been rung from the towers of Edinburgh 
Castle ; had our gentle daughter Mary dealt with her ruthless foes 
as we have dealt with the enemies of our faith, she would not now 

k2 



214 CKICHTON. 

have been a captive to Elizabeth. Chevalier Crichton, your lovely 
queen weeps away her hours in prison. It should liave been your 
aim, as faithful Catholic, and loyal subject, to have effected her 
liberation." 

"You have, unwittinglv, touched tipon a chord that vibrates 
through my heart, madam," said tlie Scot, liis colour mounting, and 
his glances kindling as he spoke. "To rescue my beloved queen from 
her oppressors, I would wilhngly lay down my life — nay, a thou- 
sand lives, if I possessed them ! If her guard were thrice in 
number wliat it is — her prison vet more inaccessible — if she Avere 
lodged within the palace of her rival — or immured in London's 
impregnable tower, 1 would accomplish her deliverance, or perish 
in the attempt, did not an awful bar prevent me." 

" What bar?" demanded Catherine, with some appearance of 
curiosity. 

" A father's malediction !" replied Crichton, Avith a sudden 
change of tone. " Your mnjcsty has spoken ot the devastation which 
heresy has spread throughout my unhappy land. Her temples 
have been desecrated — the fire that burnt upon her ancient altars 
has been extinguished; her reverend priests have been driven forth 
— but this is not all. Into the bosom of her famiUes these new 
doctrines have brought fierce and bitter dissension. Irrcconcileable 
hatred has sprung up where love before existed. My sire (alas ! that 
it should be so) has embraced the reformed Faith.. I have re- 
mained constant to the creed of my ancestry — to the creed of my 
conviction; and in behalf of that religion in the cause of my in- 
jured queen, I should have taken up arms, when I was of years to 
bear them, had not my sire placed between my sword and the 
hand that would have grasped it — his curse ! With a father's 
malediction hanging over my head, I could not hope for success. 
Without a struggle I resigned the first, the dearest wish of my 
dawning life. In vain were prospects of ambition, clouded with 
heresy, and stained by rebellion, opened to me. In vain were 
proffers made me by those who would have purchased my services. 
I left my country, for whose weal I would have gladly bled — I 
quitted my paternal halls, to Avhich a thousand tender recollections 
bound me — I vowed never to return to that country — never again 
to behold that home, till the schism of the one should be annihi- 
lated — the old rites of worship, once observed by the other, re- 
stored." 

" You will never then see Scotland more," said Catherine; " she 
will cling to her false faith, as a libertine to the leman whose arts 
have ensnared him." 

" Or, as her preachers affirm," rejoined Crichton, in a tone of 
scorn, "she is like the profligate who has abandoned the mis- 
tress, and assumed the wife. But your majesty is right. Scotland 
will know no change. The homely creed she has adopted suits 
her homely people well. Austere in feeling as in manner, they 



THE PAVILION. 245 

will become hardened in heresy. The dogma promultratcd by 
Knox — plthis est religionem reformare roused the whole nation. The 
people liave reformed their faith — and their creed is essentially 
plebeian. Stripped of its ornaments; robbed of its majesty and 
grace ; its magnilicent proportions, sculptured and reared by ages, 
destroyed ; its venerable and hoary colouring, which time alone 
could impart, effaced ; its odours scattered to the breezes ; its tra- 
ditions lorgotten or despised ; the worship of my country simple, 
naked, and, it may be, pure, no more resembles its ancient 
grandeur and sublimity, than the lowly temple of the Huguenot 
will bear comparison with the glorious edifice of Notre-Dame. A 
cathedral is religion. Wiio can enter its reverend aisles unmoved 
— who can gaze upwards to its vaulted roofs with thoughts that 
stray not heavenward ! Mine be the antique fane — mine the time- 
honoured creed. Mine be the saint, the shrine, the solemn and 
melodious mass — mine the faith picturesque, poetical, beautiful. 
My native land I may never behold again — my father's blessing I 
may never receive — but the religion of Rome, entwined around 
my heart, endeared to me even by persecution, I will ever main- 
tain." 

" I applaud your zeal, messire," said Catherine. " To the brave 
man the soil he treads is his country. Be France the land of your 
adoption. Her faith is yet unchanged. Heaven grant it may 
continue so ! The storm we have swept away is again gathering 
with increased power and fury. Lend us your assistance to dispel 
It — to uphold the religion so dear to you. In the reign of the 
Seventh Charles, v/ho swayed the sceptre of this fair kingdom, 
one of your countrymen was, for his bravery displayed in the 
well-fought field of Beauge, in Anjou, when the royal Clarence 
fell by his hand, created Constable of France — why should not a 
like dignity be yours ?" 

" Were such unhoped-for distinction mine, madam," said 
Crichton, smiling, " I should not be the first of my line who has 
been similarly graced. The valiant Earl of Buchan, the country- 
man to whom your majesty refers, by whose proud achievement 
the field of Beauge was won, and by whom the baton of Fiance 
was thenceforth borne, was (1 hesitate not to proclaim it) my an- 
cestor." 

" Indeed !" exclaimed the wily queen, with well-feigned surprise. 
" Valour it seems is your inheritance. I rejoice to learn that 
you are a descendant of bold John of Buchan, whose chivalrous 
deeds my consort Henri II. has so often rehearsed to me. Why, 
I again ask, should you not tread in the steps of your ancestor ? 
Why should not your hand grasp the marshal's baton? Why 
should not your voice lead on the chivalry of France to con- 
quest ? "WTiy should not your vigilance maintain her ancient faith 
unsullied ?" 



246 CRICHTOX. 

Cricliton returned no niiswer. . His countenance glowed and his 
frame dilated, as Catherine, not insensible of the impression she 
had produced, continued — " Why should you not aspire to the 
hand of the fairest princess of her time ? Why should not the lovely 
Esclairmonde be yours?" 

" No more, I pray you, madam — tempt me not." 
" Graced with the rank of marslial — allied to the royal house of 
Conde — enriched with the dowry -which vour bride will bring — 
■would not even your ambition be contented?" 

" Even in my Avildest dreams my aspirations never soared so 
high," ejaculated Crichton — " A marshal of France!" 

" Her leader!" said Catherine. 

"That baton in mv "-rasp which Bertrand du Guesclin. Olivier 
de Cllsson, and the brave Boucicart bore — which Gaston do Foix, 
Brissac, and Montmorency wielded — that baton mine !" 

" The legions of France beneath your command," added Cathe- 
rine. 

"Her legions!" echoed Crichton — "ha! Saint Andrew! I 
see them rise round me ! I see her fierce and fiery bands pour like 
a tide upon the plain. I see her chivalry arrayed before me — that 
peerless chivalry which Bayard led — ha! Montjoie ! St. Denis — 
methlnks I hear the battle-cry." 

" Be Bayard's fortune yours." 

" Bayard Avas reproachless, madam," returned the Scot, the 
glow which had lighted up his features suddenly fading away; 
" the name of Crichton shall be equally so." 

" Your name shall not be stained, messire," said Catherine, im- 
patiently; " but in your dreams of ambition you have forgotten — 
Avliat we should least have expected you to forget — your tender 
aspirations." 

" Esclairmonde !" exclaimed Crichton. 

" Say rather the Princess of Conde," rejoined Catherine, " for 
her rank will speedily be acknowledged." 

"Will 7J0U acknowledo-e it, madam?" demanded Crichton, 
eagerly. 

" At my OAvn pleasure," returned the queen, coldlv. " Question 
not — but listen. The baton of France — the hand of the Princess 
of Conde are yours — on certain conditions." 

" Hell liath her compacts," muttered Crichton; " and men have 
bartered tlieir eternal weal for lighter offers. Your conditions, 
madam ?" 

" Have I your knightly word, that whether or not you accept 
the terms I am about to propose, your lips shall reveal no syllable 
I may utter ?" 

(/richton appeared lost In reflection. 

" Have I your word?" repeated Catherine. 

*' You have, madam," returned the Scot. 



THE PAVILION. 247 

" I trust you with my life, then — for I am well assured, that 
once plighted, you will not break that word." 

" Your majesty may speak as to your confessor " 

" i\Iy confessor!" echoed Catherine, derisivelv. "Think you 
I would intrust a secret — the betrayal of which would fill our 
■city oi' l^^ris with scaffolds, — would lloat her streets with blood, — 
Avould crowd the dungeons of her Bastile, and the oubhcttes of her 
Chatelets with noble prisoners, to a crafty priest. No 1 there arc 
«ecrets which must not even be breathed to heaven. Ours is one 
of them." 

" And crimes too deep to be forgiven," said Crichton, gloomily. 
— " Heaven grant your mnjesty propose not such." 

" r>e patient, messire," returned the queen, " and you shall hear 
what I do propose. You are already (no matter how!) in posses- 
sion of my plans. I need not, thcrelbre, tell you of my project 
for Henri's dethronement — of my scheme to place his crown upon 
the Due d'Anjou's head." 

" Thus much I know, madam," said Crichton. 

" Ihit you arc not aware," continued Catherine, approaching 
more nearly to the Scot, and lowering her tone, " that Anjou is 
now in Paris." 

" Within this city ? — ha!" 

" Within the Louvre — v,'ithin the palace soon to be his own." 

" Great heaven !" 

" Bussy d'Amboise, his favourite, has this morning arrived 
from Flanders. All goes Avell for us. We have the gold of Spain 
— tlie swords of Switzerland and Scotland — (or the guards are f*//?-.v. 
Our thousand agents, our spies and emissaries arc at work, 'ihey 
thread each quarter of the city. Our partisans collect together, 
and only await the signal to dechire themselves. Tiuit signal will 
be given to-night." 

" So soon !" 

" Ay, so soon," reiterated Catherine, triumphantly. " Nostra- 
•damus Ibretold that all my sons should be kings, lo-niorrow his 
prediction will be verified." 

" And Henri ?" 

Catherine grew pale as death, and trembled so violently that she 
•was compelled to lay her hand for support upon Crichton's armed 
shoulder. 

" What of the king, your son, madam ?" continued the Scot, sternly. 

" Of all my sons," exclaimed the queen, with a look of deep 
agony, and it might be, compunction, " Henri hath ever been the 
most dear to me. The sicklv Francois, the rugged Charles, found 
no place in my heart. But Henri, the fond, the pliant, the win- 
ning; Henri, ever devoted, ever deferential to my will; Henri, the 
•graceful, the poHshed, the beautiful — whom nature intended for a 
•king, and for whom I have seconded nature's intentions — he has 
ever been my fiivourlte." 



248 CRICHTOX. 

" And you will now destroy your own work; you will sacrifice 
your favourite son ?" 

"My safety requires it," returned Catherine, sighing deeply; 
" Henri has of late grown wayward and capricious. He refuses to 
follow iny counsel — to acknowdedge my sway. His minions have 
supplanted me in his esteem. Saint-Luc, Joyeuse, D'Epernon 
rule where I was wont to govern. The Salic law prevents the 
exercise of sovereign authority in my own person. I reign 
ihrimgh my sons: if not through Henri, I must reign through 
Fran(,"ois." 

" Weighed against love of power, a mother's love is nothing," 
said Crichton. 

" Against high resolves it should be nothing," returned Cathe- 
rine; " ar^ainst Fate it is nothing. Of what avail is my tenderness 
for Henri; of what avail are my regrets for his defection, of what 
avail is this hesitation to pronounce his doom ? Chevalier Crichton," 
she continued, in a voice that froze the Scot's blood within his 
veins, "he must die!" 

There was a terrible pause, during wh.ich each regarded the other 
fixedly. ^ ^ _ , , 

" Horror!" exclaimed Crichton, at length recovering his speech; 
" can (I 7/iut/ier say this?" 

" Hear me!" cried Catherine, " and learn with whom you have 
to deal — learn, and tremble! By blood — my own blood, was my 
power obtained; by blood — my own blood, must it be maintained. 
Henri must die." 

" By the hand that reared him?" 

"No! mine might falter. I will find a surer arm to deal the 
blow. Listen," she continued, becoming perfectly calm, *' by mid- 
night all will be in readiness. Lender various pretexts, and in 
vaiious disguises, the leaders of Anjou's faction will, ere that hour 
arrives, have been introduced into the Louvre. Bussy d'Amboise 
has his own quarrel to avenge upon the king's favourites. His 
sword hath seldom failed him. He will deal with Joyeuse, D'Eper- 
non, and Saint-Luc. Tlie Due de Nevers is ours already. Ville- 
quier and D'O are vanes that will shift with the wind. Henri 
alone remains — and he — " 

" Well ! madam." 

" Is reserved for your hand.'' 

"For mine!" 

" I have prevailed upon him to defer the grand chivalrous 
emprise in which he takes part till midniglit. Amid the conflict 
his lance will seek yours. Couch then your sharpened spear, — cry 
' Live Francois IH.,' and strike ! I know too well the force of 
your arm to doubt the fatal issue of the blow. That cry — that 
deadly stroke, M-ill be the signal to Anjou — and to our party. They 
will respond to it. Henri's adherents will be exterminated — hia 
^rown will be his brother's." 



THE PAVIIJOX. 2i[} 

"From the scene of carnage you depict, madam," said Cricnton, 
♦• my mind Ulcs back to days gone by — to the fair month of June, 
1559. Before the paUice of the Tournelle?, a splendid tournament 
is set forth to celebrate the nuptials of Elizabeth of France with 
Philip of Spain. A chivah'ous monarch maintains the passage of 
arms against all comers. Tliat monarch is your husband. That 
monarch is Henri II." 

" No more — no more." 

" That monarch demands a fiivour from his queen. Her scarf 
is sent him. He places it upon his corslet. He calls to the E irl 
of Montgomery to place his lance in rest. The earl obevs him. 
The cotnbatants rush upon each other. The Lince of Montgomery 
is broken — " 

" Hold ! I command you, messire." 

" But a splinter hath pierced the brain of the ill-fated king," 
continued Crichton, heedless of Catherine's frowns. " He lulls 
mortally wounded. You witnessed this fearful catastrophe, madam. 
You saw your husband hurled bleeding to the earth — and to a like 
fate you would now condenni your son — his simT^ 

" Have you yet done?" 

" Think you I am an assassin, madam, that you propose to me 
a deed from which even the rutldess bravo of your native Italv 
would shrink aghast?" 

"If I propose a deed dark and terrible, I olTer a propor- 
tionate reward," returned Catherine. "Stay!" she continued, 
drawing from her escarcelle a small roll of parchment, to which a 
broad seal was appended, " here is your appointment." 

" It bears date to-morrow." 

" It will be ratified to-night," rejoined the queen, placing tlie 
document upon a tapestry-covered table which stood beside them. 
" Behold the royal signet — behold your title as Marshal of France ! 
Your answer?" 

" Is this," replied Crichton, suddenly drawing his poignard, and 
striking it through the parchment with sucli force that all trace of 
his name was effectually obliterated. 

'* Enough !" exclaimed Catherine, tearing the mutilated docu- 
ment from the board. " You shall learn anon whose wrath you 
liave provoked." 

" Threat for threat, madam," returned the undaunted Scot 
" You may find in me a formidable enemy." 

" 11a !" ejaculated the queen, pausing, " you will not betray my 
confidence? Your word is passed." 

"It is,' replied Crichton; "but your majesty forgets that 
Kuggieri is in my power," 

Catherine smiled. 

" Hug^neri will betray nothing," she said. 

*' He has sworn to reveal all, on condition that his life be spared," 
returned Crichton. 



250 CRICHTON. 

Catherine's brow darkened for an instant; but the same sinister 
smile still played around her lips. 

'• If my astrologer be your sole instrument of offence, messire," 
she said, " 1 have little to apprehend." 

" Your majesty is confident," rejoined Crichton. " What, if I tell 
you that the packet containing the proofs of the Princess Esclair- 
monde's birtfi is found? — what if I add tliat your own letters to the 
Due d'Anjou — your despatches to the Prince Vincenzo di Gonzaga 
are now on their way to the king?" 

" And if I answer — it is false ! — false as your assertion that 
Ruggieri will betray me. That packet Avill never reach the king. 
That packet is in my possession. The Huguenot preacher, who 
was to have conveyed it to Henri, is my prisoner." 

"The powers of darkness have not deserted your majesty, 1 per- 
ceive," said Crichton, with a look of astonishment. 

" Nor those of earth," retorted Catherine, clapping her hands. 
*' Let Ruggieri be brought before us," she added, as the attendants 
appeared. 

The men betrayed evident symptoms of alarm — and one of them 
stammered out something like an excuse. 

" How is this?" demanded Crichton. " Have you dared to dis- 
obey his majesty's commands? — have you suHered your prisoner to 
escape?" 

At this moment two of the hooded officials entered the pavilion. 
"Where is the astrologer? — answer on your lives," said 
Crichton, 

" We are come to seek him hei'e, monseigneur," said the fore- 
most of the twain. 

" Here !" echoed Crichton, f\triou?ly. 

" Yes, monseigneur," returned tlic man; *' we had no sooner 
placed him in the guard-room, than lie disappeared; wc know not 
how or where — and we thought he was as likely to be here, as in 
any other place." 

" I recognise your hand in this, madam," said the Scot, turning 
to Catherine. 

The queen rephed with a bitter smile: " The powers of dark- 
ness liave not yet deserted us, yoti perceive, messire." 

"The other prisoner, however, is safe enough," said the foremost 
official, as he drew back. 

" What prisoner?" demanded Crichton, eagerly, 
" The heretic preaclier," returned the man; "lie is at hand if 
you wish to interrogate him." And without waiting for the Scot's 
reply, he motioned to liis comrade, who, in his turn, motioned to 
some one without; and the curtain of the tent being drawn aside, 
with his nrms bound with cords, and his whole appearance betoken- 
ing grt-at personal suffering from ill usage, the venerable Florent 
Chretii^i was dragged into tiie pavilion. 

*' His companion, the Englishman, escaped us," interposed the 



THE PAVILION. 251 

official, who acted as spokesman, "owing to a fiend in the form of 
a do£^, with fangs like a wolf, who fought by his side, and covered 

his llight. But he cannot have passed the gates of the Louvre 

\nd we may yet secure him." 

Crichton Avas about to rush to the assistance of tlic captive 
preacher to free him from his bondage. But a look from the old 
man restrained him. 

" It is in vain, my son," said Chretien ; " do not draw dov.-n 
your blood likewise upon my head." 

"The packet?" demanded Crichton, witlx frantic ean-crne«s • 
" say it has not fallen into the hands of this remorseless queen — sav 
you have given it to the Englishman Blount — say that he hastens 
Avith it to the king — say there is yet hope." 

" Alas! my son, Avhy should I deceive you? My mission hath 
failed. Our enemies triumph. They have pursued me sore. Like a 
bird I have fallen into their snare. The precious casket hatli been 
stolen from me. There is no hope save from on higli." 

" Heaven will work no miracle in thy behalf, rank heretic that 
thou art," said Catherine; " the populace, robbed of tlie spectacle 
they anticipated in Ruggieri's execution by fire, will need a victim. 
They shall have one. The stake shall not have been planted, 
nor the fagots piled Avithin the Pre-aux-clorcs, in A^ain. Abjure 
thine heresies, old man. jMake thy peace above. Thy sentence is 
pronounced." 

" I desire no better end," replied Chretien; " my death shall be 
a testimony to the faithful." 

" Your fanatic zeal blinds you, good father," said Crichton ; " for- 
sake your errors Avhlle there is yet time." 

" Forsake them 1" echoed the preacher, Avith fervour ; " never ! 
Flames may consume my breathing body. Torture may rend my 
limbs asunder. But my lips shall never gainsay my heart. For a 
death like this, my Avhole life hath been a preparation. I am not 
taken by surprise. My house is set in order. I shall glory in my 
martyrdom. I shall rejoice to be numbered Avith the righteous, 
Avho have perished in the service of their God. It is thou, my son, 
Avho art in error. It is thou who art blinded and perverse. It is 
thou Avho art in danger of unquenchable flame. Let my Avords dwell 
"with thee — let my spirit be upon thee. So shall I not die in 
vain; so shall thy own end be happy — be joyful as mine. Thou 
hast called me father — as a father I bestoAV my blessing upon 
thee." 

"As a father — oh God!" exclaimed Crichton, his eyes filling 
Avith emotion, and his voice fidtering. 

" Kneel down, my son; an old man's benediction, Avhatever may 
be his creed, cannot injure you."* 

Crichton instantly threw himself at the preacher's feet. 

* Tlie<;r', or nearly these Avords, were addressed by the Pvpc Benedict XIV. to 
Horace Walpole. 



252 CRICHTON. 

" Heaven's grace descend upon your head, my son,'' said Clire- 
tien, bending over him; " and may the dawning of a new light 
I'roin henceforth break upon your soul !" 

" My soul will never swerve from its fixed bias," replied Crichton, 
as he arose from the benediction. " I admire your constancy; but 
my faith is changeless as your own. I shall be no apostate." 

" Video meliora, prohoque, fleteriura 6r^?/or," sighed the old man, 
— " ah, my son, you are stubborn in unbelief. But my prayers will 
not be unheard, and your name, together with that of one dear to 
you as to myself, shall mingle with my latest breath. I shall expire 
in the hope of your spiritual regeneration. For thee, perfidious 
and bloody-minded woman," he continued, turning to Catherine, 
and regarding her with a terrible look, " a day of dreadful retribu- 
tion is at hand. Thy portion shall be that of the idolatrous Queen 
of Judah. Evil shall be brought upon thee and shame. Thy pos- 
terity shall be utterly taken away. With blood hast thou polluted 
this city; and with thy own blood shall it be cleansed. ' Ven- 
geance is mine,' saith the Lord, ' and I will repay.' " 

" Peace, blasphemer," interrupted the queen, '* and learn to thy 
confusion, that if the arm of heaven hatli been manifested at all, it 
liath this day been declared in favour of the religion tliou deridest. 
'llie leader upon whom the reliance of your m.iserable sect is 
placed — our chief enemy hath been delivered into our hands. Ha ! 
tiiou tremblest — have I found a way to shake thy inflexible 
?j)irlt?" 

" It cannot be !" exclaimed Chretien, with a despairing look. 

"It /s," returned Catherine, triumphantly; " we hold thy chief- 
tain within our foils." 

" Ah, fatal rashness!" cried Chretien, bitterly; "but I will not 
murmur against the decrees of Providence. I pray your majesty to 
send me forth ; I am very faint." 

"Take him hence," said Catherine, "and let it be proclaimed 
by sound of trumpet in each quarter of our fiuthful and Catholic 
city, that a Huguenot minister will be put to death by fire at mid- 
night within the Pre-aux-clercs. Let the ecclesiastical authorities 
receive instant intimation to attend. Here is your warrant," she 
added, delivering a written paper to the official. 

" Your majesty hath delivered me the wrong order," said the 
official, glancing at the superscription of the scroll; " this is a war- 
rant lor the execution of Cosmo Kuggieri, Abbe of Saint Mahe, 
convicted of the crimes sf Itze-tnnjestt and sorcery." 

"It will suffice/' returned the queen, imperiously; "remove 
your prisoner." 

Chretien dropped upon his knees. 

" IIow long, O Lord, holy and true," cried he, gazing ear- 
nestly towards heaven, " dost thou not judge and avenge our blood 
on them tliat dwell upon the earth ?" 

And with these words his reverend head declined upon hia 



THE TAVILION. 

breast, while, supported hy tlie two ofTicials, he was borne out of 
the pavilion. 

" Your majesty, indeed, is an inexorable enemv," said Crieliton, 
gazing after the unfortunate preacher, with looks of the deepest 
commiseration. 

" And as unalterable a friend," returned the queen; " it is for 
3'ou now to determine, Chevalier Crichton, in which light I must 
henceforth be viewed. A word ere we part. In Henri you have 
a rival. He loves tlie Princess Esclairmonde." 

" I know it, madam — " 

*' To-night she is his, or yours.'" 

*' His slie shall never be." 

" Tlien you accept my terms ?" 

At this moment the loud blast of a bugle was heard sounding 
from the further end of the tilt-yard. 

" A knightly challenge !" exclaimed Crichton, listening for a 
repetition of the notes. 

" A kiiifjhj challenge," returned Catherine; " that trumpet blast 
is the defiance of Henri of Navarre." 

" Henri of Navarre !" echoed Crichton, in astonishment; " he then 
is the Huguenot leader whom fate hath delivered into your hands." 

" He is," replied Catherine. " I am indebted to chance for 
this important discovery. One of my demoiselles, La Rebours, as 
she rode to the Louvre, was struck with the resemblance of a 
soldier in the train of the Baron de Rosni to Henri de Bourbon. 
The circumstance was casually alluded to in my hearing. My sus- 
picions were at once aroused. Spies were instantly put upon 
the scent, and I found that the soldier was the monarch in mas- 
querade. Tlie secret must rest between ourselves, messire." 

" Fear nothing, madame," answered tlie Scot, " my lips are 
sealed." 

" I learnt also, that this fool-hardy king was about to attend 
the jousts held at the Louvre, for the express purpose of breaking 
a lance with you." 

" With me, madame ?" 

" Your renown as an expert tilter has, I conclude, reached his 
ears, and he is resolved to put it to the proof. But hark ! his 
trumpet sounds for the second time. This conference must be 
brought to a close. Y'^our answer to my proposal ?" 

" It shall be delivered after the jousts ?" 

" Our confidence in the mean time — ?" 

" Shall be held sacred. I swear it." 

*' Enough — after the jousts I shall expect you within the royal 
gallery. Place your hand, as if by accident, upon your poignard 
when you approach me. From the gesture I shall infer that you 
assent. Dieu vous garde ! messire." So saying, Catherine sum- 
moned her attendants and quitted the pavilion. 



254 CRicnTON". 

" "Wliat ho! my lance — my steed," shouted Crichton, snatchin,!:» 
his helmet from the armc-uver, who hva promptly answered hiR 
call, — " ha ! Saint Andrew, my gorget, my gauntlets ! By heaven !" 
he murmured, " to cross a lance with the bravest prince in Chris- 
tendom were reward enough for a thousand risks. Our Lady aid 
me in this essay !" 

In another instant his equipments were completed, and, vaulting 
i.ipon his steed, the Scot dashed throu2;h the entrance of the 
lists. 

No sooner was tiie coast clear, than from beneath the tapestry- 
covered table, which stood in the middle of the tent, emerged first 
a long conical cap — then a fantastic visage in which drollery was 
strangely mixed up with apprehension — and lastly the odd-shaped 
party-coloured person of Chicot — his teeth chattering and his 
limbs shaking. 

"Sang de cabres!" he cried, after castini; an anxious glance 

-r • 

around. " I have stolen here to some purpose. Pretty revelations 
I have heard. A conspiracy on the eve of bi'eaking forth! — our 
dear Henriot about to be transfixed with a lance as his father was 
transfixed before him. Had it been the cloister to Avhich he was 
condemned, I should not have cared — he had alwa3'S a taste for the 
frock — but assassination! — Cornes de diable ! I am horror-stricken. 
Old Buridan was in the right to propound his sophism — ' Refjinatn 
interjicere nolite timere honuin esse.' It would be a praiseworth}' 
act to put Queen Catherine out of the way. But Buridan's 
theories are out of fashion even in the Sorbonne. What is to be 
done? Luckily /have made no vow not to betray her majesty's 
confidence — and if I had, on an occasion like the present, I should 
not scruple to break it. What is to be done ? I ask myself that 
question for the second time. I am sorely perplexed. Who will 
believe my tale ? I shall be laughed at — cutfed — perhaps — be put 
out of the way myself — the common fate of meddlers. I have it. 
I will abide the issue of the jousts, and then confer with this Scot — 
for I can guess what answer he means to give our Jezabel. How 
runs the pasquil ? 

Twixt Catherine and Jezabel 

The diiference is small — 
The one the plague of Israel, 

The other plague of Gaul. 
But if the fate of Jezabel 

Our Catherine should bcfal, 
The very dogs would (mark mo well !) 

IlefusG to eat at all."* 

And muttering these scurrilous strains as he went, tlie jester 
crept cautiously out of the pavilion. 

• From a bitter pasquinade in the Journal uf Henri HI., entitled " Comparison 
'Calhirine et de Jezabel" 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE 15 E A K N A I S . 

Que direz-vous, fTicheux maris, de cette souffrancc ? N'aurez-vous point de 
peur, que vos feninies vous laissent pour venir a nioi ? ou u'estiiuerez-vous point 
plutut que ce fut quelque lachete. 

Divorce Satirique. 

As Crichton rode into the tilt-yard, he found Henri, encircled 
by his favourites, impatiently awaiting his return, and speculating 
upon the haughty defiance with which the walls of the Louvre 
yet resounded. 

" Away, Montjoic — awav, messieurs," cried tlie monarch, 
addressinix the kinff-of-arms and tlie heralds: " do vour devoir 
quickly, and bring us word wliat hardy champion dares to intrude 
within our lists. Par la mort-dieu ! it would seem we hold a free 
passage of arms, and not private jousts. But this adventurer, who- 
ever he may be, shall rue his temerity. Away ! and let us know his 
title and condition. Ha ! you are come," he added, as the Scot 
drew in the rein by his side — " we shall question you anon, mes- 
sire, as to the nature of your interminable conference with our 
mother. We suspect from your looks, that you have been hatch- 
ing some treason a";ainst us. Is it so ?" 

" Sire !" exclaimed Crichton, reddening. 

" By our flxith your interview hutk made you serious since you 
thus resent our jest," said the king, smiling; " and no wonder — lor, 
certes, a tete-a-tete of any duration with her majesty the queen- 
mother, is no laughing matter, even to ourself. However, upon 
the present occasion we ought to tliank, rather than chide you, for 
detaining her so long, as her absence has enabled us to lay closer 
siege to her lovely demoiselle, than we should have cared to do 
in her presence. Apropos of the fair Esclairmonde, Chevalier 
Crichton, so soon as we have disposed of this unknown challenger, 
it is our intention to splinter a lance Avith you in her honour. We 
have no fears of your disloyalty you see, or we should not thus 
heedlessly place our life at your disposal." 

" Be warned, sire !" said a deep voice, " and run no course to- 
day." 

Henri started. 

"Who speaks?" he ejaculated, turning with some misgiving, 
in the supposed direction of the sound. His looks of inquiry fell 
upon the frank countenance of the Vicomte de Joyeuse, which was 
charged witli as much astonishment as his own. 

" Remember your father's fate !" exclaimed the same deep voice 
now appearing to sound from a different quarter — " Beware !" 

" Sang-dieu !" vociferated the king, furiously. "Who dares 
thus address us? Let him stand forth." But no answer wis 
returned: nor was any movement made in obedience to Henri's 
mandate. 



256 CRiciiroN. 

The courtiers eyed each other with irlances of suspicion. No 
one, however, could tax his neighbour with having uttered the 
ominous words. 

" Jesus !" exclaimed Henri, in a tone of some uneasiness, at the 
same time secretly crossing himself, " that voice recals our idle 
terrors of last night. But there can be no sarbacane upon the pre- 
sent occasion." 

" Vive-dieu ! no, sire," cried Joyeuse, springing to the king's 
side. "But there may be other artiiice." 

" It may be well not to neglect the caution, my gi-aclous liege," 
said Saint-Luc, Avho was almost as superstitious as his sovereign. 
" Charles le Bien-Aime had his warning." 

" And our ill-fiited lather, likewise," mused the king. 

" Your majesty will not suffer yourself to be deterred from en- 
tering the jousts by this imposture," said Joyeuse; *' were 1 in your 
place, sire, I would show my contempt for this hidden traitor's 
counsel, by seizing a lance, and proceeding at once to the barriers." 

*' Joyeuse is in the right," said the Due de Nevers, with a singular 
smile; " it were an impeachment of the Chevalier Crichton's 
loyalty to refuse him, upon such light grounds, the honour of a 
career with your majesty." 

'* It is an honour which I have not sought, monsieur le Due," 
returned Crichton, sternly; " and I pray you to remember that the 
stroke by which Henri II. fell was accidtntal." 

" Speak not of it, mon cher," said the king, shuddering. 

" Servans cVamours rcgardez doulcement, 
Aux escliaffaux angcs de paradis — " 

sang Joyeuse, anxious to reassure the pusillanimous monarch, 
•' Tiiink of the bright eyes tlr-it will watch your prowess, sire: 
think of the belle Esclairmonde." 

Henri glanced towards the grand gallery; he there beheld the 
fair Princess of Conde, *' the cynosure ol' neighbouring eyes," and 
his fears instantly vanished. 

" Thou hast restored us, my brother," he said to the Vicomte, 
" We will think of the mistress of our heart. Were it to be our 
last career we would no longer hesitate." 

" It iclll be your last," said the deep voice, sounding yet more 
hollowly. 

" Ha !" ejaculated Henri, relapsing into all his former terrors, — 
^'that voice again! This passeth a jest — if a jest be intended; 
and though we pardoned our buffoon Chicot's efirontery last night, 
think not we will tolerate similar freedom to-day. Look to it, 
messeigneurs, and let our hidden monitor, who lacketh the courage 
to discover himself, in his turn beware." 

" Methinks your hidden counsellor displays more courage and 
forbearance in concealing himself," said Crichton, " than he would 
do were he to obey your mandate. He can have nothing tc 
apprehend from your majesty." 



THE BEARNAIS. 257 

At this moment, and while the utmost confusion prevailed amid 
the royul group, to Henri's infinite relief Montjoie and his atten- 
dant heralds returned. " Heaven be praised !" exclaimed the kin<% 
" if I am to be kept in the dark respectinrj this mysterious warnin"-, 
my curiosity will, at all events, be gratified on another point of 

equal interest. Thou art welcome, Montjoie. Thy news ! 

the name and condition of this hardy adventurer ? Yet hold ! 
Ere thou spcakest, I will wager the string of pearls at^ainst the 
knot of ribbands that flutters on the Chevalier Crichton's helm, 
that this champion is the Balafre." 

" I accept your wager, sire," said Crichton. " Favour a-^ainst 
favour." 

" Decide, iNIontjoie," said Henri. 

" Your majesty is the loser," returned the klng-of-arms ; '•' it is 
not tlie Due de Guise." 

"Diantre!" exclaimed Henri, reluctantly yleldln"- the fi^a^c to 
Crichton; "you are ever fortunate. It were vain to contend with 
one upon whom tlie capricious goddess constantly smiles." 

" Certes, your majesty has lost a talisman which more than tem- 
pered steel would have been proof against my lance," rejoined the 
Scot, joyfully unhelming himself, and attaching the string of pearls 
to his casque. 

Executed with consummate grace, this slight action was not un- 
observed by the lair princess by whom the ornament had been worn. 
Her situation enabled her to command the whole scene, and she 
witnessed with surprise the inexplicable conduct of the kinij towards 
his rival. Her astonishment was, however, speedily changed into 
admiration and delight as she beheld her lover's employment; 
and as she gazed upon his proud head, now divested of all cover- 
ing save that afforded by his fair and flowing tresses; as she 
looked upon the stately and snow-white throat springing from 
out his '• habiliments of war," like the moulded ncjk of An- 
tinous ; as she listened to the unrestrained praises of the dames 
by whom she was surrounded ; and the louder plaudits of 
the admiring multitude ; and as slie finally encountered his 
enamoured gaze, and felt that he to whom all this homage was 
paid rendered homage alone to her — shall we injure her in the 
esteem of the fair reader if we say that something of self-elation 
mingled with her tenderer emotions? As Crichton replaced his 
bourginot upon his brow she v/aved her hand, and her salutation 
was instantly acknowledged by the Scot with a look and ucsturo 
of the deepest devotion. 

Henri, meantime, turning to Montjoie, continued his interroga- 
tions respecting the strange knight. 

" As permitted by the laws of chivalry, my liege," returned 
jMontjole, in answer to the king's inquiry, " this champion claims 
to be exempted from the disclosure of his name." 

S 



"258 CRICHTON. 

" And thou hast recognised his right to do so, "vve will be sworn?" 
said Henri, in a petulant tone. 

" In the due discharge of mine ofTice, as^'our majesty's represen- 
tative in the court of arms, I could not do otherwise," returned 
Montjoie. 

" You have done well, sir," said tlie king, frowning. 

" I have fulfilled my duty, sire," returned Montjoie, bluntly; 
*' your father, Henri H., of glorious memory, would not have 
thus rebuked me." 

" Nor will his son," said Henri, kindly: " your pardon, my old 
and loyal servant. What title has this knight inscribed upon 
your rolls ?" 

" A strange one, sire — the Bcarnais." 

" The Bearnais !" exclaimed Henri, in surprise; "this is some 
mockery. There is but one champion in Europe who has a right 
to that title, and he is not so much in want of Avarlike pastime, 
or so fool-hardy, as to venture hither in quest of knightly adven- 
tures." 

" The cavalier is, perchance, one of the King of Navarre's 
valiant captains, who has, for the nonce, usurped his sovereign's 
title," returned Montjoie — " it may be Chatillon or D'Aubigne." 

" Is he unattended?" demanded Henri. 

" No, my liege," answered Montjoie; " his companion is the King 
of Navarre's envoy, IVIaximilian de Bethunes, Baron de Rosni." 

" Ah ! the Poly dor of our cousin Alcandre," said the king, 
smiling. 

" And the husband of the fair Dloclec," observed Joyeuse, sig- 
nificantly. 

" Aladame de Rosni is still alive, I believe, though her husband 
threatened her with the dagger and the bowl when he discovered 
her inconstancy with Henri of Navarre — eh ! marquis ?" said 
Saint-Luc, addressing Villequier. 

This was a home-tlirust. The Governor of Paris, a few years 
back, had slain his first wife, Fran^oise de la Marck, for a like fault.* 
He endeavoured, however, to parry the stroke. 

" The Baron de Rosni is a base and contented wittol," he said, 
with a sneer, "and merits his fate. Fortunate are they who 
possess spouses sufficiently ill-favoured to ensure their safety." 

The laugh was now on the governor's side, for the baroness (as 
we have before remarked) was the plainest woman of her time. 

Saint-Luc was about to make an angry retort to Villequier's 
raillery, but his petulance was checked by the king. 

" No more of this, messeigneurs," said Henri; " here comes the 
Baron de Rosni and his unknown companion. I pray you observe 
them closely." 

* Cruentus sanguine uxoris, Pictavii ob improperatani sibi propudiosam vitam 
interfecta;. Tkuauus. 



THE BEARNAIS. 259 

And as lie spoke, two kniglits completely armed, and each 
followed by an esquire bearing his shield and lance, entered the 
■champ-clos. The ibrcmost of the twain, whose stature, originally 
large, was materially increased in bulk by the ponderous plates 
of steel in which his limbs were cased, was mounted on a fiery 
jet-black barb, which required the utmost efforts of his rider's 
powerful arm to restrain his impatience. The visor of the kni<dit 
Avas closed, and through its narrow bars not even the flashing of an 
eye could be discerned. One uniform ruddy tint pervaded his 
equipments. From sallade to soUeret, his harness was crimson- 
coloured. His panache of ostrich plumes, " lotigs et luailx ;" the 
sweeping caparisons of his charger; the feathered tufts that nodded 
on the chamfVin and croup of the lordly animal; the shield and 
battle-axe that hung at his saddle-bow, were all of the same sanguine 
hue. 

Behind this champion, who, it is needless to sav, was Henri of 
Navarre, rode an esquire in livery of similar complexion, bearing 
in his right hand a lance, on the point of which fluttered a 
small silken pennon, and on liis left arm a buckler, painted with 
the simple flower so exquisitely described by a great poet of our 
time as 

A silver shield with boss of {ifolii 

That spreads itself, some Faery bold 
In fight to cover — 

and surmounted by a diadem, with the following couplet traced 
in golden characters beneath it: — 

3'aurat loufours nu ccnir cnitc 
Sur toutcs flcurs la Jtliiigucritc. 

It was evident from the device that this posy was intended as 
an allusion to Marixaret of Navarre. 

The Baron de Rosni (better known by his subsequent illustrious 
title of the Due de Sully) appeared in the same martial apparelhng 
in which he was first introduced. His long two-handed sword 
— a formidable weapon, described by a skilful professor of the 
art of defence, Giacomo di Grassi, as being '* four handfuls in the 
handle, or more, having also the great cross" — was still girt to his 
side. The housings of his steed, a powerful roan, were crimson 
and black in colour; while plumes of the same mixed hues crested 
his morion, the visor of which was raised. 

" Yon knight is of larger make than Alcandre, my liege," said 
Joyeuse ; " it cannot be he." 

" By Saint Andrew !" exclaimed Crichton, who had witnessed 
the entrance of the two chieftains with rapturous enthusiasm, " the 
glowing trappings of yon preux chevalier remind me of the lay of 
ahe brave Louis de Beauveau (as charming troubadour as he was 

S2 



260 CRICHTOy. 

expert tilter), wlicrein lie has depicted liis own appearance at the 
ioiists. Thus runs his ditty, if 1 remember ri<Thtly : — 

Ucs plus rouges ji sont pris. 
I. 

Slowly unto the listed field I rode, 

Koiige was my eharger's wide caparison; 
And the same hue that on his housing glowed, 

Purpled my shield, my spear, my morion. 

11. 

Kouge was my couvrechief, that swept the sward, 
Roii^e the tall plume that noddeil on my crest; 

And the rich scarf — my loyalty's reward — 
Blushed, like a timorous virgin, un my breast. 

III. 

My broad ensanguined shield bore this device. 

In golden letters writ, that all might see 
How for bold deeds will lightest words suffice, 

And thus it ran — ' Les plus rouges y sont pris.' " 

" Have a care! mon cher," said Joyeuse, smiling- at his friend's 
ardour. " See you not against whose shield the lance of yon 
doughty knight is directed?" 

" Now, by Saint George !" replied Crichton, striking his spurs 
into his steed, and compelling him to execute a rapid succession 
of curvets, " I am right glad the appeal has been made to me." 

" By the mem.ory of my valiant uncle, Fran9ois do Vivonne," 
exclaimed the Abbe de Brantome, who, though not hitherto 
particularised, formed one of the group of courtiers in attendance 
upon tlie king, " you are the ilower of knighthood, Chevalier 
Crichton, and appear to revive in your own person one of those 
hardy champions of Francois I., who, standing upon the very 
spot where we arc now assembled, said, in admiration of their 
achievements, 

Chateigneraye, Vieilleville, et Bourdillon, 
Sont les trois hardis compaguons!" 

" The saying would apply with equal force to the champions of 
our own time, dear a-bbe," returned Crichton, smiling. " The 
courage of the three renowned warriors you have named survives 
in their successors; the kingly courtesy of Francois is renewed in 
his grandson; and our own monarch might, with as much truth 
as his ancestor, exclaim, 

Joyeuse, Saint-Luc, et D'Epernon, 
Soiit truis chevaliers braves et bons." 



THE BEARNAIS. 261 

The three nobles smilingly acknowledged the compliment; nor 
did Henri appear less gratified than his favourites. 

" What is all this?" cried Chicot, who had now found his way 
to the side of his royal master, "what miserable distich is that I 
hear? Talk of ancestors and descendants — pouali ! — I, who am 
the descendant of the great Triboulet, who was fool to a *n-cater 
fool, and upon whom my ancestor's cap and bells as well as h'« 
office have iallen — I, Chicot, buffoon in ordinary to — 

Henri, par la prace de sa Mere, 

Inerte lloi de France, et de Pologne imaginaire, 

swear and declare upon my bauble, that 

Joyeuse, Saint-Luc, et D'Epernon 
Sont fous au merveilleux Crichton! 

And there's a better rhyme, as Avell as sounder reason for you.'' 

Henri of Navarre, meanwhile, followed by his esquire, having 
left the Baron de Rosni at the entrance of the tilt-yard, slowly 
traversed the arena, attracting universal attention, especially among 
the gentler sex, by his athletic and finely-formed figure, by the 
singularity of his equipments, and more tlian all, by his vert-gallant 
and amorous demeanour, which even danger could not subdue, 
nor bars of iron entirely conceal. The carelessness with which 
he bestrode his mettlesome and curveting charger; the continual 
movements of his helmet from side to side, as his ardent glances 
Avandered over the crowd of beauties; the majestic ease of his car- 
riage, and a thousand indescribable graces, none of which were lost 
upon the spectators, worked wonders in his favour. Something, 
indeed, there was in the gallant Bourbon's manly I'orra, that, under 
any disguise he might assume, never failed to awaken immediate 
interest in the female bosom. On the present occasion its effect 
•was little less than magical ; and as lie paused for a moment 
beneath the grand gallery, a perfect sensation was excited among 
its fair and frolic occupants. 

" Who is he ?" ran from lip to lip. 

" It is the Due d'Anjou," said Madame de Xarmoutiers. 

^' It is Bussy d'Amboisc," said Is?ibel de Montsoreau. 

*' It is the Due de Guise," said la jMaiechale de Retz. 

" ]\Ion Dieu ! mesdames, yon knight's arnjour would encase all 
three," said Torigni, screaming with laughter. " You ought to 
know your old lovers better." 

'* Unless, like the Demoiselle de Torigni, we should have had so 
many as to have forgotten all save the last," returned the mar6- 
chale, maliciousl3^ 

" Merci, madame," rejoined the Florentine, " you are quite wel 
come to attack my memory, so long as you compliment my attraci 
tions." 



262 CRICHTON. 

'' What if it be the fijendarme of the Rue Pelican ?" sighed La 
Kebours. 

" Your head has been running all the morning upon that soldier, 
demoiselle," remarked La Fosseuse, pettishly. " You thought him 
like Henri of Navarre, and now you think everybody like //eV«." 

" Ah 1 if it shoidd be the Bourbon, after all !" cried La Rebours, 
suddenly recovering her animation. 

" Whoever he may be," replied Torigni, "he has decidedly the 
finest figure of any knight in the tilt-yard — the Chevalier Crichtoii 
not excepted." 

" Name not the traitor in my hearing," observed jSIarguerite de 
Yalois, whose attention this chance allusion to her lover's name 
liad aroused. 

" Our unknown cavalier appears in search of some dame from 
whom he may solicit a favour," said the Marechale de Retz. 

" And he is so like the Due de Guise that you cannot possibly 
refuse him," rejoined Torigni. 

*' His glances are directed towards La Rebours," said La Fos- 
seuse — " see, he moves." 

" To me 1" ejaculated La Rebours, crimsoning to the temples. 
"No," she added, with a look of disappointment, "it is to her 
majesty." _ . . „ , . . 

" And see you not the device on his shield," remarked Torigni, 
" and the motto 

J'aurai toujours au cceur ccrite 
Sur toutes fleurs la Marguerite. 

He is, evidently, an aspirant to the smiles of our gracious mistress. 
Y'our majesty," continued the artful Florentine, addressing the queen 
in a low tone, " will have now an opportunity of fully revenging 
yourself upon your inconstant lover." 

"You forget whom you address, minion," replied IMarguerite, 
valnlv endeavouring to hide her emotion under the mask of 
impatience; " once more I forbid you to allude to him." 

At this moment, a page pressed forward, and bending the knee 
before the Queen of Navarre, tendered the homage of the unknown 
knight — 

" The companion-in-arms of the Baron de Rosni," he said, 
" Avlio solicits some slight token from your majesty, that he may 
splinter a lance in your behalf with the Chevalier Crichton." 

" With Crichton !" exclaimed Marguerite, rising. 

"I was In the right you see, madame," cried Torigni; but per- 
ceiving the fearful change that had taken place In the countenance 
of the queen, she checked her vivacity; " after all, she ?r//7 avenge 
herself upon her lover," thougiit the demoiselle; " that look reminds 
me of the night when Gulllaume du Prat, enticed by her caresses 
to the deed , for ever silenced the envenomed tongue of her enemy, 
Du Guast." 



THE BEARXAIS. 203- 

*' Tliis knight is tlic companion of tlio Baron Je llosni, thou 
sayst?" demanded Marguerite, with an abstracted air. 

" His brother-in-arms, madame," returned the youth 

" He sliall receive a gage from our own hand," said the queen, 
after a brief pause. 

" He will vahie it the more liighly," rejoined tlic youtli. 
" Honoured by so fair a queen, his success in tlie career is certain." 

" On my faith, beau sire, thou hast learnt thine oliice betimes," 
said Torigni, smiling. 

" Let thy lord attend us Avithin the chamber beneath this gal- 
lery," said Marguerite. " Demoiselles Torigni and La Rebours, 
you will accompany us." 

The page arose and departed. 

" INIay 1 crave a word with your majesty ?" said Esclairmonde, 
approaching the queen. 

" Your pardon, demoiselle," replied Marguerite, haughtily, 
*' we would pass." 

And she quitted the gallery, followed by her attendants. 

Having completed his survey of the fair occupants of the bal- 
cony, and despatched the message we have just heard delivered, 
Henri of Navarre spurred his steed in the direction of the pavilion^ 
before which, attached to a halbert struck deeply into the earth, 
Avas displayed Crichton's shield. Snatching a lance from his 
esquire, the monarch struck it against the targe with so much good 
will that the halbert and its clanging burden were at once borne 
to the ground ; while, startled by the noise of the falling arms, his 
charger began to rear and plunge violently. 

" Harnibleu!" muttered Henri, sharply applying his armed heel 
to the flanks of the unruly animal, and by a powerful ellbrt reducing 
him to subjection; " this froward steed is evidently imused to the 
exercise of the tilt-yard. He starts at the clatter of steel as an 
unmanaged colt winceth at the lash of tlie chambriere. He may 
know his paces; but I doubt if I shall be able to bring him to the 
rest, after the career. My .sage counsellor Kosni had, I suspect, 
his own motives in persuading me to abandon my brave old Nor- 
man charger, whom the roar of a culverin, or the clash of a thou- 
sand pikes would not aflright, and whom I can restrain with a silken 
thread, for this high-spirited and iantastic barb, because, forsooth, 
he has finer limbs, and a sleeker coat. The knave would gladly 
see me discomfited, that his own superior wisdom may. In future, 
be acknowledged. It shall go hard, however, if I do not, despite 
his ingenious stratagem, outwit him. At all events, I will not give 
him the satisfaction of perceiving the annoyance he has occasioned 
me. I have overcome greater obstacles than this rebellious animal 
presents — ay, and turned them to account, too. An enterprise 
without danger is of little worth. Invia virtuli inilla est via : — 
ha.^ ever been my device. And now for my lady's token ! Sa 
ha! sirrah — take heed ! You carry Caesar and his fortunes." 



264 CRICHTON 

Again applying the spur, and cliecking the impetuous movements 
of his steed with an arm of iron, Henri, as deliberately as he came, 
returned to the grand gallery, 

" Her majesty ■will bestow the token upon you with her own 
hand; monseigneur," said tlie page, advancing to meet him. 

"A la bonne heure !" exclaimed the king. "This is exactly 
what I wished." And dismounting, he flung tlie rein to his 
esquire, and entered the scaffold with a light and joyous footstep. 

" This way, sir knight," said one of the huissiers stationed at 
the portah " The Queen of Navarre Avill give you audience 
■within this chamber." 

A tapestried curtain, suspended before an open valve, was then 
drawn aside, and the king found himself in the presence of his 
consort. 

Henri of Bourbon was not wont to have misgivings where a 
lady was concerned. But the situation in which he was placed 
with his queen was rather embarrassing. It was a relief to 
him, therefore, to find that she was not alone. Having no such 
apprehensions, and not being aware who it was that stood before 
her, iNIarguerite immediately, on the king's appearance, dismissed 
her attendants. La Rebours lingered for an instant behind her 
companion; and as she passed the monarch, her embroidered 
handkercliief (it might have been by accident) fell to the ground. 
Henri stooped to raise it; and as he restored the perfumed mou- 
choir to its fair owner, his hand, divested of his gauntlet, contrived 
to encounter the taper fingers of the demoiselle. Assuredly it was 
not by accident that the pressure which he hazarded was so per- 
ceptibly returned. 

" Ventre-saint-gris !" muttered the king, " this is the lovely 
dame whom I beheld in the rue Pelican." 

" I will stake my life that it is Henri of Navarre," thought La 
Bebours, glancing from beneath her downcast evelids at the 
Bourbon's stately figure; "and if so,'' ran her meditations, as she 
quitted the room, "there can be no danger in trusting him with 
his queen. I need apprehend no rivalry in that quarter. Con- 
nubial devotion is certainly not Henri's foible." 

If the monarch felt disconcerted at the idea of a tete-a-tete witii 
his spouse, his embarrassment was not diminished when he found 
that this little piece of gallantry had not escaped her notice. His 
fears, however, were needless. jVIarguerite entertained no jealousy 
c^ him ; though it suited her purpose to affect some slight pique. 

" The kerchief of my demoiselle would seem to have a higher 
value in your eyes, messire," she said, " than any gage I could 
bestow, Avere it even a tress of my own hair to bind upon your 
lielm?" 

" You are mistaken, madamc," returned Henri, in a feigned 
voice, but in the impassioned tone which he had ever at command, 
** llie simple pearl is lovely in mine eyes; but the ' pearl of j)earl8' 



THE BEAKNAIS. 265 

IS that which wins my lioniafre. As Joan <Ie la Taillc, from 
whom I have borrowed the scroll upon my shield, sings, 

Co ne flit pas la paquerette 
L'oeillet, la rose, ni le lys: 
Ce tut la belle Marguerite, 
Qu'au c'ocur j'aurai toujours &rlte. 

Marguerite, vour name is inscribed upon my heart as upon my 
buckler. Recal not your boon, I implore of you. Yield me that 
treasured gage, and you ensure me victory." 

" If it jvill ensure you victory, it is yours," said Marguerite, 
eagerly. 

" What you refuse to love you readily accord to hate, I per- 
ceive." returned Henri. " You have some quarrel to avenge upon 
the Chevalier Crichton." 

" The deepest a woman has to avenge," replied Marguerite. " I 
will not disguise from you, messire, that I have to requite a lover's 
inconstancy." 

" Soli," tliought Henry " /am destined to hear my own dis- 
honour proclaimed by lips to which I cannot with propriety give 
the lie. I also have a quarrel to arrange with this Scottish 
knight," he added aloud, "and by consequence you could not 
have found a fitter champion to redress your wrongs. He has 
injured me as deeply as yourself." 

" Impossible." 

" Corbleu ! madame," returned Henri, " most men would con- 
sider my injuries the iieavier. Eut I will not contest the point. 
You are, undoubtedly, the best judge as to wliich of us is the 
greater sufferer." 

" I see to what you allude, messire," said Marguerite. " / 
have to complain of the perfidy of a lover — you of the infidelity 
of a wife." 

" Precisely so," replied Henry. 

" Wash out the stain upon your name in the traitor's blood," 
exclaimed the queen. "As to your faithless dame, if the death of 
her paramour will not content your vengeance, I swear, if she belong 
to tlie court of France, or to that of my royal husband, Henry of 
Navarre, her crime shall not pass unpunished." 

"The guilt of the adultress shall not pass unpunished," rejoined 
Henri, gravely. " But it is Avell for my faithless dame that my 
plan of retribution diiFers from that proposed by your majesty." 

" You love her, then, despite her lault?" said Marguerite. 

" No," replied Henri, mournfully — " but I have loved her — and 
for that remembered tenderness I will spare her. 

'* Your dame is fortunate in the possession of a lord so patient," 
returned Marguerite, scornfully. 

" She is more fortunate than slie deserves to be, I must own, 
inadamo," answered Henri. 



266 ciiiciiTox. 

" You may repent this weakness when it is too late." rejoined 
Marguerite. "I comprehend not how a wrong hke this can be 
forgiven." 

" Would not these words pass sentence upon yourseU", madame^ 
wore tliey uttered in the presence of the king your husband?" . 

" Speak not of Henri," said the queen. " He hath long divorced 
himself from my love. If I have been faithless consort, he has 
been faithless lord. He cannot complain. I could have loved him 
— but — no matter! It is not onn'm I would speak — but of your- 
self" 

" Two persons closely connected," thought the king. 

" Hear me !" cried Marguerite, clasping Henri's lingers with a 
hand that burnt with fever; " your dame has wronged you — you 
love her not." 

" I have already confessed as much, madame. Open not my 
bleeding wounds anew." 

" I do so but to heal them. Now, mark me. Let the result of 
this career be fatal to — to the Chevalier Crichton, and what I have 
of love is yours." 

" Ventre-saint-gris I" mentally ejaculated Henri. " This is a 
novel reward for redressing my own injuries." 

" How say you, mcvssire?" demanded the queen, impatiently. 

" Can you doubt my answer? I accept your proposal. But 
wliat assurance have I of your sincerity?" 

"My word — the word of an injured and vindictive woman — 
the Avord of a queen." 

" When her injuries are redressed, the queen may forget what 
the woman has promised." 

" The woman shall never forget that she is a queen, nor what is 
due to her as the sister, and tlie spouse of kings," returned Mar- 
guerite, haughtily. " When I laid my commands upon the Baron 
de Viteaux to slay the ribald Du Guast; when I made the same 
proposal to him that I have made to you, he hesitated not.* 
But he had loved me long." 

" /have lored you yet longer, ^larguerite," rejoined Henri, in 
a troubled tone ; " and I will do your bidding. But do not 
liken me to the assassin Viteaux." 

* Tliat these details are not exacrgerated, will be perceived by a glance a 
the subjoined account of the assassination of the Sieur Du Guast, taken fron'. 
the Journal de Henri III. "La reine Marguerite, pique'e au vif, et aniniee encore 
par les plaintes de toutes celles que IJu Guast avoit outrage'es, s'addressa 
a Guillaume Du Prat, Baron de Viteaux, alors cache' a Paris, dans le Couvent 
des Augustins, pour un nieurtre, qu'il avoit commis quelque temps auparavant 
en la personne d'Antoine d'Alegre; cde Vengayea par ses caresses a devenir son 
reitrjeiir. Viteaux, pour faire son coup, choisit le premier de Novembre, vielle do la 
Tete des ^lorts, parce que le bruit de toutes les cloches de Paris qui se f;iit 
entendre alors, ctoit propre a cachor le bruit inseparable de I'exccution 
de son eutreprise. II se rend, avec quelques autres sur le soir, au logis de 
Du Guast, monte daus sa chambre, et le trouve au lit, ou il le perce de plusieurs 
coups." 



THE BKARNAIS. 267 

" I blame not your increJullty, mcssire," said the queen, resum- 
ing all her softness and blandisjiment of manner; "it could not 
be otherwise. That I should alFect to love one -whom I never 
before beheld — with whose features — with whose name I am alike 
imacquainted — were to belie myself — to deceive you. But there 
is something in the tone of your voice that inspires me with 
confidence. I have unhesitatingly trusted you with the hidden 
purposes of my soul. As loyal knight you will not betray them. 
Obey my behests, and I will fulfil my promise. You ask for some 
token of my truth. Here is one will remove all doubts ;" and 
as she spoke, she took from her neck a carcanet of pearls, the lustre 
of which was eclipsed by the dazzling fairness of her skin ; " this 
ornament was the gift of Henri of Navarre." 

" Diable!" ejaculated the king. 

" It was given me on our espousals — it is yours." 

" Could Henri of Navarre have anticipated you would part with 
it thus, his hand should have been hacked ofi" at the wrist ere he 
had bestowed it." 

"How?" 

" I crave your majesty's pardon. I have a strange habit of put- 
ting myself in the situation of other people, and for the moment 
fancied myself your credulous husband. Give me the chain." 

" Remove your casque, then, and with my own hand I will 
attach the collar to it." 

Henri appeared irresolute. 

*' Trifle not," said the queen, " but to the lists. And then death 
to the traitor, and confusion to your faithless dame !" 

"Be it so," replied the king, unhelming himself, and gazing 
sternly at his consort. " Take back your own words, Marguerite, 
— confusion to my faithless dame I" 

" Henri !" ejaculated the queen, gazing at him as if she beheld 
a spectre. " Pity — pity !" 

" Be silent, madame," said the king; " this is my retribution." 

Marguerite made an effort to control herself — but in vain. Her 
limbs failed her, and she sank senseless into the arms of La Rebours, 
who most opportunely flew to her assistance. 

" Give me thy kerchief, ma mie," said Henri, to the demoiselle; 
" it shall be my gage instead of this polluted carcanet. And now, 
thy hand — nay, thy lips, sweet one; we shall meet again anon." 

" Success attend your majesty," said La Rebours, as tlie king 
departed. " Give me joy, Torigni," she added, when the latter 
appeared; " my fondest hopes are realised." 

" Li what way?" asked the Florentine. 

" Hush 1 her majesty revives — the intelligence is not for her 
ears." 

" Is he gone?" gasped Marguerite. 

" He has returned to the lists, madame," replied La Rebours. 



268 CRICHTON. 

" And my gage?" asked tlie queen. 

*' Is tliere," answered the attendant, pointing, maliciously, to 
the neglected pearls. 

" Assist me to that fauteuil, Torigni," said the queen, withdraw- 
ing herself from the support of La Kebours. " If Crichton proves 
victorious in this conflict, bid the Demoiselle Esclairmonde attend 
me here." 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE BARB. 

La seconde venue 



Guerry encor, j'en ay bien souvenance, 
L'autre ronipit, et depuis contenance 
N'ot son destrier a la lice approchier, 
Et car long temps ne se peuvent touchier. 

Louis de Beauveau. 

CuiCHTOX, meantime, in answer to the defiance of tlie King of 
Navarre, instantly proceeded to the entrance of the Hsts, executing, 
as lie rode thither, so many graceful curvets and liigh passades 
(wliich latter, according to Pluvinel, constitute " la xrayt pierre 
de tuHclte du bon chevulier, ct du ban c/ieval") that the air resounded 
with the applause of the spectators, and tlie tide of popular 
opinion, which a breath will ever turn, again ran higii in his 
favour. 

Stirred by their shouts, and still more elated by the prospect of 
an encounter with his kingly and chivalrous antagonist ; perceiv- 
ing, also, that the Bourbon liad dismounted, and that the pales 
(again hastily stretched across the area under the direction of the 
Vicomte de Joyeuse and Montjoie) were not yet firmly fastened to 
their supporters, the Scot called to his esquire, and taking his spear, 
with the ostensible purpose of breathing his charger, performed a 
brilliant course alone. 

Nothing could exceed the rapidity and dexterity with which this 
pass was made. The animal seemed to obey every impulse of liis 
rider. Starting from his post with a snort of wild delight, he 
launched into the career as if he would bear down all oppo- 
sition by his fury. Crichton threw the rein upon his shoulder, and 
flung his heavy lance into the air — caught it — again tossed it aloft 
— and repeated this extraordinary feat for a third time, ere the 
h.aunches of his steed seemed to stiffen into marble on liis arrival 
at the point of rest. Universal acclamations rewarded this trium- 
phant exhibition of knightly skill. 

But the admiration of the beholders amounted to the most rap- 
ttu'ous enthusiasm as they witnessed what next ensued. The Scot 
shouted to the attendants, and, in obedience to his command, the 
ring em{)loyed in the tourney was instantly attached to an elevated 



THE BAuii. 2(39 

post, forming part of the framework of the lists. Executlnir a 
(lenii-volte Avith curvets, lie again started on his career; agiiin 
thrice luuled his spear aloft; and, maintaining throughout '"this 
gallant action an unaltered carriage of body, moving only the ri'-ht 
arm, as occasion demanded, finally carried off the prize uponliis 
hince's point. This performance (prolonged in description) was 
tlic work only of a few seconds. 

The dames waved their kerchiefs; tlic sergeants of the o-uard 
clashed their halberts ; the mob flung their caps into the air, 
without being so successful in regaining them as the Scut had 
been in the recovery of his spear ; the bosoms of the youthful 
nobles beat high with ardour and emulation; even the members of 
the royal group Avere loud in their applauses. 

" Honneur mixjils ties preuw T exclaimed Brantome, with tran- 
sport; " that course was bravely executed." 

" A marvellous exploit, certes, n^.y dear abbe," said Henri. 
" Your valiant uncle, the Sieur de la Chatelgnerayc, with all his 
address In horsemanship, and expcrtness in the management of 
arms, could scarcely have achieved that amazing feat." 

" Ic may not occur to your majesty's recollection, but precisely 
the same feat as that we have just witnessed, was performed bv 
the Sleur dela Chateigneraye In the presence of your royal father," 
returned Brantome. " My brave uncle has occn surpassed by no 
knight, living or dead, in vigour and address." 

" Save by Gul de Chabot, abbe," cried the jester, with a scofling 
grimace. " The cuup de Jurnac has passed into a proverb. It 
will be fortunate for our dear Henrlot if the coup dc Crichtun 
do not supersede it." 

" A truce to this!" said the king; " thy jesting Is ill-timed." 

" Good counsel is generally so, compere," retorted Chicot. " If, 
however, after this specimen of Crichton's consummate skill, like 
yon unknown knight, you are so madly adventurous as to tilt with 
him, I shall say of you, what one wiser than I am said of the 
king, your father — 

Sire, vous n'cstcs plus, vous n'estes plus que cirel'' 

" You shall say wiiat you please of us, scelerat," returned the 
good-humoured monarch, laughing ; " If we do hazard the safety 
of our royal person, and endanger our hitherto untarnished repu- 
tation as a knight, by entering the lists with this invincible Scot, 
Avhom Sathan certainly abetteth. But see! his fool-hardy clial- 
lenger again takes the field — ha ! mort Dieu ! what is this ? Our 
Bearnais (if he must be so designated) tears the silken streamer 
from his spear, and casts it beneath his charger's hoofs." 

" Observe, also, my liege, that lie replaces it with a kerchief," 
interposed Brantome ; " and note, moreover, that this kerchief 
lias not the golden fringe which is worn by the Queen of Navarre 



270 CRICHTOX. 

Her majesty, whose colours lie hath rashly assumed, has evidently 
refused him a fovour — ha I — ha !" 

" There is nothing extraordinary in that, Seigneur Abbe, seeing 
that the Admirable Crichton is in the case," returned Chicot. " I 
warrant me, if thou hadst been his opponent, this cavalier's suit 
would not have been fruitless. Let it suffice that he has a gage 
— no matter what — or whence obtained — 

Wliat a queen hath denied him, 
A quean liath supplied liim ; 
And the fovour he beareth 
No favourite shareth : 
His choice is a right one 
"With kerchief a white one, 
To tilt against Crichton." 

" By Phoebus ! gossip !" exclaimed the king, " thou rhymest 
like Frere Jean, en cranioisi. But hark! the charge is sounded. 
jMontjoie's arrangements are completed. Allons ! messeigneurs. 
Hola ! Du Halde, my warder ! Hast thou contrived Ruggieri's 
€scape ?" he added, in a whisper. 

" He is already without the Louvre, my liege," returned the 
chief valet, in the same tone. 

" The fair Esclairmonde is ours, then !" ejaculated Henri, with 
triumph. 

And, followed by his favourites, he proceeded to the canopy and 
took his seat upon the throne. 

By this time the area of the tilt-yard was cleared of its nume- 
rous intruders. The marshals of the field hastened to their tri- 
bunal; Montjoie hurried to the estrade reserved for himself and 
his attendants ; Avhile each cavalier sought to secure for himself 
an advantageous position for the approaching spectacle. For the 
moment all was bustle and clamour. But, above the shouts of the 
various officers, stationed (it would seem in all ages), not so 
much to preserve order as to increase confusion, the trampling 
and neighing of steeds, and the jingling of martial equipments, 
arose the loud fanfare of the trumpeter, making " young pulses 
dance" with its stirring notes. 

As the blast died away, profound silence ensued. The two 
champions and their esquires alone occupied either extremity of 
the barriers. Each regarded his antagonist with curiosity. On 
the part of Crichton the feeling was one of enthusiastic delight : 
on that of Henri of Bourbon admiration was chilled by deep sense 
of wrong. Nevertheless, his frank and noble nature could not 
resist the Scot's high claims to consideration ; and as he narrowly 
scrutinised his matchless symmetry of figure, and consummate grace 
of demeanour, he, who was no harsh judge of woman, felt half 
disposed to overlook his consort's fault. 

" Ventre-saint-gris !" he mentally ejaculated; " a likely galliard 



THE B\RR. 271 

to please the fancy of a queen — and v.-orth a tliousand sucli mlfr- 
n:;.i(I voluptuaries as the balladin La j\Iole, or tliat grand defionte 
liA'cnnc. I could for<,dvc liis attentions to Marguerite. But there 
is our fair cousin of Conde — I must punish his presumption in that 
quarter. Sa ha ! the devil is in his steed." 

Crichton now drew liis visor over his glowing check, and re- 
pressing the tumultuous emotions of his heart, with a light and 
steady hand placed his lance in its rest. The trumpet sounded for 
the second time, and Henri was about to follow the Scot's example, 
in expectation of the signal of assault, wlicn, affrighted by the 
kerchief fluttering over his head, his iiery charger, disregarding 
all restraint, broke from his post, and dashed headlong into the 
area. 

Expert in all martial exercises, the chivalrous Bourbon was one 
of the most perfect horsemen of his time, and his arm was 
endowed with no ordinary vigour; but neither skill nor strength 
availed him on the present emergency. Encumbered by hi«»<lance, 
which he was unwilling to throw aside, he could only employ his 
left hand in coercion — while, deeply mortified and irritated at the 
occurrence, his efforts were in the first place directed rather to the 
punishment than the subjection of his unruly steed; — and this 
made matters worse. Each application of the spur was followed 
by a fierce and violent plunge. The infuriated animal reared, 
jerked, winced, and resorted to every vicious practice and strata^eni 
to dislodge his rider. In this he failed. But, in his turn, his rider 
failed in compelling him to approach the lists. 

At this juncture, and just as the monarch, full of wrath against 
his counsellor Rosni, began to despair of accomplishing his point, 
assistance was afforded him from a quarter whence it could have 
been least anticipated. Perceiving the Bourbon's inability to 
g;overn his charger, Crichton rode towards him — and in a tone of 
the highest courtesy proffered to exchange steeds with him ; ex- 
pressing, at the same time, his perfect conviction that he could 
achieve the animal's subjection, and carry him safely through the 
course. 

" By the soul of Bayard !" returned the Bourbon, v/ith equal 
courtesy, " fame hath not belied you, Chevalier Crichton. Your 
proffer is worthy of a brighter age of chivalry, and should have 
been made to a Avorthier knight than myself. In acceding to 
your proposal I feel that I acknowledge my defeat. In any case 
you are victor in point of generosity. Nor Avill I by a refusal rob 
you of additional honour." So saying, he flung himself from Ins 
charger's back. 

" It follows not, because I may be the more expert horseman, tliat 
I shall also prove the more expert tilter," returned Crichton, dis- 
mounting. 

"If you overcome the impetuosity of this froward beast, you 
will accomplish a feat more diflicult than that of Alexander of 



272 CRICHTON. 

Macedon," rejoined the Bourbon. " But If you succeed in brirp* 
ing liiin to the pales, look well to yourself — 1 promise you the re- 
ception due to so valiant a champion: — 

Les plus jolis n'ont pas a leur plaisance 
Aucune fois I'honneur et le renoni." 

" You Avill find me no faineant," replied Crichton. " Nor do J 
think so li^^htly of your prowess as to neglect your caution." 

At tliis moment the Baron de Rosni, attended by Montjoie and 
Joyeuse, rode up to them. 

" Sire," said Rosni, in a whisper, " I pray you take my steed." 

" Stand back, sir !" returned the Bourbon, coldly. 

" Chevalier Crichton," said Rosni, turning to the Scot. 
" mount not that ungovernable horse — my charger is at your 
service." 

Crichton replied by vaulting into the saddle of the King of Na- 
varre, and giving the rein to the barb, he careered round the tilt- 
yard, as if he was borne by one of the winged horses of the sun. 

" Courage, nion Admirable," cried Joyeuse, looking after him, 
with a smile. 

Vain were the efforts of the nigh frantic steed to shake his firm- 
seated rider; — he had to strive against one with whom contention 
was Ineffectual. Crichton, for the moment, allowed him to expend 
his fire. He then struck spurs fiercely Into his sides, and com- 
pelled him to execute upwards of twenty caprioles in a breath. 
His fury now visibly abated; and the Scot completed his mastery 
by another career, and a swift succession of curvets. The next 
moment the animal stood controlled and motionless at the entrance 
of the lists. 

The loudest plaudits would have followed this achievement had 
not all clamour been interdicted during the actual progress of the 
jousts. As it was, an irrepressible murmur testified the wonder- 
ment and delight of the spectators. 

The clarion now sounded for the third time, and the combatants 
started on their career. Both lances were splintered by the vehe- 
ment shock of their encounter. But no injury was sustained on 
either side. A similar result followed the second atteinte. 

" Give me that painted spear, It Is of tougher wood," said Criciiton. 
to his esquire, while the trumpet was blown for the third assault. 
And couching his lance, as he again sprang forward, he di- 
rected it, with unerring aim, against the crest of his antagonist's 
morion. 

The result of the career was decisive. The shock was more 
violent than those of the preceding rencounters. The lance of the 
Bourbon, whose mark had been the centre of the Scot's helm^ 
again shivered to the handle; while the stroke of Crichton, into 
whlcli he had thrown all his force, would unquestionably have 



THE ENGLISHMAN. 275 

unhorsed liis adversary, had not the hehnet of the monarcli, which 
liad never been firmly fastened since his interview with his queen, 
yielded to the blow, and rolled to the ground. 

"Bondieu!" exclaimed Henri III., rising, " it is the Bt^arnais 
— it is our brother of Navarre. We should recognise that Bourbon 
nose among a thousand. What ho ! — our steed ! our steed. — 
Where is our mother? — where is her majesty, Catherine de 
]\Iedicis? We would speak witli her, ere we confront tlie 
hardy traitor. Surround us, messeigneurs, and let our body- 
guard be trebled. Some conspiracy may — nay, must be on foot. 
What think you of it, Villequier, and you, cousin of Nevers? 
See to the outlets of the tilt-yard. Suffer none to go forth, or to enter. 
By Saint Hubert I we have snared a tiger." 

Crichton, meantime, had reined in his steed, and returned to 
the Bourbon. "Sire!" he said, speaking in a low, determined 
tone, " I have, imwittingly, betrayed you to your foes. But 
if you will confide in me, I pledge myself to accomplish your 
deliverance." 

" My counsel to your majesty," interposed Rosni, '* would be 
to hasten to the king your brother, and if possible obtain permis- 
sion to depart with your escort ere he have time to confer with the 
queen-mother. It is your only hope." 

Henri averted his head from his confidant. "Chevalier Crich 
ton," he said, addressing the Scot, " I will trust you. There is 
my hand." 

" If I take it not, sire," replied Crichton, " your majesty will 
understand my motive, when I say that the eyes of Catherine de 
Medicis are upon us." 

" True," replied the Bourbon, " and those of our fair cousin of 
Conde, also — hem ! clrevalier." 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE ENGLISHMAN. 

Where'er I wander, boast of this I can, 
Though banish'd, yet a true-born Englishman. 

Shakspeare. Richard 12. 

The majestic and remarkable countenance of Henri of Navarre 
(a face once seen, not readily forgotten) had been instantly re- 
cognised by the majority of the assemblage ; and such of the 
crowd as were unacquainted with his features, speedily gathered 
his title from the general vociferations. Coupled with various and 
most discordant epithets, his name now resounded from every 
quarter. Some applauded his bravery and bonhommle ; some 
■derided his imprudence and temerity; others railed bitterly and 
loudly against his heresies, and apostacy from the religion of 

T 



274 CKicnxoN'. 

Rome (wliose tenets Henri, not over-scrupulous on matters of 
faith, embraced or renounced, as circumstances required); others, 
on the contrary, silently and devoutly hailed him as the cham- 
pion of their creed. A lew there were, who fancied they dis- 
covered in his sudden appearance in the midst of his foes, a 
signal for an insurrection and massacre, in retaliation for the 
sanguinary day of Saint-Barthelemi, and held themselves iu 
readiness to obey his mandates; while another, and more nume- 
rous fiicticn, deeply interested in all events affecting their 
project, regarded the occurrence as singularly inauspicious. Ca- 
therine de Medicis, alone, viewed the discovery without surprise 
or dismay. 

Popular by his affability, generosity, and manliness (qualities 
which afterwards won for him the affectionate appellation — yet 
hallowing his name in the breast of every true Frenchman — ol 
'•' le ban rof), the Bourbon, even during the period of his deten- 
tion within the Louvre, had attached no inconsiderable party to 
his cause ; and amongst the youthful and light-hearted nobles 
then present, there Avere many whose zeal would have prompted 
them to declare themselves in his favour, had any attempt been 
made upon his life. The situation, therefore, of the intrepid 
monarch, who, attended by Crichton and Rosni, remained 
unmoved, with his hand upon the pommel of his sword, and a 
smile upon his lips, was not fraught with so much peril as at first 
sight would appear. 

Joyeuse and D'Epernon, with several of the immediate and 
loyal adherents of Henri IH., flew to each outlet of the tilt-yard,, 
re-info reed the guard, and issued the king's commands to allow 
none to enter or to pass forth from the arena. 

Before these orders could be obeyed, a man of robust appear 
ance, and square, stout make, rushed upon the ancient, or standard- 
bearer of the guard, plucked from his side a long two-handed 
sword, leapt over the palisades of the lists, and, followed by a 
huge dog, made the best of his way in the direction of Henri of 
Navarre, 

The action was too sudJenly and too swiftly executed to be 
prevented. But the flying figure of the man catching the eye of 
the Vicomte de Joyeuse, he struck his spurs into his charger, 
and dashed in pursuit with the intention of cutting him down. 
Nothing could have prevented the fugitive's destruction but the 
timely assistance afforded by his four-footed companion. Just a? 
Joyeuse had overtaken him, and was about to discharge a blow , 
which must have proved fatal, the career of his steed was checkec 
by the dog, whose fangs were suddenly fixed within the nostrils o. 
the terriOed animal. At the same moment the man turned and 
stood upon his defence. 

With eyes starting from their sockets, veins distended, flanks 
quivering, liead borne to the ground by the weight of the dog,. 



THE ENGLISHMAN. 275 

and nostrils gushing witli blood, the poor horse uttered a shrill 
neigh, sounding almost like a scream ; but attempted neither to 
move nor to free himself from his fierce assailant. Exasperated 
beyond endurance at the condition of his steed, Joyeuse directed 
his next assault again?t the hound. 

" Hold !" exclaimed Blount. " Touch a hair of my dog's hide, 
and, by Saint Dunstan ! I Avill no longer stay my hand." 

Joyeuse replied by aiming a downward blow at the English- 
man. Blount received the stroke upon the edge of his sword, 
and returned it with such good effect that the vicomte's rapier was 
beaten from his grasp, and whirled to some distance. 

" Call off thy dog, villain," shouted Joyeuse, furiously, " or 
thou shalt repent it. Ha ! Vive-dicu !" he added, as several of 
his attendants rode up, "seize him! If he resists, show him no 
quarter — yield, madman ?*' 

" Never !" replied Blount, stoutly, " were they ten times 
their number. I ask no quarter, and will yield to no man, 
or men. It shall not be said that an Englishman sued for mercy, 
while his hand could wield a sword. Come on, then, my 
masters — one, and all — and try the force of an English arm. 
Your sires have felt the weight of our blows at Crcci and 
Poitiers — and their sons shall find that our bull-dog breed is not 
degenerated, or his country disgraced, in the person of Simon 
Blount." 

*' Why do you hesitate ?" thundered Joyeuse. 

" Wliy do they hesitate ?" echoed Blount, in a taunting tone, at 
the same time flourishing his tremendous blade with the greatest 
ease over his head. " Because I am an Englishman. They are six 
and I am one. They are mounted, I on foot. They have sword 
and partisan — I, sword only. They are Frenchmen — I am an 
Englishman. By my troth ! we are fairly matched." 

" Silence him!" cried Joyeuse. 

But this was no such easy matter. The inert, but sturdy 
Islander was now fairly roused from his habitual lethargy. His 
arm and tongue were alike in motion. He answered with a roar of 
defiance. 

" Silence me! quotha. E'en let them, if they can! But they 
have good reasons for their forbearance. Their memoiies serve 
them too faithfully. They recollect the bygone times of the Regent 
Bedford — when a French noble was obliged to doff his cap to an 
English churl. Old Kabelais has told them of our thirst — and at 
whose cost we allayed it." 

" Cravens ! will ye bear this ?" cried Joyeuse. " He says truly 
— ye are six to one." 

" It was the same at Azincourt," retorted Blount, " and ye know 
by whom that day was won." 

" That day was not won by big words, sirrah," rejoined Joyeuse, 
amazed at the Englishman's audacity. 

T 2 



276 CRICHTON. 

"Riglit!" exclaimed Blount, waving his sword, as if selectinf» 
a mark. " I thank you for the hint. I have ah-eady talked too 
much." 

" Despatch this hound witli your pike, Baptiste," shouted 
Joyeuse, " and liberate my wounded cliarger." 

'I he man instantly obeyed, and thrust his partisan through the 
throat of Druid. Severely, but not mortally wounded, the coura- 
geous brute still maintained his grasp. 

" Hew him in pieces !" vociferated Joyeuse. " It is the nature 
of the accursed animal to cling thus, while aught of life remains." 

Another man-at-arms now took up the attack ; and in his endea- 
vour to cleave asunder the dog's skull, which he was only prevented 
from effecting by tlie resistance made by his thick hide, struck off 
his right ear and fore paw. 

Blinded by his own blood, and frightfully mutilated, Druid kept 
his liold with unflinching tenacity. 

" Saint George for England !" shouted Blount. And as lie 
spoke, his sword whistled through the air, and the man-at-arms 
fell headless to tlie ground. " Here is a sweet morsel for thee, 
Druid," he added, with a savage laugh, at the same time spurning 
with his heel the gory liead, which had dropped near him. " Come 
hither, sirrah, quick :" 

Obedient to his master's call, the dog yielded that compliance 
whicli he had refused to commands, enforced by sharpest blows; 
and at once, set free the vicomte's charger. Uttering a piercing 
cry, the latter animal galloped, with uncontrollable speed, to the 
farther end of the lists ; where, fortunately, his career was stopped 
by one of tlie heralds, and Joyeuse was enabled to dismount. 

Blount's assailants were now reduced to five. But he was on 
all sides surrounded; and fresh foes were pouring against him from 
each quarter of the tilt-yard. Undismayed by numbers, and sup- 
ported by his constitutional phlegm, he viewed his probable end with 
indifference, and resolved to meet it as became a brave man, and a 
denizen of that island nook, which, in the words of the greatest of 
her sons, " breedeth very valiant children." 

" Would I were with my back against a wall," he thought, 
" I would take far greater odds, and give them ruder welcome than 
they brmg. As it is, with this long poking-iron so luckily ob- 
tained, I will carbonado some of their doublets after a fashion in 
which they were never slashed before. Gules shall predominate 
over or and azure in their emblazoned coats." 

And as these reflections ran through his mind, his sword again 
described a tremendous circle, in the course of which it encountered 
the various weapons of his antagonists, who were thrusting and 
striking at him from all points, and finally descending upon the 
shoulder of the halberdier, by whom Druid had been first wounded, 
the man, cloven almost to the girdle, fell to the ground. 

" Huhet .'" cried Blount, laughing, and again whirling round his 
ensanguined blade. 



THE ENGLISHMAN. 277 

In the midst of this gladiatorial dispLiy, which was rcf^arded hv 
the beholders, even of the gentler sex, with the same licrcc anil 
thrilling interest that prevailed amongst the witnesses of the ter- 
rible entertainments held within a Roman circus, we shall take 
breath for an instant to describe more fully the weapon used by 
our English combatant. We have before adverted to the treatise 
of Giacomo di Grassi,* — 

-a man of f::rcat defence, 



Expert in battles, and in deeds of armes — 

and we shall now give the manner of wielding the two-edged 
sword, as delivered by the Italian professor. In the words of his 
quaint translator we are told that " one may with it (as a galleon 
among manie gallies) resist manle swords, or other weapons. And 
it is accustomed to be carried in the citie, as well by night as by 
day, wlien it so chaunceth that a few are constrayned to withstand 
a great manie. And because his weight and bigness require great 
strength, therefore those only are allotted to the handling thereof 
which are mightie and blgge to behould, great and stronge in 
bodle, of stout and valiant courage. Who (forasmuch as they 
arc to encoimter manie, and to the end they may strike the more 
safclie, and amaze them with the furie of the sword) do altogether 
use to deliver great edfje-blows, downright and reversed, fetching 
a full circle or compass therein, staying themselves sometimes upon 
one foot, sometimes on the other, utterlle neglecting to thrust, and 
persuading themselves that the thrust serveth to amaze one man 
onelie, but these edge-blows are of force to encounter manle. 
The which manner of skirmishing, besides that it is most gallant 
to behold, being accompanied with exceeding swiftness in deliverie 
(for otherwise it worketh no such effect) it is also most profitable, 
not properly of itselfe, but because men considering the furie ot 
the sword, which greatly amaseth them, are not resolute to doe 
that, which otherwise they could not choose but doe." 

All that Di Grassi has here so graphically depicted, was per- 
formed by Blount — and more than this ; lor so great was his 
activity and dexterity — so nimble was he in the management and 
recovery of his weapon — so tremendous was its sweep, " being of 
the compass of ten arms or more," that in the space of a few 
moments he had disabled a third opponent, and beaten off the 
others. 

" Hurrah!" he shouted, with lusty lungs, tossing, as he spoke, 
his bonnet into the air; "hurrah! for England, and God save 
Queen Bess." 

At the same time, as if partaking of his master's triumph, 
Druid upturned his mangled visage, and uttered a loud and exult- 
ing howl. 

* Giaeomo di Grassi, his True Arte of Defence. First written in Italian hy the 
foresaid author, and Englished by 1. G., Gentleman, 1594. 



278 CRICHTON. 

" Poor fellow!" said Blount, liis heart smiting him as he heard 
the sound. " Thou art sorely luirt : but I have amply avenged 
thee," he added, looking grimly around; "we can at least die 
together — thou wouldst never survive thy master." 

The faithful dog understood this appeal. His fierce howl changed 
to a piteous moan. 

" Peace, sirrah !" cried Blount, angrily; " no whimpering. Thou 
art wounded, or I would bestow a buffet on thee for thy cowardice. 
An English bull-dog — and whine?" 

The red flame in the dog's eyes at this reproof blazed yet more 
fiercely, and his fangs were instantly displayed. 

" AVhy, that is right," cried Blount, in a tone of approval. 

Whereupon, shouldering his gigantic blade, and keeping his 
eye steadily fixed upon the movements of his foes, though menaced 
with immediate, and, it would seem, inevitable destruction, in order 
to show his utter disregard of tlie peril in wliich he stood, he began 
to carol in a rough, but not inharmonious voice, the following 
homely stave* — 

BruiU. 
I. 

Through the world have I wandered wide, 
With never a wife, or a friend liy my side. 
Save Druid — a comrade staiincii and tried: — 

Troll on away ! 
Druid, my dog, is a friend in need, 
Druid, my dog, is a friend indeed, 
]Jruid, my dog, is of English breed! 

More need I say? 

Troll on awaif 

II. 
Druid would perisli my life to save, 
For faithful Druid like fate /"</ brave. 
The dog and his master shall find one grave. 

Troll on away! 
Life! I heed not its loss a featlier! 
And when black Atropos snaps my tether. 
She must cut 'wice — we'll die together! 

No more I'll say, 

Troll on away ! 

In enumerating the good and evil qualities of Henri HI., we 
have before mentioned his singular predilection for the canine 
species. His attachment to dogs was as strong as his aversion to 
cats. Upon the commencement of the skirmish just described, the 
royal train, by their sovereign's command, had halted, and Henri's 
attention, throughout, had been attracted towards Druid, whose 
courage and fidelity he could not sufficiently admire and applaud. 
It was owing to this circumstance that Blount remained so long 
unmolested. 



TIIK ENGLISHMAN. 270 

"What would I give for a follower ?o faithful!" said tlie 
"king. " Such a hound Avcre worth a whole pack of barbcts and 
spaniels, with my two fiivourites, Citron and Chatelard, at their 
head. I must possess him. Miron will speedily heal his wounds. 
But how shall we get rid of his master, without doing the dog 
further mischief ?" 

" Let your arquebussiers fire upon the knave, my liege," said 
the Duo do Nevers, in a low tone; " and, if a stray l)all s/itm/d reach. 
the 15earnais, your majesty will have an enemy the less. Maurevert 
is behind us, armed with the same calivcr with wliich Coligni was 
wounded. A look will suffice for hlin.'' 

*' Thanks, fair cousin," returned Henri, " but we are in no such 
hurry. We see no reason to suspect treachery on the part of our 
brother of Navarre, lie appears as much diverted as ourself with 
this fray. Besides," he added, smiling, " avc have not yet con- 
sulted our mother upon the expediency of a step so important in its 
consequences." 

" I will answer for her majesty's approval," returned the duke, 
hastily. 

'^''Yvur exclaimed the king, with a look of surprise. "Are 
vou our mother's confidant, Monsieur le Due? What reason 
have you to suppose she would desire the death of the Bear- 
nals ?" 

"Because," replied Chicot, boldly, "he is like the wrong king 
unexpectedly turned up at Primero ; he spoils the order of the 
cards, and ruins the game." 

"Parbleu! what game, compere?" demanded the monarch. 

" Your majesty forgets the dog you are anxious to save," inter- 
rupted the duke, darting an angry glance at the jester; " another 
moment and it will be too late." 

" Right !" cried Henri; " command yon men-at-arms to stay their 
swords, and let a company of arquebussiers advance." 

The king's orders were instantly obeyed. The soldiers, who had 
rushed to the assistance of their comrades, reluctantly withdrew. 
A dozen arquebussiers, attired in richly-emblazoned doublets of 
crimson frieze, girded in at the waist by broad leathern belts, from 
which depended matches ofliglited tow; with great ruils round their 
throats, pale green hose upon their lower limbs, and roses of ribbons, 
almost as large as the shoes they covered, upon their feet; each 
carrying on his right arm a huge bell-mouthed musquet, and on his 
left a forked staff intended to support it — this troop, headed by 
jVIaurevert, the hired assassin of Charles IX. (and surnamed 
le Tacnr dit Rui), swiftly advanced, ranged themselves in two lines 
by the side of the king, planted their ibrks In the ground, pointed 
tiieir artillery against the Englishman's breast, and awaited only 
the royal mandate to fire. 

Blount witnessed these proceedings without dismay. When he 



280 ciuciiTox. 

saw the deatli-Jealing tubes levelled against him, he stooped to the 
ground, and catching Druid in liis arms, breathed tlie words of his 
song — 

The dog and his master sh.iU find one grave ! — 

fully prepared to meet his fate. 

'•Hold!" exclaimed Henri; "some fiend hath put it into the 
knave's head to defeat our object. Bid him surrender at discretion, 
Maurevert. Once get possession of his dog, and deal with him as 
you list. But I charge you, on your life, do the animal no further 
injury." 

Maurevert stepped forwards. Blount, however, sturdily refused to 
yield up his sword. 

At this moment, and while Henri, ever irresolute when resolu- 
tion was required, hesitated to give the signal to the arquebussiers, 
Crichton rode up. " I will disarm him, sire." he said, " if I have 
your majesty's permission to do so." 

" Grammercy ! mon cher, you have our permission at once, 
and to slay him, too, if it please you, provided you harm not the 
dog." 

" One will scarcely succumb without the other, I suspect, my 
liege," replied the Scot. " We shall see." 

Savinir which, he dismounted, and sivinw his steed to the charge 
of an attendant, advanced towards Blount. 

"Are you mad?" he said, sternly, as he arrived within a few 
paces of the Englishman, '• that you adopt this braggart posture? 
Yield ! and I may yet preserve your life." 

" I should hold it foul scorn were such Avords to pass my 
lips, even at your bidding, Chevalier Crichton," replied Blount, 
doggedly. 

" Fool !" said the Scot, in a low and significant tone, " this 
'is but a feint. Throw down your sword. I will be your safe- 
guard." 

" Were I to do so it would seem as if I yielded," rejoined 
Blount; "and I would rather die a thousand deaths than these 
accursed Frenchmen should be able to crow over me." 

" Defend yourself, then," exclaimed Crichton, plucking his 
rapier from the scabbard. 

" If I fall by your hands I shall die the death I would have 
chosen," replied Blount. " Yet think not I will perish tamely. 
I hold it too good luck to cro?s swords with you, not to approve 
myself worthy of the honour. But our blades are ill-matched. I 
cannot fight without equal arms." 

" I have helm and corslet," answered Crichton ; " you have 
neither buff jerkin, nor steel cap. The advantage is on my 
side." 

•' Down, Druid," said Blount, quitting his hold of the dog, 



THE ENGLISHMAN. 281 

" Stir not — use neither tooth nor claw. ChcvaHer Cricliton " 
he added, in a tone of some emotion, " if I fall — this hound — " 
" I understand," replied Cricliton. " I will be his master." 

" No!" said Blount, " I meant not that— despatch him." 

" Waste no more words in this idle parley," returned Crichton, 
fiercely. " My blows are for men. not dogs. Again, I sav, defend 
yourself" 

" Saint George for England !" shouted Blount, fetching a com- 
pass with his sword that dazzled the eyes of the beholders like a 
llash of lightning. But rapid as was this circle — not so swift was 
it as the corresponding movement of the Scot. Instead of endea- 
vouring to avoid the blow, or to encounter its force, Avhcrc it was 
most dangerous, at a distance, he at once rushed in upon the 
Englishman, met the edge of his weapon in mid sweep with a 
stoccado, and nothing daunted that his own rapier was hurled 
from his grasp, clutched with his left hand the wrist of his 
adversary, and with his right fearlessly catching hold of his 
enormous blade, by a violent downward jerk wrested it from his 
gripe. 

Thus far Druid had obeyed his master's orders, and crouched 
inoffensively at his feet — but now instinctively comprehending his 
danger, he flew with such violence against Crichton's legs, that had 
they not been plated in steel, he must have withdrawn his attack 
from Blount to defend himself from his follower. " Lie still, sir," 
cried the Englishman, furiously. And setting his foot upon the dog's 
back, he pressed him, notwithstanding his desperate struggles, 
forcibly to the ground. " Your are the victor," he continued, ad- 
dressing Crichton, " strike!" 

" I have accomplished all I desired," replied the Scot, " in dis- 
arming you." 

" I will not yield," said Blount, sullenly. " You had better finish 
me. 

The words were scarcely uttered, when his arms were suddenly 
seized from behind by a couple of halberdiers, who had stolen upon 
him unawares; and a stout sword-belt, slipped over his wrists, and 
drawn tightly together, prevented any further resistance on his part 
At the same moment, a sash, tied In a noose, and flung over the head 
of Druid by a third man-at-arms, made the bi'ave animal likewise 
a prisoner. 

" Harm neither," said Crichton, addressing the guards ; " but 
await his majesty's pleasure — and see ! he approaches." 

" Draw near to me, I pray you, Chevalier Crichton," said Blount, 
gazing earnestly at the Scot, " 1 have something to communicate, 
which, In my confusion, I hiad I'orgotten." 

" I know what you would say," returned Crichton, making a 
gesture of silence; " all is lost I" 

"The devil!" exclaimed Blount, with a look of disappointment. 



282 CRICIITON'. 

" my labour then has bccu in vain. It was '.nercly to bring you 
these tidinsTs that I adventured within the Ihta." 

" Heed not that, good Blount, but pacify your dog," said Crich- 
ton, noticing, with uneasiness, tiie violent etforts of the animal to 
free himself, by which he was well-nigh strangled ; " on his life 
hangs your own." 

" True," replied Blount, taking the words literally, " it does so." 
And he addressed an angry declamation to Druid, who instantly 
became passive in the hands of his captor. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE TWO HEXKIS. 

Prtmlcr Scldat. Le Bearnais a pciit-etre proiiiis tie retouiner a confesse. Ca 
scrait lieureux', tout de iiit'ine — il me fait I'cffet d'liii bon compere de roil 

Deuxieme Soldat. Le iiotre n'a pas mauvais air non plus sur sa grande jumcnt 
• — mais il sent trop le jasmin. 

La Mort de Henri III. 

Unwilling to hold any private conference with the King of 
Navarre, until he should receive some information of Catherine's 
disposition towards him; and "perplexed in the extreme," that 
no message had, as yet, arrived from her majesty, Henri HI., 
uncertain what line of policy he ought to pursue, and glad of any 
pretext to gain further time, instead of advancing to question the 
Bourbon, as he had origlnallv intended, bent his course towards 
the captive Englishman. This plan, however, was defeated. 
Henri of Navarre, yielding tardy compliance with the earnest 
solicitations of Rosni, who represented, in the most moving 
terms, the perils and calamities in which his present fatal obstinacy 
must necessarily involve himself, his people, :^-jd his religion, camo 
suddenly to the resolution of throwing himself upon the generosity 
ot his royal brother. Accordingly, when Henri HI. turned aside 
to confer with Blount, he stuck spurs into his charger, and rode 
towards him. 

A greeting of apparently fraternal warmth passed between the 
two monarchs. Though each, in secret, distrusted the other, both 
deemed it prudent to assume an air of unbor Tided confidence and 
goodwill. Dissimulation formed no part of the Bourbon's frank 
and loyal character. But his long experience of the perljdy and 
insincerity of the race of Valois, wiiile it prevented him from being 
Henri's dupe, satisfied him that any advantage which might accrue 
to him from the interview, could only be attained by the employ- 
ment of similar artifice. Throwing himself, therefore, instantly 
from his steed, he attempted, with the greatest cordiality, to take 



TOE TWO HENRIS. 283 

the hand of tlie king, with tlic intention of proffering the cns- 
>3mary ?ahitation. 

Henri III., however, drew hack liis steed as he approached. 
"Your pardon, my brother," he said, with a gracious smile; " \vc 
K'oukl cut ofF our right hand could we suspect it of heresy, nor 
can we consent to take yours, tainted as it is with tliat contagious 
leprosy, unless we first receive assurance from your lips that you 
are come hither, like the prodigal son, to confess your indiscretions, 
to implore our forgiveness, and to sohcit to be received once more 
into the indulgent bosom of our holy Catholic, Apostolic, and 
Roman church." 

" Sire," replied the Bourbon, " I own that I am in much the 
same predicament as the unfortunate wight to whom you have 
likened me. I have, at this moment, more nose than kingdom — 
more care than coin — more hope than faith — more regard for your 
majesty than the religion you propose — " 

" And more regard for your body than your soul, I fear, my 
brother," interrupted Henri III., gravely shaking his head, and 
telling a bead or two upon his rosary. 

" That is to say, he has more regard for his mistress tlian his 
queen," said Chicot. "You are right, compere. Our Bearnais 
will never be saved unless the good old faith of the Gentiles comes 
round again, and new altars are raised at Cnydos and Paphos, to 
the goddess he worships." 

" Certcs, thou malapert knave, I am a heretic in no creed in which 
beauty is concerned," replied the Bourbon, laughing; " and amid 
yon gallery of fair saints, there is not one to whom I would refuse 
adoration." 

" I could point out one," cried the jester. 

" I defy thee," said the Bourbon. 

" Your queen !" returned Chicot. 

Even Henri HI. could not help joining in the mirth occasioned 
oy this sally of the jester. 

"Kibaldl" exclaimed the Bourbon, laughing louder than the 
rest; *' thy fool's cap alone protects thee from my resentment." 

" Mv fool's calotte is a better defence than many a knight's 
casque," answered Chicot. " For the love I bear her majesty of 
Navarre, I Avill exchange it for thine, and throw my marotte into 
the bargain. Thou Avilt need both on thy next encounter with 
the Admirable Crichton." 

" Wilt thou throw thyself into tlie bargain, knave," asked the 
Bourbon, " and follow my fortunes ?" 

" Of a surety, no!" replied the jester. " That were to quit the 
master for the valet ; the provost for the prisoner ; the falconer for 
the quarry." 

"Pardieu! compere," said Henri HI., in a tone of raillery, 
•*' art thou so blind to thy own interest as to tarry in our 



284 CRICHTON. 

service, when an offer so brilliant is made tliec by our brother 
of Navarre ? Bethink tliee of the eminence to which thy wisdom 
aifCi decorum must, necessarily, promote thee, amongst the 
svnods of the Huguenots, and the safje councils of the court of 
Pau !" 

" I never leap in the dark, gossip," replied Chicot. " It were the 
province of a wise man to go in quest of danger. I am a fool, and 
prefer safe quarters at home." 

" Wholesome advice may be gathered even from the mouth of 
fools, you perceive, brother," said Henri IH. " May I now 
inquire to what fortunate circumstance I owe the unexpected 
happiness of this vi.sit ? I have been singularly misinformed 
about you and your proceedings. I am told you are an enemy 
— 1 find you our best of friends. I learn that you are at the 
head of a hostile army, putting my towns and subjects to fire and 
sword — 1 find you as blithe companion as ever, and almost 
unattended. My last accounts are, that you arc barricaded within 
the walls of Pau, or Nerac; my next are gathered from your own 
lips within the walls of the Louvre. See how one may be de- 
ceived." 

" Your majesty is not deceived in my expressions of friendship," 
replied the Bourbon, cordially. " Will it please you to command 
your gentleman to stand further off?" 

" Excuse me, my brother, if I venture to retain my atten- 
dants," replied Henri HI. " I am curious to question this bold 
knave," he added, glancing at Blount. " You may reserve 
your tale, if you please, for the car of our confessor, whom you 
will permit me to recommend, in the hope of accomplishing your 
conversion." 

"Your confessor, sire!" ejaculated the Bourbon, knitting b.is 
brow. 

" And at the tall of the priest the headsman," added Chicot. 
" You will not then fail to profit by his instruction, and for the 
third time get rid of any scruples of consclenc*. The laconic 
message of his late Majesty Charles IX., to your cousin, Henri of 
Conde, had other merits besides its conciseness." 

" What message was that, gossip!" asked Henri HI., ffecting 
ignorance. 

" Messe, moit ou Baslilef" replied the jester. " Our Bearnais 
will remember it by the token, that about tiiesame time he abjured 
his own Calvinistic heresies." 

" Ventre-saint-gris ! thou scurrilous varlet," cried the Bourbon,, 
fiercely; " if thou darest to push thy mischievous pleasantry 
further, not even thy own insignificance, or thy royal master's 
presence, shall prevent my inllicting due chastisement upon 
thee." 

Alarmed by the menacing aspect of the King of Navarre, 



THE TWO HENRIS. 28d 

vnth a grimace of mixed terror and defiance, Chicot, like a 
snarling cur, apprehensive of the liecls of a noble steed he 
has annoyed beyond endurance, now turned tail, and retreated 
to the ])rotection of his master, who was secretly delighted 
with this specimen of his skill in the " art of ingeniously tor- 
menting." 

" Since you decline answering my inquiries respecting the 
'Tiotive of your visit, brother," said Henri III., in his blandest 
flccents, " I will not press the point. But I trust you will 
not object to remaining near my person till I return to the 
banquet?" 

" Your majesty has only to command me." 

" And as you have no attendants excepting the Baron de Rosni, 
I give you your choice of six of my own gentlemen, who will 
continue constantly by your side." 

" I understand your majesty. I am a prisoner." 

" I did not say so, brother. Choose your attendants." 

" ]\Iv choice is readily made, sire. I shall name but one 
— the Chevalier Crichton. 1 leave the nomination of the others to 
him." 

" FcBHUin habet in cornu,^' muttered Chicot, " a wittol's 
choice !" 

" You could not have made a better election," observed 
Henri HI., with a smile. 

" I think not," said the Bourbon. 

" I am sure not," added Chicot. " Forgiveness becomes a Chris- 
tian prince. Madame Marguerite will highly applaud your gene- 
rosity and placability." 

" Peace, droll !" said Henri HI. " And now, brother," he 
continued, in the same honeyed tone he had previously adopted, 
and which by those who knew him was more dreaded than the 
most violent bursts of indignation, " as the jousts are at an end, 
and you will have no further occasion for it, I entreat you to 
resign your sword to the custody of him whom you have appointed 
your principal attendant." 

"My sword, sire?" exclaimed the Bourbon, recoiling. 

" Your sword, brother," repeated Henri HI., blandly. 

The King of Navarre looked around. On all sides he was invested 
by danger. The whole circle of the area in which he stood bristled 
with pikes and spears. Above the halberts of the Switzers rose 
the javelins of the Scottish guards; and above the javelins of the 
Scots gleamed the long lances of D'Epernon's gallant Gascon troop. 
Here was stationed a company of archers — there a band of arque- 
bussiers. On the right were arrayed the youthful nobles, under the 
<;ommand of the Vicomte de Joyeuse, readily to be distinguished 
hy their gorgeous apparel and fluttering pennons ; on the left 
was drawn out the sumptuous retinue of the Duo de Nevers. Nor 



286 CUICHTON. 

was this all. A nearer circle of the king's body-gnarci encompassed 
him. Every hand was upon a sword-hilt — every glance fixed upon 
him. As he carelessly noted all this hostile preparation, the Bour- 
bon turned towards his counsellor Rosni, who stood leaning upor» 
the handle of his sword immediately behind him. Not a word — • 
not a sign were exchanged between them. But the monarch under- 
stood the meaning of the cold stern look of his counsellor. At 
this moment, the rolling of drums, mingled with the sound of 
other martial instruments, was heard from the outer courts of the 
palace. 

"Hark! the tambour!" exclaimed Henri HI.; "fresh troops 
have entered the Louvre." 

" By your command, sire?" asked the Bourbon, in a tone of 
displeasure. 

" Our subjects are careful of our safety," answered Henri HI., 
evasively. 

" They ought to be so, sire," replied the Bourbon; " your majesty 
has well earned their love; and when were the people of France 
ungrateful? But against whom are all these precautions taken? Is 
the Louvre in a state of siege, or have the burgesses of your good 
city of Paris broken into revolt?" 

" No, brother, our good city is at present free from faction or 
tumult; and it is our intention (with the aid of rieaven) to main- 
tain its tranquillity undisturbed." 

" You cannot suppose I would be the instigator of disorder, 
sire," said the Bourbon. " I have drawn the sword to protect the 
rights of my people, and to uphold their persecuted creed, not to 
wage war upon your majesty. On any terms which shall secure to 
my subjects the immunities, and religious toleration they seek, I 
will, at once, enter into a compact of truce with your majesty, and 
place myself in your hands as a hostage for the due observance of 
its conditions." 

" Sire !" exclaimed Rosni, grasping his sovereign's arm, " each 
word you utter is a battle lost." 

" Your majesty will not now suspect me of disloyalty," continued 
the Bourbon, disregarding the interruption. 

" I suspect nothing, brother — nothing whatever," said Henri HI., 
hastily; " but I will sign no truce — enter into no compact, which 
shall favour, or appear to favour, the dissemination of heresy and 
sedition. To tolerate such a faith were to approve it. And I 
would rather command a second St. Barthelemi; rather imitate 
the example of my brother, Philip H. of Spain ; or pursue the 
course pointed out to me by my cousin of Guise and the gcntlemcu 
of the league, than in any way countenance a religion so hateful. 
I am too good a Catholic for that, brother. My reign has been 
(for my sins) disturbed by three great troubles. My brother of 
Anjou and his faction; the Balafre and his leaguers; you and youi 
friends of the reform." 



THE TWO IIENRIS. 287 

"Sire!" 

" 1 know not wliicli of the tlirce has been the most vexatious. 
Anjou witli liis claims; Guise with his pretensions; or you with 
your exactions. I shall be glad to put an end to one of these 
annoyances." 

" i have exacted nothing but what was my due, cire," replied 
the liourbon, bluntly. 

" So saith Anjou; so salth the Guise; so say all rebels." 

" Rebels, sire!" 

" Fret not yourself about a word, brother. Your own con- 
duct will best prevent the application of the term, if you deem 
it injurious." 

" Sire," replied the Bourbon, drawing himself up to his full 
height, and regarding his royal brother with a glance of undisguised 
scorn and defiance, " you have done me deep wrong in stigmatising 
me as a rebel. It Is false. I am none, liashness, insane rashness 
— if you please, is all that can be laid to my charge. I came hither 
attended only by the Baron de Rosni, whose person, as my ambas- 
sadoi', guarded by your passport, is sacred : and as I came I should 
have departed, had not an accident occasioned my discovery. No 
thought of treason was in my breast. Nor had I other motive save 
a desire to splinter a lance with one whose prowess I doubted, with 
as much justice, it appears, as your majesty now exhibits in ques- 
tioning my sincerity." 

" You mistake me, brother. Heaven forbid I should question 
your fealty." 

" Your actions contradict your words, sire," returned the Bour- 
bon. " It is evident from the threatening demeanour of your 
attendants, from the hostile disposition of your troops, as well as 
from the orders you have issued, that you do distrust me; and that 
you have more reason to apprehend my influence with the popu- 
lace, in the event of an insurrection, than you care to admit. Your 
alarm is groundless. Had I come as an enemy, I should not have 
come alone. I am the contriver of no plot, the leader of no faction; 
nor, amid yon vast assemblage could I point out the features of a 
single adherent, though I nothing fear, if my war-cry were once 
raised, I should find friends enow to rally round my standard. Yes- 
tcr-morn, with but a dozen followers, I entered the gates of Paris: 
to-day, with but one, those of the Louvre. And to-moiTow's 
dawn shall find me and my scanty train far on our way to my ter- 
ritories, if I have your majesty's permission to depart peaceably." 

" In the mean time, brother," said Henri HI., " I would gladly 
learn what induced you to quit those territories to which you 
are now apparently so anxious to return? I can scarcely flatter 
myself that a desire to hold this interview with me was your sole 
motive." 

" So far from it, sire, that I repeat It was my Intention to 
have remained strictly incognito, had not my own heedlessness 



288 CRICHTOX. 

betrayed me. The object of my hair-brained journey I will no 
longer disguise. When I deserted the Louvre," he added, his 
brow rclaxins: to a slight smile, " there were two things which, in 
my haste, I left behind me." 

" Ah ! what were they, brother?" 

" The mass and my wife, sire. For the loss of the former I felt 
little concern. The want of the latter was a more serious grievance. 
And having failed in my previous remonstrance, made through 
the Sicur Duras, I thouglit the fault might rest with my envoy. 
Accordingly, I resolved — " 

" To come yourself," interrupted Henri III., laughing heartily. 
" A wise determination, certes. Still, I fear your suit has proved 
as unsuccessful as ever, though backed by your own solicitations." 

" His majesty is certain of gaining his cause, now that he has 
employed the Chevalier Crichton as an advocate," cried Chicot. 
'"' It is exactly three years since the Sieur Duras came to Paris on 
this fool's errand, and then Bussy D'Amboise sent him back again, 
like Panurge, '^ avec une puce a Voreille.^ The same result would 
have followed his own application had it not been for this master- 
stroke. Of all men Henri of Navarre ought to be the last to forget 
the maxim, that — 

A husband out of season 

Is a husband without reason I" 

" Let not these taunts annoy you, brother," said Henri lU. 
" You shall liave both your lost matters. But I cannot restore the 
one without the other." 

" I will have neither, sire." 

" You are changeable, brother." 

"It may be so, sire," replied the Bourbon, coldly; " but I have 
the same aversion to a faithless woman that I have to a consecrated 
wafer." 

" I have at all events made you the offer," said Henri III., 
angrily. " And now, Chevalier Crichton," he continued, addressing 
the Scot, who had remained near him, a silent, but deeply inte- 
rested observer of the scene — " advance ! — arrest him !" 

These words, uttered in a sharp, abrupt tone, produced a 
startling effect upon the group. Saint-Luc and D'Epernon drew 
their swords, closing in on either side of their sovereign. The 
Bourbon uttered a single exclamation, and placed his hand upon 
the hilt of his own weapon. His arm, however, was again forcibly 
withheld by Rosni. 

"Remember, sire," said the baron, m a deep whisper, "your 
sacred pledge to your people, and to your God. One false step, 
and your subjects are without a ruler — your church without a 
defender. Be warned !" 

" Quern Deus vult perdere prius dementat" said Chicot. 

Crichton meanwhile stirred not, but watched steadily the move- 



THE TWO IIENUIS. 289 

mcnts of the Kini^ of Navarre. " Must I repeat my orders, 
messire ?" asked Henri III. 

"No, sire," replied the Bourbon. " I will relieve the Chevalier 
Criehton from his cinbarnis.-ment. Here is my sword." 

The Seot received it with a j)rufounfl salutation. 

"Keep it," continued the Bourbon; "you need not blush to 
bear it." 

" I blusli to receive it, sire," returned Criehton, scarcely able to 
repress the emotions swelling within iiis bosom. 

" And now for the other captive and his dog," said Henri HI. 

" Hold, sire," exclaimed the Bourbon; "ere this conference is 
broken up, I have a secret of importance to disclose to you. I 
woidd willingly have imparted it to your ears alone. But since 
you refuse me a private audience, I iim compelled to proclaim it 
openly." 

At'this moment the shifting glances of Henri 111. fell upon tiie 
Due de Nevers. The latter was evidently ill at ease, and approach- 
ing his sovereing, said, in a low emphatic tone, 

" This interview were better concluded, sire." 

" I think otherwise, fair cousin," returned the king, whose 
curiosity was awakened. " May I venture to trust myself 
alone with him for a few moments?" he whispered. "He is 
unarmed." 

" By no means, sire," returned the duke; " he has a poignard." 

"True," returned Henri HI.; "and he is not unskilful in its 
use, as I have seen. His strength, too, greatly exceeds my own 
— and though his bearing is frank and loyal, it were most imprudent 
implicitly to conhde in him. — Speak, brother," he continued, aloud. 
" I am impatient to hear your disclosure." 

" Your majesty drives me to the course 1 now adopt," returned 
the Bourbon, haughtily; " the shame I would willingly spare the 
queen your mother I will no longer spare her." 

" Will you endure this insolence, sire?" said the Due de Nevers, 
alarmed at the King of Navarre's commencement. 

" Heed him not," returned Henri HI.; " her majesty will give 
herself little concern about /tis reproaches." 

" What I would have requested," continued the Bourbon, who 
had paused for a moment, " I now demand. In the name of my 
cousin, Henri I. of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, whose person I 
here represent, I require from your majesty the liberation of his 
sister, unjustly detained a captive within the Louvre by the queen- 
mother, Catherine de Medicis." 

"Mort-dieu ! brother," exclaimed Henri HI., " you are strangely 
deceived in this matter. Our mother has no such captive." 

" Contest not the point, sire," whispered the Due de Nevers, 
who was now relieved from his own apprehension. " Promise her 
liberation." 

U 



■21)0 CRICHTON. 

*' Your majesty lias been, desigaedly, kept in ignorance of tho 
circumstance," said the Bourbon. 

" Well, brother," returned Henri III., with affected bo/ihommie, 
'•'if your representation be correct, we pass our word for the free- 
dom of the princess." 

As this speech was uttered, a slight exclamation of joy escaped 
Crichton. But when the king glanced towards him. his eyes were 
riveted upon the Bourbon's sword. 

" Add to your boon, sire," said the King of Navarre, " for 
which I thank you as heartily as if my own liberty had been in- 
cluded in it, and suffer the princess to set forth, at once, from the 
Louvre, under your safe conduct. My own escort shall, with your 
majesty's permission, act as her convoy to Henri of Conde." 

" Why this extreme urgency, brother?" asked Henri HI., doubt- 

" Because," replied the Bourbon, " while she remains in the 
power of Catherine de Medicis, her life, her honour are m 
danger." 

" Beware how you scandalise our mother," returned Henri IH., 
with warmth. " These are dark accusations." 

" They are made in broad daylight before your assembled nobles, 
sire, and will not be unremembered." 

" Nor unrec[uited," answered Henri HI., frowning. " Proceed, 
brother." 

*' I am a soldier, not a courtier, sire," continued the Bourbon. 
'• ]\ry steel corslet is seldom exchanged for a silken pourpoint; — my 
rude speech as seldom takes the garb of flattery. Your majesty 
will bear in mind that you have forced me to make this charge in 
public. I am prepared to answer to the queen your mother for my 
accusation, and to approve it. Your royal word is passed for the 
liberation of the princess. That is enough for me." 

" What are we to think of this mystery?" demanded Henri IH. 
of the Due de Nevers. 

" Tlidt his Majesty of Navarre's wits, as well as his discretion, 
have deserted him, my liege," returned the duke. " I am suffi- 
ciently in the confidence of her majesty the queen-mother, to 
assert, luihesitatingly, that there is no such princess." 

" You arc sure of it, fair cousin ?" 

" As of your majesty's existence — as of the presence of yon 
Bernese bear." 

" You have already relieved me. I began to fear that I had, 
in some way or other, committed myself." 

The Bourbon, meanwhile, conferred an Instant apart with his 
counsellor. " Thou wilt command this escort, Rosni," whispered 
he, "and say to the Prince of Conde that — " 

" I quit not your majesty's side for any prince or princess," in- 
terrupted Rosni. 



THE TWO HENRIS. 291 

'• How, sir ?" 

'' Sparc your frowns, sire. I can be as obstinate, on occasion, as 
your majesty." 

" Stay witli me, then, my faithful friend," replied the Bourbon, 
pressing the hand of his counsellor, " and let our recent diflerence 
be forgotten. Thou hast iny full pardon." 

" When your majesty lias obtained your own forgiveness, it 
■will be time enough to extend tlie same grace to me," rejoined 
Rosni, bluntly. 

" Chevalier Crichton," said the Bourbon, turninp; in displeasure 
from his confidant, " will you escort the Princess of Conde to her 
brother ?" 

The Scot's colour mounted to his temples at the proposal. 
*' Your majesty has already appointed me to the post of your 
chief attendant," he returned, in a voice of constrained calmness; 
*' I cannot accept both ofliccs." 

" Nor can I consent to part with you, mon cher," said 
Henri III., approvingly. " To put an end to this discussion, 
brother," he continued, addressing the Bourbon, " if you will find 
the princess, I will undertake to find the convoy." 

" A la bonne heure !" cried tlie King of Navarre. " My task will 
be readily performed. Behold her!" he added, pointing to the 
royal gallery. 

" Behold whom ! — you cannot mean ? — '' 

" In the queen of the lists — in the fair Esclairmonde your 
majesty beholds the sister of Henri of Conde — my cousin — yoiw 
cousin, sire." 

" Mort et damnation! Esclairmonde my cousin! Esclairmonde 
a Princess of Conde ! — Were it so — but you do not, cannot expect 
us to credit your assertion, unsupported by proof, upon a point 
like this ?" 

" I have proofs, sire, — proofs of her illustrious birth — of her 
capture as an infant by Tavannes — of her detention within the 
Louvre by Catherine — proofs which will carry conviction even to 
the mind of your majesty." 

*' Produce them, brother, produce them !" cried Henri III., 
trembling with agitation. 

" Let your guard, by sound of trump, summon before your 
presence Messire Florent Chretien, a preacher of the Reformed 
Faith and the spii'itual adviser of the princess ; lie is within th«^ 
Louvre — he is in possession of these proofs." 

" Ha ! think you to delude us by the devices of the evil one — of 
his minister?" vociferated Henri HI. " Think you "we would 
place the fabrications of this miserable liypocrite against the word 
•of our mother? Think you we "will endure the presence of a 
heretic, and a propagator of heresy, knowing him to be such ? 
Let him take heed how he approaches us — how he defiles the hem 

u 2 



292 CRICHTON. 

of our garment — how he polhites our palace. The Greve hatli an 
axe — the Pre-aux-clercs a stake — ^Nlontfaucon a gibbet. He sliall 
have his choice of the three ; tlie sole grace a false and perjured 
Huguenot may look for at our hands." 

" Be all three his portion and mine, if he deceives you, sire," 
returned the Bourbon. " Let him be summoned. I will abide 
the issue." 

" Be it so," replied Henri 111., as if he had suddenly decided 
upon the course he ought to pursue. 

" Your guard must seek him within the dungeons of the 
Louvre," said Crichton. " He is a prisoner." 

" A prisoner I" echoed the Bourbon, starting. 

"A prisoner!" repeated Henri HI., joyfully. 

" He is in the hands of Catherine de iNIedicis," continued the 
Scot. 

*' And the documents ?" demanded the King of Navarre, 
eagerly. 

" Are also in her majesty's possession," returned Crichton. 
" Florent Chretien is adjudged to the stake." 

" Will you now forgive yourself, sire?" asked Rosni, in a low 
tone. 

" Away !" ejaculated the King of Navarre, stamping his foot 
upon the ground with wrath. " Ventre-saint-gris ! is this a season 
for reproaches ? Your majesty, I am well assured," he added, 
indignantly appealing to his royal brother, " will see fit to reverse 
this most unjust judgment. Chretien is innocent of all crime." 

" Of all, save that of heresy, it may be," returned Henri HL, 
" than which no guilt is more heinous and unpardonable in our 
eyes, and of which, eveji by your own showing, he is culpable. 
Our mother has acted in conformity with our wishes, and in 
furtherance of the interests of the true faltli, \n condemning tliis 
Huguenot preacher to expiate his olFenccs against Heaven at the 
stake; and, were our sanction needful, it should be readily ac- 
corded." 

'• Vive la messe .'" cried the courtiers. 

'* You hear, brother," said Henri III., smiling. " Such are the 
sentiments of every good Catholic." 

" Will you violate the majesty of your own laws, sire ?" de- 
manded the Bourbon. " Have you no regard lor the sajictity of 
the pledges voluntarily given for the security of your Protestant 
subjects .''" 

" Hcereticis Jides non seivanda est," rejoined Henri HI., coldly. 

" It follows then, sire," said the Bourbon, " that your royal 
word, passed to me for the liberation of the Princess Esclairmonde, 
is not binding upon your pliant conscience? — ha !"' 

" Satisfy me that she is a princess, and I will keep my faith 
with you, albeit you are a heretic, brother. Produce your proofs, 
and I repeat, she is free." 



TilE TWO nENKIS. 29.'^ 

♦' Your mnjesty may safely make that promise now," returned 
the Bourbon, scornfully. 

" If / ])ro(luce those proofs ere midnight, will you fulfil your 
word, sire ?" asked Crichton, advancing. 

Henri III. was visibly embarrassed. 

" You cannot retreat, my liege," whispered the Due de Nevers. 

" But, fair cousin," returned the king, in an under tone, '* we 
would rather part with our crown than Esclairmondc — and this 
accursed Scot would outwit the devil." 

" He will not outwit Catlierine de Medicis, sire," said the duke. 
*' I will put her upon her guard." 

" How says your majesty?" demanded the Bourbon. 

" Our word is already passed," returned Henri HI. 

" Enough !" said Crichton, retiring. 

At this moment the Vicomte de Joyeuse approached. 

" I am the bearer of a billet from the queen-mother, sire," h. 
said, presenting a sealed despatch to the king. 

" Pcste!" exclaimed Henri HI., as he glanced over the contents 
of the letter. " We have been too precipitate, fair cousin," con- 
tinued he, addressing the Due de Nevers. " Her majesty counsels 
us to treat the Bearnais with all courtesy and consideration." 

The duke replied by a shrug of the shoulder. 

"Nay, this is not all," added the king; "she entreats us to re- 
store his sword." 

" And your majesty will, of course, comply with her request." 

" Pardieu ! no, cousin." 

" Kemember the fair Esclairmonde, sire." 

" Ah ! you are right," returned Henri III., hastily. " That 
name at once decides me. 1 know not what credit is to be attached 
to this story of the lovely demoiselle's birth. It is possible it may 
be true. But true or false, it is plain, if I would hope to succeed 
in my designs upon her, I must now, more than ever, yield im- 
plicit obedience to my mother's behests." 

" Wisely resolved, sire." 

" A reconciliation with the Bearnais will not be difficult," pur- 
sued Henri HI.; "his choler is as readily appeased as aroused. 
You shall see how easily we will cajole him. A fair word or so 
will make all smooth between us. Approach, brother," he con- 
tinued, addressing the King of Navarre in a friendly tone ; " I 
have done you wrong, and am eager to make you reparation." 

" Sire!" exclaimed the Bourbon, springing eagerly forward. 

" Your hand, brother." 

" It is the hand of a heretic, sire." 

*' No matter ! it is a loyal hand, and as such I clasp it. Nay, 
withdraw it not, good brother. I Avish all my court to perceive 
that we are on terms of amity together — especially my mother," he 
added, aside. 



294 CRICHTON. 

" Vive le Roi T cried the courtiers. And the shout was echoed 
by a thousand voices. 

" I have deprived you of your sword," continued Henri III. 
" You cannot reclaim your gift from the Chevalier Crichton. I 
pray you, therefore, to wear this blade for my sake," he added, 
unbuckling his rapier, the hilt of which was studded with dia- 
monds, and presenting it to the King of Navarre. " Promise me 
only that you will not draw it against a subject of France." 

" I will wear it for your defence, sire," replied the Bourbon. 
" Your majesty's kindness will not allow me for an instant to doubt 
your sincerity, but I would gladly learn to whom I am indebted 
for this sudden alteration in \o\xx sentiments." 

" To one whose intercession you scarcely merit," returned Henri 
HI., with a gracious smile — " to the queen-mother." 

" Jour de dieu !" exclaimed the Bourbon, " to her !" 

"Pardon tlie unworthy reception I have given you. I was 
taken by surprise, and could not divest myself of certain misgivings, 
Avhich this letter has wholly dispelled. I will make the best amends 
in mv power." 

" Grant me the life of Florcnt Chretien, and we are quits, sire." 

Henri IH. was again perplexed. 

" His life is in mv mother's hands," he said; " make your appeal 
to her. You stand Avell with her, it seems. I never interfere 
between her mnjesty and the objects of her displeasure. Yet stay ! 
if you can induce this Chretien to abjure his heresies, I think I 
may venture to promise you his life." 

" You have ratified his doom, sire," said the Bourbon, retiring. 
*' What think you of this change, Rosni?" he added, as he rejoined 
his counsellor. 

" I like it not," returned Rosni. " The friendship of this Vilairi 
Herodes is more to be dreaded than his enmity. But you have 
coniided in him ? — " 

" Bon gre, mal gre," answered the Bourbon. 

" How have I played my part, my cousin?" asked Henri IH. of 
the Due de Nevers. 

" To admiration, sire," replied the duke. 

" You are a flatterer. But I am weary of this conference. 
Bring forward our captive and his dog. 'Twill divert my thoughts 
to question him." 

" Take heed, compere," cried Chicot; "you will not find that 
dog so carefully muzzled as the great bear of Berne." 



295 
CHAPTER X. 

THE MISSAL. 

Que toute traliison sur le traitre retombe! 

Victor Hugo. Hernanu 

Blount, who had heen strictly guarded during the conference 
previously detailed, and had endured, with stoical calmness, all 
the petty persecution, in tlie shape of taunts and blows, that his 
captors chose to inflict, was now dragged into the king's presence. 
Druid followed as closely at his heels as the sash by which he was 
restrained would permit him to do. 

*' Before you bestow yon caititf' s head upon tlic executioner of 
the Chatelet, my liege," said Joyeuse, "it may be well to interro- 
gate him as to the motive of his daring action. I can scarcely 
think, with all his reckless courage, that it proceeded from mere 
bravado. j\Iy own opinion is," he added, lowering his voice,, 
"that he is cliargcd with a message to the Bearnais — in which 
case vour majesty may elicit some important information from 
him."" 

" I will essay, mon enfant," replied Henri III.; "but I despair 
of success. Look at his stubborn visage and resolute bearing, and 
say if threats are likely to shake him? Iliat man would perish 
rather than play the traitor." 

And so it proved. Blount refused to retiu-n other than a surly 
monosyllabic response to the monarch's inquiries. 

" Remove him to the Grand-Chatelet," said Henri HI., impa- 
tiently, "and let the question ordinary and extraordinary be pro- 
posed to him." 

" It will extort nothing," rejoined the Englishman, firmly. 

"I was right, you perceive, mon cher," said the monarch, turn- 
ing to his favourite. 

" I will find a way to wring his secret from him, my liege," re- 
plied the vicomte. " I see where his vulnerable point lies." 

And he whispered to the king. 

"You have hit it," returned Henri, laughing; "but proceed! 
not to extremities." 

" Leave him to me, sire," said Joyeuse. " Draw thy sword,'* 
he added, addressing the man-at-arms by whom Druid was guarded, 
*' and upon each interrogation which this obstinate traitor may 
decline to answer, hew a limb from his hound." 

The weapon of the halberdier fiashed in the air. 

" Devils!" cried Blount, in a voice that sounded like the roar of 
a lion, at the same time exerting himself with so much force as to 
burst asunder the leathern thong that confined his arras. " What 
would you have me do?" 

" Reply, without disguise, to his majesty's interrogations," said 
Crlchton, advancing towards liim. 



296 CRICHTOX. 

" Well, then," returned Blount, " to spare my dog unnecessary 
suffering, I will do that which I would not have done to preserve 
my own flesh from the hot pincers, or my bones from the grinding 
wheel — I tvill speak — though, by the rood ! I have nothing to 
reveal. I might have borne to see Druid perish," he muttered, 
" but to behold him die by piecemeal — no — no — I could not en- 
dure that." 

" What brought thee hither, thou contumacious varlet?" de- 
manded Henri III. " Wert thou not aware that thy life would 
pay the penalty of thy rashness?" 

" I was fully aware of the consequences of the step I took," an- 
swered the Englishman. " But the desire to serve a friend was 
paramount to any consideration of danger." 

" Wiiat friend, sirrah?" 

" I have been too bold, perhaps, to term him such," returned 
Blount; " but death levels all distinctions, and mine is so near at 
liand, that I may claim some exemption from worldly forms. My 
fidelity will, 1 nothing doubt, insure me a worthy place in his re- 
membrance." 

" Thy devotion to whom, sirrah?" demanded Henri HI., impa- 
tiently. "To the King of Navarre?" 

'* To the Chevalier Crichton, sire." 

"To Crichton!" echoed Henri, in astonishment. "Morbleu! 
Joyeuse," he continued, addressing the vicomte, " this Scot exer- 
cises an unaccountable influence over his fellows. Here is a sturdy 
knave, who derides the dungeon and the rack, ready to lay down 
his head for the love he bears him. By what magic is this ac- 
complished?" 

" By the magic of manner, sire," returned Joyeuse. '* Was 
ever smile beheld so captivating — was ever demeanour witnessed 
at once so courteous and so dignified, as that of Crichton ! Add to 
the charm of manner, the ennobling and heroic spirit of chivalry 
breathing from his lightest word and action — weaving its spell 
around him, and inspiring all who approach with kindred ardour, 
and you have the secret of his witchery over the minds of men. 
It was the same with Bayard — the same with Du Guesclin — witli 
Charlemagne, and with Godefroy do Bouillon. Some men there 
are for whom we would willingly live: others for whom we would 
as readily die. Crichton is among the latter." 

" You have merely drawn the distinction between friendship and 
devotion, mon cher," replied Henri, turning, with a look of dis- 
pleasure, towards Blount. " Thy intelHgence must have been of 
vital Import, sirrah," he added, pursuing his inquiries, " since it 
could not be delayed till the jousts were ended?" 

" IMy errand Avas nothing more," answered Blount, carelessly, 
" than to apprise the Chevalier Crichton that a packet on which he 
set some store, and which, after incurring various risks, had been 
strangely found, was again as strangely lost." 



THE MISSAL. 297 

"Is that all tliou knowst concernini^ it, mon maltrc?" 

" I know that it has proved a fatal charge, sire. All who have 
meddled with it have come to ill. It was lost, as it was won, at 
the point of the sword. To the breast of him who first grasped 
it, it brought a poignard ; to the next who received it, tlie stake ; 
and to myself, it is like to bring the axe. May like calamity alight 
on her into wliose possession it hath now fallen." 

" Your majesty will, perhaps, next question him as to his acquaint- 
ance with the contents of the packet?" interposed Crichton. 

" By no means," leturned Henri, frowning. *' I perceive 
your drift, and have heard enough to convince me that the testi- 
mony of this traitor is suborned. Hola ! Larchant," he continued, 
addressing one of the officers in attendance, " let the prisoner 
be conveyed to the Clhatelet, and thrown into the Fin d\/ise, wiiere, 
if he expire not within the week, the headsman may release him 
iiom further torture." 

" Yours are tender mercies, sire," returned Blount, smiling dis- 
dainfully. 

" Let the hound be cared for," continued Henri. 

" Is lie not to go with me ?" asked Blount, starting. 

" Hence with tlie prating knave!" exclaimed the king, furiously. 

Blount suddenly broke I'rom his guards, and prostrated himself 
at tlio king's feet. 

" I do not ask for mercy, sire," he cried. " I know my life is 
forfeited, and justly; but oh ! separate me not from my faithful 
companion." 

Henri wavered. If he /lad a heart, it lay on the side on which 
the Englishman now assailed him. 

" Thou lovst thy dog?" he said, musingly. 

" Better than my life." 

"'Tis a good sign! — Thou shnnldst be honest. I cannot, how- 
ever, grant tliy request. Refusal here is mercy. The poor animal 
■would only howl beneath thy carcase ; and it may console tiiee to 
learn, that in changing masters, he will find one who will not 
value him less than thou dost, while he is better able to protect 
him. Stand back ! mon maitrc." 

" My dog is no courtier," replied Blount, rising; " he will serve 
no second master. What ho ! Druid." 

This summons, followed by a short, sharp whistle, brought Druid 
instantly to the Englishman's feet. The scarf was round his throat; 
and in his teeth he held a large fragment of the apparel of the 
man-at-arms, which he had torn off in effecting his liberation. 

" I knew no bonds would hold thee, brave fellow," said Blount, 
caressing his clog, who, in his turn, fondly licked his master's hand. 
** We must part, old comrade." 

Druid looked wistfully in his face. 

" For ever," said Blount, slowly, " for ever!" 

*' Away with him," cried Henri, " but take heed you harm not 



298 CRICHTON. 

the dorr. I would not lose that noble animal for a prince's 
ransom." 

'■' A moment, sire, and he is yours," ejaculated Blo\mt, over 
Avhose open and manly countenance a sullen cloud had now spread. 
" It is hard to part with a friend whom one has long cherished. 
This dog," he continued, with difficulty mastering the euK^tion, 
Avhich w^as proclaimed by sundry twitches at the corners of his 
mouth, " will feed from no hand but mine; will answer to no call 
but mine; will figlit at no bidding but mine. I must teach him 
obedience to his new master. You will find lii-m tractable cnougli 
wlien I have done with him." 

" I will take every care of him," said Henri, somewhat affected 
by the scene. 

" Fare thee well, Druid !" murmured Blount; " and now," he 
added, gently, " lie down, lie down, old friend." 
Druid crouched upon the ground. 

Swift as thought Blount placed his foot upon the dog's body, 
as if about to crush him to the earth, and with both hands- 
seized the scarf entwined around his throat. Though he perceived 
the action, and might have guessed its intent, Druid offered no 
resistance. His eyes were fixed upon his master. The noose wa& 
tif>htened, and in another instant the fate of the brave dog would 
have been sealed, but for the intervention of Crichton, who forcibly 
arrested the Englishman's arm. 

" Desist !" he whispered. " I promise to despatch him, if aught 
befal thee." 

" You promise more than you can perform sometimes. Chevalier 
Crichton," returned Blount, sullenly. " You undertook to free me 
from any peril I might incur in the execution of your orders. My 
head is now within reach of the axe." 

" Thy own madness has brought it there," rejoined Crichton, 
sternly. " Release tliy dog, or I abandon thee to thy fate." 

Blount, with some reluctance, relinquished his hold of the scarf. 
" Where is the missal which I entrusted to thy care ?" continued 
the Scot. 

"Where you placed it — next my heart; where it will remain 
while that heart beats." 

" Saint Andrew be praised !" exclaimed Crichton, joyfully. 
" Anticipating they would search thee, and discover that book upon 
thy person, I allowed matters to proceed thus far. But no injury 
should have been done thee. Deliver it instantly to the king." 

Crichton retired, and Blount drew a small riciily-gilded volume 
from his doublet. "Sire!" he said, addressing Henri HI., "this 
book, confided to me by the Chevalier Crichton, dropped from the 
folds of the packet about which you have just questioned me. It 
was connnitted to my charge because, upon ascertaining it was a 
mass-book of the Romish Church, Messire Florent Chretien 
refused to receive it. I am a Catholic. And were I not, I have- 



THE MISSAL. 295 

no sucli scruples. It would seem to belong to your majesty. The 
veikun cover is emblazoned with a royal crown — with the lilies of 
France, and with the letters C and H." 

" Fardieu ! it is our mother's missal," exclaimed Henri III.; " it 
is her cipher lini^cd with that of the king our father. Give nio 
the book, Du Halde." 

" Your majesty will not touch it," said the Due de Ncvcrs, turn- 
ing pale; "it may be poisoned." 

" I will be the first to open it, if you have any such apprehen- 
sions, my liege," interposed Crichton. 

" I have no fear," rephed the king. " From these pages I 
derive health and succour, not bane. Ah ! mon Dieu !" he ex- 
claimed, as his eye rested upon a leaf on which certain mysterious 
characters were traced. " Have I chanced upon the serpents' 
nest ?" 

" What have you discovered, my liege ?" asked Joyeuse. 

"A plot!" vociferated Henri III.; "a conspiracy against our 
crown — against our life !" 

Universal consternation prevailed amidst the assemblage. Many 
mysterious and suspicious glances were interchanged by the nobles, 
and a look of intelligence passed unobserved between Crichton and 
the King of Navarre. 

"By whom is this plot contrived, my liege?" asked the Due dc 
Nevers, with quivering lips. 

" Wy whom think you, monsieur Ic due ? — by whom think 
you ?" thundered the king. 

" By the Guise ?" 

" By our father's son — by the Due D'Anjou." 

There was a deep silence, which no one cared to break except 
the Bourbon, who coughed slightly in an ineffectual attempt to 
conceal his satisfaction. 

" I have long suspected my brother's treachery," said Henri, 
after a pause, during Avhich he appeared greatly disturbed; " but I 
have here evidence of his guilt under his own hand." 

" It is a letter you have found, sire?" inquired the Duo de Nevers, 
anxiously. 

"Ay, my cousin," returned the king, in a deep whisper, " it is a 
letter! — a letter from Anjou to our mother — a letter of treason 
and blood penned upon these sacred pages — a letter devised by the 
demon, inscribed upon the word of God !" 

" It is a forgery, my liege. The Due D'Anjou is incapable ot 
a crime so monstrous and unnatural. I will answer for his inno- 
cence with my head." 

"Answer for yourself, monseigneur," replied Henri, in a freez- 
ing tone, at the same time speaking in a voice so low as to be in- 
luidible to his attendants, " you will find it no easy matter. The 
characters in which this letter is traced reveal the writer. They 
are secret characters, known only to myself — my mother — and 
this arch traitor. They were contrived for the security of my own 



300 CRICHTON. 

despatches from Poland, Avhcn Cliarles stood towards me as I 
now stand to Anjou ; and when my mother betrayed him, as she 
has here betrayed me. These characters cannot have been fabricated, 
neither can they be deciphered without a key. Look at this 
writing ! To you it is incomprehensible as an Egyptian hierogly- 
phic: to me legible as the billet of a mistress. And see ! a leaf is 
wanting. Where was our motlier's letter — here is Anjou's answer. 
Jesus-Maria ! if I liad any doubts Iclt, this would remove them. 
I am doubly betrayed." 

" ^ly gracious liege — " 

" Anjou is guilty of lezc-majeste and felony in the highest degree 

and shall die the deatli of a traitor — as shall all who have 

favoured, or are engaged in this foul conspiracy — even though I 
flood the Louvre in the noblest blood of France. The scaffold and 
the block shall not be removed from these courts, nor shall the 
headsman cease his labour till he has utterly exterminated this 
hj'dra-headed monster of rebellion. Hitherto 1 have been easy, 
forgiving, merciful. It has availed nothing. Henceforth I will 
be relentless and inflexible. The ordinance of my ancestor Louis 
XL, which condemns him who is guilty of misprision of treason, to 
like doom with the traitor, is not yet abrogated. You have answered 
for Anjou with your head. Take heed 1 claim not the pledge. It 
is already Ibrfeiied." 

" Your suspicions cannot attach to me, sire," faltered De Nevers. 
*' I liave been your loyal follower ever." 

" My suspicions!" echoed the king, in a tone of irony. "Par 
la Mort-dieu ! monseigneur, I suspect you not — I am assured of 
your treachery." 

" Malediction ! this to me, sire." 

" Be patient, fair cousin. Another such intemperate exclama- 
tion, and my guard shall conduct you to the Bastile." 

" Your menaces alarm me not, sire," replied the duke, Avho had 
now recovered his composure, "conscious as I am of my inno- 
cence, and of the groundlessness of the charge preferred against 
me. The name of Gonzaga has never yet been coupled with that 
of traitor. Were I aware of any conspiracy against your majesty, 
1 would denounce it, though my own son were its leader. And if 
I should march hence to the scaffold with which you have 
threatened me, my last prayer should be for the uninterrupted pros- 
perity and long continuance of your reign." 

"Judas!" muttered the king between his teeth; "the plot is 
better organised, and nearer its outbreak, than I deemed it, if he is 
thus confident. I must proceed with greater caution. Qui nescit 
(lissimulare, nescit refpiare. Vive-dieu, cousin," he continued, 
placing his hand familiarly upon the duke's saddle-bow, and re- 
garding him with a look, in which distrust was skilfully veiled 
by an expression of friendliness, " your warmth would almost 
pers\iade me I have wronged you in suspecting you of defec- 
tion. \i it be so, yoi: m-IU know how to overlook the error. En- 



THE MISSAL. 301 

vlroncd as I ain by fiiction and sedition — surrounded by perfidy in 
all shapes and all aspects — by rebels in the mask of brothers 
— traitors under tiie cloak of counsellors — assassins in the ^ause of 
iriends; when those I have most loved, most honoured, most 
rewarded, are the lirst to desert, to betray me; when those bound 
to me by the strict ties of duty, and by the stricter tics of aflinity, 
fbriret alike their allegiance and affection; when tlic hand that 
once caressed me brings the polgnard to u\y bosom ; and tlio lips, 
from which the fondest maternal endearments have ilowed, com- 
mand my destruction, I may be forgiven if" I should mistake a 
loyal follower for a deadly enemy, and for u moment question the 
stainless honour, and mistaken, though not wholly unrequited, 
lidclity of Gonzaga." 

" My services, liowever requited," replied the duke, widi some 
asperity, "-should have secured me from these unmerited taunts. 
But since they who sliould be nearest to your higlmcss in your 
love are visited with the extremity of your indignation, I am con- 
tent to disregard the alfront." 

•' You do wisely, monseigneur," rejoined the king, with a smile 
of derision; " / need not remind you this is not the first time I 
have detected and deleated Aiijou's trensonable schemes. 1 need 
not tell you of the revolt which was to have followed my return 
from Poland to the throne of France ; of the ambuscade which 
beset my route; of the assassins who were baulked of their victim. 
I need not tell you of my brother's capture, interrogation, and 
confession; of the decapitation of La Mole and Coconnas; and of 
my mistaken clemency. Catherine de jNIedicis in those days 
watched over my safety with zealous care. Now she has instigated 
a rebellion she was then prompt to crush. Would to Heaven 
Anjou had yielded to the promptings of his own dark heart, and 
strangled her, as he intended to do, when she embraced him in his 
prison at Vincennes." 

" Sire, your resentment carries you too far. Catherine de 
Medicis is still your mother. To her you owe your crown." 

"Oiii-da, monseigneur, and to her, also, I might owe my abdi- 
cation and dethronement, if she would permit me to finish my 
term of life in the seclusion of a cloister. Think you I know not 
ivhose hand has hidierto grasped the reins of empire — whose voice 
lias swayed my councils — whose mandates have controlled my 
edicts — whose policy has influenced my actions? Think you I 
deemed, when Catherine resigned the regency of this realm to me, 
she resigned also its sovereign sway? Pardieu ! if such has been 
your opinion, it is time you Avere undeceived. I owe her mucli, 
but she owes me more. I am indebted to her for the name oi 
kinii: she has to thank me for the powers of royalty. If I have 
preferred an existence of enjoyment and repose (as much repose, 
at least, as is ever allotted to princes) to the cares and responsibili- 
ties of active government — if I have sought to dispel my e/niui 
by a thousand trifling occupations — if the pursuits of pleasure, 



302 CRICHTON. 

tlie exercises of devotion, the companionship of favourites and of 
mistresses, have engrossed my attention — though my people may 
have some reason to complain, my mother has none, because such 
a course has been consonant to her inchnations. I liave submitted 
iill to her disposah But, if I am rudely awakened from my dream 
of security — if I find that the arm which defended me has become 
hostile — that what I have quietly yielded is to be forcibly wrested 
from me — that not even the semblance of rule is to be left ; what 
■wonder if T start, like one from a trance, and. banishing from my 
breast all feclin^^s, save those akin to justice and retribution, 
prepare to wreak my vengeance upon the heads of the aggres- 
sors ?" 

" Calm yourself, my liege." 

" Tete-et-sang ! I am calm enough, as you will find anon, mon- 
seigneur. I pardoned my brother's first transgression — restored 
liim to my love — bestowed upon him in appanage the dukedoms 
of Berri and Anjou, tlie earldoms of Touraine and I\Iaine, and 
refused only his solicitation for the lieutenant-generalship of the 
kingdom. I had good reasons for my refusal. I reserved that 
liigh post for some adherent, trustworthy and meritorious as the 
Due de Nevers." 

'• Sire," replied the duke, in confusion, unable to divine Henri's 
j-eal meaning, and fearful of some snare being laid for him, " I 
liave already received too many proofs of your favour." 

"Bah!" exclaimed the king, with ill-disguised irony; " I never 
till now sufficiently appreciated your services or fidelity. True, 
I thought, in raising you to your present elevated position — in 
■entrusting my Piedmontesc army to your command — in appointing 
you to the government of Pigneroi, Savillan, and La Perose ; in 
j)lacing certain wealthy benefices at your disposal ; in granting you a 
heavy pension from the coffers of the state, and investing you with 
the cordon of the Saint-Espi-it wdiich hangs from your gorget; in 
doing all this I imagined I had made some slight return for your 
imremitting zeal and devotedness. But I perceive my mistake. I 
liave yet a greater service to exact : — I have yet a higher reward 
to offer." 

" The service I can conjecture," said the duke, after a pause — 
" the reward—" 

" The post I refused to Anjou. I\Iy refusal made liini a traitor. 
jNIy grant shall make you loyal." 

"Sire!" 

" Your brevet shall be signed to-morrow." 

" 1 should prefer it to-day," replied the duke, significantly. 
*' To-morrow it may be out of your majesty's power." 

'• lla!" exclaimed Henri, with a thrill of apprehension, " is my 
peril then so imminent? Mary Mother protect me!" 

" In the Virgin's name," whispered the duke, " I beseech you 
to maintain your composure. You are surrounded by the spies of 



THE MISSAL. 30?^ 

Catlicrine dc iMedlci?, avIiosc glances are fixed upon your every look 
it/iu gesture ; whose ears are on the alert to catch each word you let 
fall. Still appear to suspect me, or I sliall hecomc as much the 
o6ject of their vigilance as your majesty. You are on the brink 
of a precipice. My arm alone can arrest your fall." 

" llow shall I evince my gratitude?" said Henri, vainly endea- 
vouring to repress his agitation. 

" By the fuUilment of your promise, sire." 

" Doubt it not — doubt it not, my cousin. You shall h.avc yom- 
appointment on my return to the Louvre. I swear it by Saint 
Louis, my patron ! And now relieve my anxiety. You have put 
mo on the rack — " 

" Your majesty must excuse my saying more at present," returned 
the duke, evasively; " I have already said too much. Your cabinet 
will be the fittest place for my lurther disclosures. Here I dare not 
breathe them. Meantime, do not disquiet yourself. I will answer 
for your safety." 

Henri darted an angry and distrustful glance at the wily De 
Nevers. "Who will answer for your honesty, monsieur Ic due?" 
he said. 

" San-Francesco, my patron," replied the duke, smiling. 

" Where is the Prince Vincenzo?" demanded Henri. 

" He has been removed by his attendants to the Hotel de 
Nevers," answered the duke. " Heaven be praised his Avound is 
not dangerous." 

" 'TIs well !" exclaimed Henri. " And now take heed, cousin, 
lo-morrow you are chief in command of our armies, or," he added, 
in a deep, determined tone, " the Duke of Mantua will have to 
lament his son and brother." 

" As you please, my liege," rejoined De Nevers, with affjcted 
indifference. " I have warned you, and you will find my Avarning 
fearfully verified if you neglect it. Arouse the suspicions of 
Catherine de Medicis, and all is lost. Her party is stronger than 
your own. Her majesty, I perceive," he continued, carelessly 
looking in that direction, " has quitted the grand gallery. She has 
remarked our conference, and despatched a secret messenger to 
ascertain its object. It must be brought to a close. Pardon my 
freedom, sire. Danger Is not ceremonious." 

" So I find," said Henri. 

" Be ruled by me, my liege," continued the duke, " and your 
crown shall be preserved without risk — without bloodshed. 1 will 
meet plot with counter-plot ; stratagem with stratagem ; and turn 
the weapons of your adversaries agamst themselves. One life only 
shall be sacrificed." 

" The life of my brother?" faltered Henry. 

" No, sire; that of your rival in the affections of Esclalrmonde 
— that of the Chevalier Crichton." 

*' Sauff-dlcu ! though I shall not re^rret to be freed from a rival so 



.304 CRICHTON. 

formidiiblc as Ciichton, 1 sec not how his destruction will ensure 
the success of your sclicmes." 

" On liiin rests the cliief rehance of Catherine de Medicis — of the 
Due d'Anjoti. On him devolves the terrible part of your assassi- 
nation." 

"Jesus!" eAclaimed Henri, smelling at a flacon which he took 
Irom Ills escarcelle. 

" He must die." 

' In heaven's name let him die, cousin. Order lils instant exe- 
cution, if you think proper." 

" In good time, my liege. And now let mo counsel your 
majesty to coihmand some of your youthful nobles and gentlemen 
to enter the lists, or to engage in such knightly exercises as may 
induce your lynx-eyed motlier and her mouchards to conclude our 
tete-a-tete lias had reference only to the business of the tilt-yard-' 

*' \Yell thought of, cousin," replied Henri. "But can you not 
devise some better expedient than the withdrawal of our loyal 
attendants from our side at a critical conjuncture like the present? 
I dare not — will not hazard it." 

" What sav you to a combat of animals, sire?" insinuated De 
Nevers. " Many montlis have elapsed since the gentle dames of 
your court had an opportunity of witnessing a spectacl'^ So deli<j;ht- 
ful. It will affird them the highest gratification, and answer our 
purpose admirably. Suppose you make trial of the strength and 
ferocity of the African lion, sent by Phdlp II. of Spain, against 
the tigers lately presented to your majesty by the Grand Signer 
Amurath III., or, if you think that match unequal, against the 
pack of German wolves — " 

" Or Italian foxes," interrupted Henri. *' No, De Nevers; were 
the lion worsted, I should hold it an evil omen. I have often heard 
of the extreme hardihood of an English bull-dog in the fight; I 
win now put it to the test." 

" Bravo !" exclaimed the duke. 

" I have a wild Spanish bull, black as Pluto, and fierce as 
Chiron," continued the king; " he shall sustain the hound's attack. 
Bid his keepers bring him forth, and chain him to the stoutest post 
they can find, in the lists. Mort-dieu! 'twill be brave sport," ho 
added, rubbing his hands with pleasurable anticipation. 

De Nevers bowed and retired. Henri gazed after him a moment 
in silence, and then addressing his chief valet, said quickly, 
'• Follow him, Du Halde, and let me know with whom he con- 
verses. Take note of all he does. Away I — Strange!" he mut- 
tered, '* everything, whether of love or peril, In which I am con- 
cerned, seems to liinge upon Crichton." 

" Nof at all, compere," said Chicot, who had overheard the 
latter part of the monarch's self-communion; " he is your destiny,'* 

" How, gossip?" 

** In his hand rest your crown —your life — your mistress." 



THE MISSAL. 30o 

•• Sirrah !" 

" Hcnriot," said the jester, witli a luok that ill became his 
wonted hiughter-moving visage, "lor the first time in my life I am 
serious." 

" And the last, I hope, gossip," returned the king. 
" iS'o, compere, I shall be more serious Avhen 1 am buffoon to 
Francois III. By my bauble! I had rather they should carve 
ine a monument like that of Ihevenin de Saint-Ligier, tlie faithful 
fool of Charles V., at Scnlis, than what I fear should happen. And 
it tcill happen unless you profit by my caution." 
" And what is thy caution, my poor gossip?' 
" Place your faith in Crichton, cher Henriot," -whimpered the 
jester. " Otherwise I shall certainly lose one of the best of masters, 
and France will as certainly gain one of the worst of kinc-s." 

Struck by the jester's unfeigned, though ludicrous, emotion, 
Henri seemed to reflect for a short time. He then motioned the 
Scot to approach him. " Chevalier Crichton," he said, " to your 
charge I intrust this missal. I may require you to produce it here- 
after. But understand me, and you too, messeigneurs," he added, 
looking round, " the suspicions entertained of treasonable intentions 
on the part of my brother have been entirely dispelled by the Due 
de Nevers. I recal my accusation, and beg of you to dismiss it from 
your remembrance." 

A murmur of astonishment and displeasure was heard araon<y the 
courtiers. 

" Have I your majesty's permission to defy the Due de Nevers 
to the combat," said Crichton, unable to repress his indignation, 
" and to extort from his own lips an avowal of his treason?" 

" It is needless, mon cher. He has cleared himself from all im- 
putation of guilt." 

" You are the dupe of this wily Italian, my liege," returned the 
Scot, with warmth; " he is a felon knight, and disloyal gentleman." 
" The duke is absent, messire," said Henri, anxious to put an end 
to the discussion. 

" On his return I will hurl the epithets in his teeth." 
"Be that task mine," cried Joycuse. "You have won nonour 
enough. My sword is eager to leave the scabbard." 

" I have a vow to defend his majesty against all traitois," ex- 
claimed Saint-Luc, " and claim the right of challenge." 

"His be the right who first shall affront the caitiff," shouted 
D'Epernon, striking spurs into his charger. 

" Agreed !" cried Joycuse, following the baron's example. " AVe 
fhall see who M-ill be first in the race." 

" Hold ! messeigneurs," ejaculated Henri, authoritatively. " Let 
no one stir from hence on pain of our sovereign displeasure." 

" Vive-dieu !" exclaimed Joycuse, chafing with vexation. " Your 
majesty shows more favour to traitors than to your loyal fol- 
lowers." 

X 



306 cuicnTON. 

" Be ]')atlcnt, mon enfant," returned Henri, smiling graciously,. 
" Your devotion and that ot" my other laithlul friends shall not be 
forgotten. Meantime, I forbid all further allusion to this matter. 
Alter the banquet we shall hold a secret council, at which thou, 
Saint-Luc, D'Epernon, Crichton, and, I trust, my brother of Na- 
varre, will assist. Till then, keep guard upon your speech and 
actions. Chevalier Cri«_iiton, a word with you." 

" By m}' patron, the Evangelist," said Saint-Luc, shrugging his 
shoulders, " I am completely in the dark." 

" And I," rejoined D'Epernon. " Henri seems bewitched. 
Like a love-sick damsel he will — and he will not. He evidently 
distrusts De Nevers, and yet will not avow his suspicions." 

" He has good reasons, doubtless, for his caution," observed Joy- 
cuse. " I will be sworn this false duke has betrayed his own party, 
and purchased Henri's fivour willi the heads of his colleagues. I 
am, moreover, of opinion, that in lieu ol'a peaceful melee by torch- 
light, we shall have a sanguinary conllict witli swords and sharp- 
ened lances. So much the better ! Perish the Medicis and her 
train of Italian impostors, priests, poisoners, and panders. If we 
can free Henri's neck from this intolerable yoke, he will indeed 
become a king." 

"And thou?" interrupted D'Epernon, laughing. 

"A duke, peradventure," returned Joyeuse. "En attendant, 
we arc to have a duel between two rallines in the art of offence. 
The horns of the bull Avill, I trust, avenge the injuries inflicted by 
the teeth of that accursed liound on my gallant charger Bavieca." 

" The hound will be the victor, for a thousand pistoles," cried 
Saint-Luc. 

" I am for you," replied Joyeuse, eagerly. 

"Let us look at him," said D'Epernon; " methought he was 
sorely wounded by your men-at-arms." 

" That will not prevent his fighting," said Saint-Luc. "These 
dogs are the bravest in the world, and will i\ii\\t as long as life 
endures." 

Upon which the three nobles directed their coursers towards the 
Englishman, at whose feet Druid still crouched. 

" What think you of all this, Rosni?" said the King of Navarre 
to his counsellor. 

"That migchlef is brewing, sire," replied the baron, knitting his 
brows, " and that the Valois is either a knave, or a Ibol — perhaps 
both." 

" It is easy to see that a storm Is gathering," rejoined the Bour- 
bon. " But It will pass harmlessly over our heads, and may, per- 
haps, facilitate our evasion." 

" It may so," returned Rosnl, gravely. 

Henri HI. meantime conferred apart with Crichton. " Guard 
that missal," he said, continuing his instructions, " as you would the 
hidden letters of her you love; as you would a tress of her hair, or 



THE MISSAL. 307 

a glove from licr liand; as you would guard holy relic or cliai-mcd 
amulet. I may require it anon." 

" 1 will guard it as I would the honour of her I love, sire," re- 
turned Crichton, haughtily. " It shall be wrested from mc only 
with life." 

"When the bull-fight is ended," said Henri, '* depart secretlv 
from the Louvre, and proceed to the Hotel de Nevers. Here i's 
my signet. Display it to any of the captains of the guard, and 
such men-at-arms as you may require will attend you. Arrest the 
Prince Vinccnzo — " 

"Sire!" 

" Interrupt mc not. Arrest him, I say, and let him be conveyed 
in a litter to the palace. I will give orders for his further custody. 
Tills done, rejoin us at the banquet." 

" Sire," rejoined Crichton, regarding the king with a searching 
glance, " whatever commands you niay impose upon me, I will 
obey. I would, however, counsel you to adopt measures widely 
different. I am at no loss to discover your design. It is unworthy 
of the grandson of Francois I., — of the son of Henri II. Unmask 
these traitors, and let them perish by the death they merit. Sever 
the web they have woven around you with the sword. But do not 
resort to this perfidious Machiavelian policy — treachery against 
treachery, in which the winner is the loser — or you will find, 
Avhen too late, tliai you are not so profoundly versed in its mysteries, 
or so intimately acquainted with its thousand shifts and expe- 
dients, as tlie subtle queen with whom you have to contend." 

" We shall see," replied Henri, angrily. " What I now require 
is obedience, not counsel." 

" Qvicqiiid deliraiit )ef/es" cried Chicot, who had stolen upon 
them unawares. " I am now more than ever convinced of the 
wisdom of the sajje who wrote that kinss are fools, and tools are 
kings. IMark the intimate relationship between us. 

Kings are fools, and fools are kings, 

Majesty does foolish things, 

While from Folly wisdom springs. 

^lajesty her sceptre swings. 

Folly soon her bauble brings; 

Majesty to tinsel clings. 

Folly bells of silver rings. 

Crowns and coxcombs, fools and kings 

i\re inseparable things: 

"Where Kings govern Folly rules, 

Fools are kings, and kings are fools I" 

At this moment a loud bellowing roar, followed by general 
plaudits, announced the appearance of a new combatant within the 
precincts of the tilt-yard. 



x2 



308 CRICHTON. 

CHAPTER XL 

THE BULL. 

J'av ouv conter que feu son pore luyfaisoit meslor en tons ?es mangers ct boircs 
de lajxiudre d'ur. d'acier ct ile t'er. pour le bien fortifier; ce qu'il continua si bien 
iusqu'i' lagc de douze ans. qu'il le rendit ainsi fort et robuste, jusqu'a prendre un 
taureau par les comes, et I'arrester en sa furie. 

Brantome. Hommes lUustres : Disc. LXXXII. 

A MENAGERIE, ill tlie olden time, was considered an indispen- 
sable appendage to regal state. Sauval relates, that from the 
rei<m of ChaVles V. to that of Louis XIL, there existed in 
the Rue Froidmantcl, immediately behind the Louvre, a building 
" oii soiilaif;vt estre les lions du roi.'' When the ancient palace of 
the kincrs of France was in part destroyed to make way for the 
mnf^nilicent structure, erected upon its site by Pierre Lescot, and 
now known as the old Louvre, this vivarium, removed to one of 
the outer courts, was greatly increased by Fran9ois I., and carefully 
maintained by his successors. Here, on grand occasions, conflicts 
took place between the savage occupants of the various cages, and the 
atrocities of a Roman amphitheatre were, in some degree, revived. 
Here the inhuman Charles IX., in whose bosom the soul of Nero 
was lodged, frequently repaired with his favourites to indulge his 
insatiable appetite for carnage. Here, brilliant crowds assembled; 
and the courage and devotion of a lover were sometimes severely 
tested bv his mistress, who, dropping her glove into the scene of 
strife, niade its restoration the price of future favours. 

An exploit of this description, attended witii more than ordi- 
nary peril, marked the commencement of Crichton's amour with 
Marguerite de Valois. A combat of animals had been commanded. 
Scallbldings, reared around the court, were graced with the flower 
and loveliness of the land. A fiercely-contested fight, between the 
ruler of the forest and the sole disputant of his sway — the striped 
tifer, had terminated in the defeat of the latter. With mane erect 
and paw heavily imposed upon the lacerated breast of his antagonist, 
the kingly brute, still growling witli rage, glared defiance at the 
assemblage ; when, amid the hush of silent admiration that 
succeeded his victory, was heard the light musical laugh of the 
Queen of Navan-e, and the next moment her embroidered kerchief 
fell at the feet of the slaughtered tiger. The curiosity of the s])cctators 
to ascertain whose faith was to undergo this dread ordeal was 
not long ungratified. Exclamations of terror burst from many a 
gentle lip as the figure of a youthful cavalier was discovered within 
the aren.i. To the terrible encounter in which he was about to 
engage, this youth brought only a polgnard, and a short Spanish 
mantle swathed around his left arm. His finely-formed limbs had 
jiu other delence than was afforded by a rich attire of velvet and 



THE BULL. 309 

saye, while his fair uncovered locks, lloatinnr over his shoulders, 
added to tlie noble and poetical beauty of his countenance. He 
looked like O.i^ier le Danois before the lion-guarded seats of Avalon. 
AVitli a fwilt and resolute step he advanced towards his foe, who 
awaited his approach with grim, but majestic composure. He 
had attained the object of his (piest; his loot was placed on tlic 
kci'chier; his eyes were fixed steadlas-tly upon tlie kiiidlipg orbs of 
tlic lion. At this juncture — and when scarcely a breath was drawn 
by the spectatois — a page at the back of the scaifold was seized with 
sudden faintness, and uttered a piercing cry. So absorbing, how- 
cvev. was the interest of the passing scene, that no one heeded hi:n, 
and he i'ell back deprived of sense. Better had it been for that 
page he had never revived ! Koused by the cry, the lion menace(\ 
his Jatal spring. With a roar that shook the rafters of tlie gallery, 
he prepared to dart upon his intrepid ene»ny. But the cavalier 
evaded the attack. As the i'urious beast I funded against him, he 
sprang to one side, and, with marvellous force and skill, plunged his 
dagger deeply into the animal's throat. The wound was not 
mortal. Lashing his sides with rage, the lion returned instantly to 
the charge. On this occasion, the cavalier flung himself on the 
ground; and, as the animal passed over his prostrate body, inflicted 
another and surer stroke. The roseate hue, which, during the com- 
bat, had deserted the blooming cheek of Marguerite de Valois, re- 
turned with added lustre as the cavalier, on bended knee, shortly 
afterwards sued for the prize he had so dearly won. Marguerite 
smiled upon him, as she granted his request, as only queens (and 
queens who love) can smile; and that smde was then in his esteem 
held cheaply purchased by the hazard he had run. 

On the same night the page we have described as overcome by 
emotion, beheld another conflict, between the cavalier and the most 
celebrated duellist of his day, Ic bien raffuie Bussy D'Amboise — at 
that time the avowed favourite of the Queen of Navarre. In this 
second encounter he Avas fortunate as the flrst. He disarmed and 
shghtly wounded his adversary. Quitting this rendezvous, which 
took place in a retired walk within the gardens ol' the Louvre, the 
cavalier entered the palace, still warily followed by the J^age. He 
was admitted, with some mystery, to the apartments of Marguerite 
de Valois. Framing a thousand excuses, the page awaited his 
return witliin a corridor. It was a night of lengthened torture, 
for the gallant appeared not till dawn, when, with a quick and 
buoyant step, he passed the miserable witness of his bonne fortune. 
" Why I'ollow you not your master, the Seigneur Crichton, 
good youth ?" said Aubiac, Marguerite's confldential valet, to the 
page, who remained like one stupifled. " The coast is clear — 
away !" 

" Call him not my master," replied the page, bursting into an 
agony of tears, and tearing his raven curls; "1 serve him not — I 
love him not — I will ibrget him. As to your royal mistress," he 



310 CRICHTON. 

continued, glancing with fury at the dooi', " may my curse full upon 
her; may she endure the anguish I have endured; may she pass 
one such night as I have passed." And with these words he 
vushed from the corridor. 

" Ha! ha!" laughed Aubiac; "I see how it is — a girl in dis- 
j^uise — over head and cars in love with this handsome Scot, Avliom 
all the women rave about, though for my part I see nothing extra- 
ordinary in him. However, as Madame ^largucrite admires him, I 
suppose he has merits I cannot discover. From henceforth the 
SieurBussy is dismissed; and for three weeks, or, it may be, tlirce 
days, the Sieur Crichton Avill reign in his stead. Maugrebleu ! I 
must take care that pretty vixen docs not find her way here again. 
Of all plagues a jealous woman is the most intolerable; and of all 
women, your woman of intrigue is the most jealous. Madame 
^Marguerite is the most jealous woman I have the honour to know. 
Tiie malediction of that unhappy damsel is likely enough to attach 
to her. Where have I seen that lovely face before ? Those dark 
eyes are certainly not imknown to me. She looks like an Italian : 
ah ! I have it — I recollect her. She is the principal actress of the 
Hotel de Bourbon. A line girl i'faith. This Crichton is fortunate. 
I should prefer her to the queen." 

Aubiac was right in the conjecture. It icas the Gelosa. 

To return. Within the menagerie previously described the Duo 
<ie Nevers sought out the warlike beast destined to sustain the 
attack of Druid. Captured amid the Sierra Morena, this wild 
mountain bull — one of the fiercest of his untameable race 
— was so little subdued in spirit by confinement, that it re- 
quired considerable address to approach him; and it was only by 
entirely excluding light from his den, that his keepers were enabled 
to bind and blindfold him. In this state — now rushing madly 
forward, now suddenly halting, with lip curled upwards, nostrils 
distended, head bent down, and tail erect — foaming, butting, bel- 
lowing, and leaping — girt, as to his neck and shoulders, with a 
strong tether of ropes, so disposed, that he could neither break 
loose from his bondage, nor injure himself by its pressure; the 
furious animal, exaspei'atcd by the shouts of the spectators, reached 
the middle of the arena, where he was speedily attached to the 
central and stoutest stake in the lists. This done, the covering was 
withdrawn from his eyes. 

Dazzled bv the sudden transition from obscurity to sunshine, the 
bull appeared for a moment bewildered. He then uttered a sullen, 
ominous moan, which, in the opinion of the experienced, gave 
unquestionable assurance of resolution and ferocity. His vigour 
con id not be doubted. In make he was perfect. Broad-chested, 
wide-fronted, straight-backed, thick-necked, well-hammed — curled, 
shaggy, tufted; his tremendous energies were plainly written in 
every limb. In colour, from the points of his short, sharp, wrinkled 
horns to his pawing hoofs, he was black as the steeds of Pluto. 



THE BULL. 311 

The old Syrncusans would have chosen him as an acceptable sacri- 
fice to that Deity. Glaring around the assemblage with eyes of 
flame, tossing the sand over his shoulders, and lashing his sides 
with his tall, he all at once changed his moan into a fierce prolonn'ed 
roar of defiance. This challenge was instantly answered by a growl 
deep and terrible as his own. 

Before, however, we attempt to describe the combat, we will 
repair, for a few moments, to the outer ranks of the spectators, 
composed of the burgesses, the scholars, and others of the com- 
monalty of Paris. 

" Vale me Dios!"' exclaimed a swarthy-visaged knave, with a 
broad-leaved, rusty sombrero pulled over his beetle brows, pressin^^ 
forward as he spoke to obtain a nearer view of the bull; " a noble 
animal, and of a good heart, I'll be sworn. He is of the rifdit 
breed and make. I know his stock well. He comes from the 
mountains of Estremadura; from the heights of the Guadalcana, 
where range herds of the finest steers in Spain — ciertamente ! I 
have seen a hundred such when a grand bull-fight lias been held in 
the Plaza at Madrid, in the presence of his most Catholic Majesty, 
Don Felipe; and by the black eyes of my mistress it Avas a ijlorious 
sight 1" 

" No doubt of it, most veracious Don Diego Caravaja," rejoined 
a bystander, turning round, and disclosing the cynical countenance 
of the Sorbonist. " But what brings you here, my hidalgo? I 
was told you had entered into the service of Ruggieri, on the last 
day of his compact with Sathanas, and were to be hanged from the 
walls of the Grand Chatelet, at the precise juncture that the fagots 
of the old sorcerer were lighted in the Place de Grove. Pardicu! 
I am clad to find I was misinformed." 

"Never believe idle rumours, amigo," said the Spaniard, twist- 
ing; his moustache after a threatening fashion ; " Rutrfjieri is free; 
and the hemp is yet unsown that shall form my halter. I, the 
familiar of a magician — fob ! Hark ye, compafiero," he added, 
mysteriously, " I am in the service of the queen-mother." 

" You have quitted the devil, tlien, for his dam," replied the Sor- 
bonist, with a sneering laugli. " But i'faith, man, whether you have 
escaped the noose of the hangman, or the clutches of the fiend, I am 
deliglited to see you. I am only sorry we shall lose the agreeable 
spectacle of your master's — I beg pardon — Ruggleri's execution. 
Because I had a wager with our comrade, the Bernardin, who 
stands by my side, that the Prince of Darkness would, as a matter 
of policy, deliver so serviceable an agent from the midst of his fiery 
torment." 

*' Which wager you have Indubitably lost, compaign," laughed 
the Bernardin, " for the black prince has clearly interfered in his 
behalf by releasing him before he has even snuffed the odours of 
the resinous torches. Sapristi ! I would you had laid a like 
stake on Caravaja. I should have been a double winner — ho ! 
—ho !" 



J12 CKICHTON. 

"Whoso wagereth on my neck, had better look to his own,** 
said the Spaniard, coolly, at the same time tappin<^ the hilt of his 
long Toledo in a significant manner, " or there may be more slitting 
than choking of weasands. A truce, however, to jesting. I am in 
no mood I'or it. In regard to the execution, you will not be dis- 
appointo.l, senors. The Pre-aux-Clercs will not want a bonfire to- 
night. Ruggieri's name has been ei'ased from the warrant, and 
that of Florent Chretien substituted." 

" lo triumphe ! let me embrace thee for the intelligence," cried 
the Sorbonist. " I had vowed that old sinner's destruction. 
Better one heretic should perisli than a thousand sorcerers. Tliere 
is some hope of tlie conversion of the latter. Besides, it will be a 
pleasant pastime to him. 

Tormenta, career, nnjiuLe, 
Stridensque flamniis lamina, 
Atque ipsa pcEiiarum ultima 
Mors Lutheranis ludus est — 
liidebat base miles Dei." 

" Chito!" whispered Caravaja, placing his finger on his lips, and 
again assuming a mysterious air, " this is not the only spectacle you 
will behold to-night." 

" Indeed!" exclaimed the Sorbonist, elevating his eyebrows into 
an expression of surprise; '' what goodly sight is in reserve?" 

" May I trust you?" demanded tlie Spaniard, yet more myste- 
riously. 

" You may, if your disclosure be not treasonable," returned the 
scholar, mimicking the tone and gesture of his companion. 

" Treasonable or not, I will confide in you," replied Caravaja, in 
a low voice; " see you these rose-nobles?" he added, thrusting his 
hand into his doublet, and exhibiting, under the shadow of his cloak, 
which he held over them, a glittering handful to the greedy eyes 
of his companion. 

" Whose throat are you bribed to cut?" asked the Sorbonist, 
spitefully. 

" Thine, if thou amendest not tliy speech, amigo. But listen to 
me, and I will tell tliee how to replenish thine empty pouches. I 
have discovered the true El Dorado. Lend me thine ear." 

The Sorbonist complied. He soon became deeply interested in 
Caravaja's commurdcation. 

" And is this to take place to-night ?" he inquired, as the. 
Spaniard concluded. 

Caravaja nodded. 

" And the whole court is to be turned topsy-turvy?" 

Caravaja nodded again. 

" And thine office — our office, I should say — if I join you — is 
— the word sticks in my throat — the assassination of Crichton?" 

Caravaja nodded for the third time, adding a shght cough by 
way of emphasis. 



t^ 



THE BULL. 313 

"By Barrabas! I like it not," said the Sorbonist, as if struek 
witli contrition. " I would not stick at a trifle — but tins is crinic 
on too grand a scale for my fancy," 

" Choose," returned Caravnja, pointing alternately to tlie purse 
and a poiu:;nai'd. " I have but to name thee to one of Catherine's 
mouchanls, of whom there are plenty around us, and the cluuices 
arc shrewdly against thy reaching the Sorbonne in time lor 
vespers." 

" Of two evils the wise man electcth the les?er," replied the 
scholar. " After all, one king is as good as another. Le roi est 
mort — vive le roi ! I am with you. I will be a conspirator. There 
is something antique and Roman in the idea of overthrowing a 
tyrant. It will be as amusing as the jeu dc coupc-tcte." 

" BuenoT' exclaimed tiie Spaniard, " to-night thou shalt help to 
rid us of a foe. To-morrow thou mayst, peradvcnture, fill the 
place of one of these minions of the Sybarite. The scarf 1 will 
trive thee anon. The word is — " 

'Hark!" cried the Bernardin, interrupting their conference. 
" The sport is about to begin. You will lose it altogether if you 
stand so nmch aloof May the devil direct the bull's horns to the 
heart of that accursed hound for the fright he gave me at the dit- 
])utation yesterday !" 

Leaving these worthies to struggle for a good station to vic\7 the 
fight, we shall now return to the arena. 

Druid, meantime, had not remained inactive. No fiery cham- 
pion ever evinced more impatience at the sound of hostile bugle, 
than he displayed on hearing the roaring challenge of the bull. 
His fury could scarcely be restrained; and his efforts to break loose 
became at length so violent, that Blount was compelled to take 
him in his arms, and forcibly restrain him. Covered with dust and 
blood — the thick gore slowly dropping from his unstanched 
wounds, his head swollen, his right eye closed — the poor brute 
presented a deplorable spectacle. But neither suffering nor exhaus- 
tion affected his courage — he was still fierce and terrible as hereto- 
fore. To the questions put by the youthful nobles by whom he 
■was surrounded, the Englishman refused all response, until tlie 
Vicomte de Joyeusc casually remarked, " that it was impossible the 
dog could fight long in that condition — he must speedily give in." 

A slight smile of derision passed across Blount's features. 

*' I would I wore as sure of my freedom as I am of Druid's 
endurance," he said. " He is thorough-bred. And I would stake 
my life — if my life were my own to stake — that when once he has 
tinned the bull, nothing will move him. You may hew him m 
pieces, from tail to jowl ; and, while life lasts, the fangs will 

cling." 

The nobles were laughing loudly at this boast, when Henri HI., 
attended by Crichton, who still ct)ntinued on foot, approached. 



314 CRICHTON. 

"Thy liound is in a sorry condition, maitre," said the kinf^j in a 
compassionate tone; " dost think hcAvili face his foe?" 

"I am assured of it, sire," repficd Blount. 

" Thou hast vaunted liis courage," continued Henri; "if he is 
victorious I give thee free pardon. If he loseth the battle thou 
diest." 

" I am well contented," answered the Englishman. 

The monarch and his retinue then proceeded to take up a posi- 
tion immediately in front of the bull, leaving an interval of some ten 
paces between them and the enraged animal, who eyed their move- 
ments with a look of malignant curiosity, redoubling his clamour, 
and vainly endeavouring to disengage himself from his bondage. 
All at once he became still — his glaring orbs seemed fascinated; he 
ceased bellowing; and giving a loud snort, that scattered the foam 
over his dusky shoulders, lowered the points of his horns. 

The spectators next beheld a man, bearing a dog in his arms, 
advance from the ranks. At his approach the bull brought his 
broad front almost to a level with the sand. 

Like his antagonist, the dog had left off growling. There was 
something formidable in the sudden silence of these two savage 
beasts, who had up to that moment filled the tilt-yard with their 
roaring. 

Arrived within fitting distance of the hostile party, Blount depo- 
sited his burden upon the ground. 

" Upon him !" he cried; " thy country's honour is at stake." 

But Druid stirred not. 

" How, sir!" exclaimed Blount, angrily; "has thy valour dege- 
nerated since I brought thee to this craven country? Ha! I see," 
he added, changing his manner; "/am to blame, not thou." 
Upon which he clapped his hands together smartly twice or thrice, 
and uttered a shrill and peculiar cry. 

Exasperated by these sounds, the bull slightly raised his head. 
The instant he did so, Druid, who had watched liis opportunity, 
sprang furiously upon him, and made good his hold by fixing his 
teeth in the tliick and fleshy covering of his antagonist's eye. 
Bellowing with rage and pain, the Avounded animal sought to 
free himself from his persecutor by violently dashing his head to 
the earth, plunging it between his legs, shaking and tossing it in 
the air. His efforts were in vain. Crushed, bruised, and gored, 
Druid relinquished not his gripe. 

The spectators were in ecstasies. Henri IH. laughed till the 
tears filled his eyes. The Bourbon, who stood on his right hand, 
appeared equally to enjoy the spectacle. 

" By my bauble !" cried Ciiicot, thrusting himself between the 
steeds of the two monarchs, " 'tis royal sport ! and worthy the 
illustrious beholders. A goodly conclusion to a chivalrous spec- 
fade — ha — ha! The sutie after the tragedy — the charivari after 
the widow's espousals. May it end as well as it hath begun! 



TIIK BULL. 315 

Yon luigo cornuto," lie added, dartini^f a malicious glance at the 
Xing of Navane, " appears, as yet, to have the worst of it." 

" Kail on, knave," returned tlie Bourbon, lauMiin"- good- 
hutnoredly; " tliou art welcome." 

" Fear me not," rejoined Chicot; " I am of tlie bull-dorr breed 
myself : 

Ut caiiis a corio minquam abstcrrebitur uncto, 
I never relax — once bit, hold tight. Attend ! 

The horns of a bull, 

'J'he sword of a fool, 

The heels of a mule, 

Make a King of Misrule. 

But of crown should he bo shorn, 

"Who weareth wittol's horn ; 

Better queen had never suckled him, 

Than other (juean should cuckold him !" 

The jester did not wait to see what effect these ribald strains 
■produced upon the subject of liis satire, but diving under the 
charger of his own sovereign, disappeared. 

A loud shout was now raised. Tlie bull had obtained a monicn- 
tnry advantage over his assailant. By a tremendous effort — at- 
tended with considerable detriment to his own hide — he succeeded 
in dislodging Druid, whom, he Hung to a great height above his 
head. Fortunately, the brave hound escaped the deadly points 
that awaited his descent, but he fell so heavily to the ground, that 
few imagined he would rise to renew the conflict: — an opinion which 
was further strengthened when the bull, bending his knees, dropped 
upon Druid's body before he had time to recover himself, and strove 
to crush him by his ponderous weight. At this juncture the voice 
of the Englishman was heard in encouragement of his luckless 
companion. 

" What ho ! Druid — what ho !" he cried; " bestir thyself, or the 
knees of that accursed brute Avill force all the breatli from thy 
body. By Saint Dunstan ! I can scarcely forbear my hand. Up ! 
man — and rouse thee — or it is all over with both of us." 

Henri III. was no less disturbed. 

" Mort-dieu !" he ejaculated, "the brave hound will be slain, 
and I shall lose one, who might have proved my trustiest follower. 
Fool that I was to command this fight." 

*' Had you not better throw down your warder, fjossip?" said 
Chicot, suddenly appearing on the left hand of the king ; " tlie 
chivalrous bull will probably attend to your behests — and withhold 
the stroke of mercy. Down with it ! — the base cur yields." 

" 'Tis false, thou yelping limmer, he does tint yield," exclaimed 
Crichton, Avho, stationed also on the left of Henri IH,, liad 
"watched the contest with lively interest. Seest thou not the mad- 
dened beast hath, in the blindness of his fury, driven his horns 
deeply into the soil, and not into the dog's reins. And mark how 



316 CniCHTON. 

Druid struggles with lils luige oppressor, like Typhon with tlie 
rocks of Jove — or Hercules Avith the Cretan bull. Look ! he has 
extricated himself! — ha ! — bravely done ! — bravely done ! — to the 
assault ! staunch hound — to the assaidt ! Fix thy keen and tenacious 
fangs within his leathern nostrils. 'Tis done ! — 'tis done ! — there 
thou wilt cling till thy foe sinks from exhaustion. The victory is 
thine. By Saint Andrew!" he added, with warmth, "1 would 
rather assail the bull myself, than that noble hound should perish." 

" Your assistance is needless," i-eplied Joyeuse, whose hilarity,, 
occasioned by Di-uid's recent perilous position, had become over- 
cast by the present aspect of the fray; " I fear I shall lose my wager 
as well as my charger." 

" Ceries, if you have backed tlie bull, you will infallibly lose," 
said tlie Scot, laughing, " for see! even now he staggers, and (.'x- 
liibits symptoms of faintness." 

'• There I differ with you, mon cher," rejoined the king; " to me 
he appears as if he were collecting his energies for some mighty 
effort. Kemember, tliis is no stall-fed, scant-winded steer." 

Druid, as will have ocen gathered from the foregoing dis- 
course, had again made good his hold upon the nostiils of his anta- 
gonist; and such was the effect of Ids combined weight and Strength, 
that he contrived to detain the bull, for some little space, in the 
kneeling posture he had just assumed.- No sooner, liowever, did 
the latter animal regain his feet, than, nigh frantic wltli wrath and 
agony, he resorted to every expedient that desperation suggested, 
ol" freeinrr himself from his relentless assailant. Worn out, at length, 
with repeated fruitless attempts, he became comparatively tranquil; 
and it was this cessation from strife that Crlchton had construed 
into relaxing energy, but which was rather, as the king had sur- 
mised, the preparation for a mightier struggle. 

" Saint Geori>-e for England!" shouted Blount, whose san^julne 
anticipations had also deceived him — " the victory is ours. A few 
minutes must decide tlie conflict — hurrah !" 

But tlie next moment the Enfjlishman's countenance fell — the 
smile of exultation fled from his lips. He perceived his error- 
Renewing the combat with a fury that showed his vigour was un- 
diminished, the bull tore the ground with his hoofs — filled the air 
with his blatant cries — tossed his head as if a thousand hornets 
were buzzing about his ears — and shook the stake to which he was 
attached, as if he would uproot it. 

" Cornes de Diable !" screamed Chicot; " 'tis a pleasant sight to 
witness the fantastic gambols of von amiable beast, and equally 
diverting to listen to his music. Foreheaven he danceth the cou- 
ranto more deftly than the Chevalier Crichton — ha ! — ha ! — ho !" 

"Is the fastening secure, think you, mon cher Crlchton?" said 
Henri HI., noticing with uneasiness the violent strain produced 
upon the rope by the ceaseless struggles of the bull. 

" Have no fear, sire !" returned the Scot, advancing a step or 



THE BULL. 317 

two ill front of the_ king. *♦ I will place myself between your 
majesty and the possibility of harm." 

" Gramercy," rejoined Henri, smiling graciously; " and calling 
to mind your former exploit in the Court of Animals (wliich, c7t 
passant, cost me somewhat dear in tlie life of my noblest lion), 
I cannot doubt your ability to cope with a beast of inferior power. 
I shall, therefore, rest under your protection as securely as behind 
a rampart." 

" Vivat!" cried Joyeuse, " the bull wins!" 

" And the calf," added Chicot. 

As he spoke, the applauses, resounding on all sides, were sud- 
denly cliecked, and a wild cry of alarm, mingled with screams from 
the female portion of the assemblage, arose. Druid was a^aln 
tossed aloft, and tlie bull, instead of awaiting his fall to gore and 
trample him as heretofore, gave a headlong dash of such force 
that the rope, though of almost cable thickness, snapped in twain 
close to his thi-oat, and, thus liberated, the animal commenced a 
mad scamper on the arena. The first obstacle he encountered was 
Blount, whom he instantly overtluew. He paused not, however, 
to molest him, but rushed in the direction of Henri HI. 

" The king ! — the king !" cried a thousand eager voices. 
" Save the king I" 

But this seemed impossible. Ere a pike could be hurled, a bolt 
fired, or a sword drawn, the bull had reached the spot occupied by 
the monarch, and Henri's destruction would have been inevitable, 
if an arm of iron had not interposed between him and the danger 
with which he was menaced. That arm was Crichton's, who 
threw himself unhesitatingly upon the furious animal, and seizinfj 
his wrinkled horns, by the exertion of his almost superhuman 
strength arrested his career. 

Amid the turmoil that ensued, the voice of the Scot was heard 
sternly exclaiming, " Let no one touch him — I will achieve his 
subjection alone." 

Thus admonished, the crowds, who had flocked to his assistance, 
drew back. 

The struggles of the bull were desperate — but unavailing. He 
could neither liberate himself, nor advance. Suddenly, from actin" 
on the defensive, Crichton became the assailant. Calling into play 
all the energies of his muscular frame, he forcibly drove his oppo- 
nent backwards. 

" It is time to bring this conflict to a close," he thought, 
holding the bull's head, immoveably, with his right hand, while 
with his left he sought his poignard. 

• He then glanced towards the king. Surrounded by the bristling 
halberts of his guard, Henri looked on at his ease. 

" PolUcein verto," cried Chicot, " let him despatch his enemy, 
compere." 

The royal assent given, scarce another moment elapsed before the 
bull, mortally wounded by a blow dexterously stricken between 



318 CEICIITOX. 

the vortobraj of the neclc, fell to the ground. Thunders of" applause 
succeeded. 

The loyal cortege then formed into two Hnes, and Henri rode 
iorth to greet his preserver. 

" Chevalier Crichton," he said, " to you I owe my life. No Valois 
was ever imgrateful. Claim some boon, I pray you, at my liands." 

" Sire," replied Crichton, smiling, as he unhehned himself to 
wipe the dust and heat from his brow, " my demands will not ex- 
liaust your treasury. I ask only the life of that man," pointing to 
Blount, who, with folded arms and a dejected air, stood alternately 
regarding the carcase of the bull and l)ruid, who, stunned by his 
i'all, had with diinculty limped to his feet; "he will suller punish- 
ment enough in tiie mortification occasioned by his dog's defeat." 

•' It is yours," replied H-enri. 

" Your majesty will not separate tlic faithful hound from his 
master," continued the Scot. 

" As you please," sighed the monarch. "I cannot refuse your 
request." Crichton threw himself upon his knee, and pressed 
Henri's hand gratefully to his lips. 

" My thousand pistoles, Saint-Luc," said Joyeuse, gleefully. 

" They are not fairly won," replied Saint-Luc. " I appeal to 
D'Epernon." 

•' 'Tis a drawn wager," returned the baron; "and in future I 
recommend both of you to back a Scottish right arm against bull 
or bull-dog." 

CHAPTER XH. 

TUE PRIZE. 

Quand ilz fnrent tous devant sa presence, 

Et a genoulx pour sa face choisir, 

Le roy d'arnies en tres grant re'vc'rence 

Lui dit ce qu'il s'ensuit, et a loisir: 

Sire, avecques le vostre bon plaisir 

Et licence d'autre part obtenue. 

La pastourelle est devant vous venue 

Pour le grant pris delivrer orendroit 

A cellui qui sans doutance y a droit, 

Et dc dehors deservi I'ara niieux. 

Louis i>E Beauveau. Le Pas de la Bergien, 

Two sergeants of the guard now advanced, leading a steed, 
which the carcase of the slaughtered bull was promptly attach 
by means of cords, and dragged out of the arena. 

A pursuivant-at-arms, clothed in a sumptuous casaque flowered 
with the lilies of France, next approached; and, reverentiall}'- in- 
clining himself before Henri, demanded, in the name of the Queen 
of the Lists, his majesty's license to close the jousts. Permission 
being graciously accorded, the pursuivant, accompanied by a 
couple of trumpeters, who gallantly did their devoir, proceeded 
towards the pavilions, and removing the shields of the combatants, 
delivered that of Crichton to his esquire. This done, the judges 



THE PRIZE. 311) 

of the field, inars-halled by oMontjoic, descended from their tribunal, 
and gravely directed their course towards the grand gallcrv, into 
^vllich they Avere ceremoniously ushered. 

Crichton, meantime, looked on in silence. Indescrib;.blc emo- 
tinns swelled his bosom. The stirring notes of the trumpet re- 
kindled all his fire. INIuch as he had done to distinguisli hime-elf,. 
he burnt for new oj)portunities of disphiying his prowess, and would 
gladly have splintered another lance in honour of the bright eyes 
he worshipped. 

" What would life be," ran his self-communion, " without 
ambition — Avithout fame — without love? — hopeless slavery — 
and prolonged torture. I for one could endure not its burden. 
jNIv life shall be computed by days, not years; witli me hours 
shall play the part of days — moments of hours. I will crowd into 
eacli moment as much of active existence as that moment will 
comprehend, nor will I know pause till fate shall for ever clieck 
my impulses. I reverence age; but I desire not its honours. I 
would rather die covered with glory than bowed down by years. 
Were I to perish now, I sliould have lived long enougli. And if 
I can achieve the deliverance of her, to whose love my heart is for- 
bidden to aspire — but for whom alone it can ever beat; if I can free 
yon brave monarch from his thraldom; and that inconstant, yet not 
imgenerous voluptuary, from the peril in which lie stands — I care 
not if this day be my last." 

As these thoughts swept through his mind, the countenance of 
the Scot — ever the faithful mirror of his emotions — took a sliglit 
cast of sadness; and Henri, inspired by jealousy, having narrowly 
scrutinised his features during this momentary reverie, fancied he 
could detect the secrets of his inmost soul. 

•' It will not do to trust him," thought the king; " his passion is 
stronger than his loyalty. Hola ! Chevalier Crichton," he added, 
aloud, and in a tone of raillery, "while you are studying your 
next ode, or preparing a thesisfbr the schools, we, less philosophical, 
less poetical mortals, are dreaming only of the speedy appearance of 
the Queen of the Lists to award the chief prize of the tourney, 
I have some notion upon whom it will be bestowed. Attend me 
to the tribunal. Trover as I am of etiquette, it would ill become 
me to break througli prescribed forms upon an occasion like the 
present, when I have fairer dame to grace my lists than ever yet 
rewarded valour, and braver knight to receive the meed of victory 
than ever yet won prize from dame !" 

With this high-flown compliment, Henri rode slowly towards 
the canopy, where he dismounted, and took his seat upon the fau- 
teuil, placing the King of Navarre on the tabouret at liis right. 
Crichton remained standing on the lowest step of the scaffold. 

Presently the inspiring bruit of clarions and other martial in- 
struments was heard from that quarter of the tilt-yard in which 
the grand gallery was situated. The barriers were hastily removed; 



"320 CRICHTON. 

llie halberdiers ranged themselves en hnic ; and admittance was 
ijlven to a troop of fair equet-trians, whose personal cliarms were 
scarcely less to be apprehended than tlic weapons of their knightly 
■predecessors. At the Iicad of this radiant band, which, like the burst 
of a sunbeam, diffiised smiles and animation as it proceeded, three 
ifigures were distinguished, each so beautiful, yet each so different 
in stvle of l)eauty, that the admiration of tlie beholders was divided, 
-and the judgment perplexed, as to wliom tlie palm of surpassing 
loveliness ought to be assigned. In the fmc and delicate features; 
tlie exquisite fiiirness of complexion; the soft blue eyes and gentle 
regards of her who rode on the right, the spectators recognised and 
hailed their queen, the virtuous but lightly-esteemed Louise. In 
llie fuller form and more majestic deportment; in the ravishing grace, 
the jetty tresses, and dark languid glances of the queenly dame on 
the left, no one failed to detect the gorgeous Marguerite de Valois. 
]\rurmurs of impassioned homage pursued her. The very air re- 
spired of love as she passed; and there was not a cavalier of the 
■thousands who gazed upon her, but would have perilled his life 
for a favouring regard. Marguerite, however, was insensible to 
the general idolatry. A smile was on her lips; witchery was in 
'lier looks; but in her lieart raged the undying worm of jealousy. 

Uetween the two queens, on an Isabelle-coloured palfrey, richly 
caparisoned with blue velvet bordered with pearls, rode Esclair- 
inonde; and if a preference was shown by the assemblage, it was 
towards the lovely princess; whose attractions, although they did 
not excite tlie fiery admiration roused by the voluptuous fascina- 
tions of Marguerite de Valois, awakened a sentiment of far deeper 
devotion. Immediately behind this captivating trio rode Catherine 
de Medicis, who displayed the admirable symmetry of person for 
T/hich she was celebrated — a charm not to be impaired by time — 
as well as the proficiency as an equestrian, for which she was equally 
noted, in the management of a fiery Arabian. In the languishing 
looks of the beautiful blonde, on the left of the queen-mother, the 
King of Navarre was at no loss to discover his new conquest, La 
Uebours; while, in the sprightly brunette at her right, admirers, too 
numerous to particularise, claimed a more intimate acquaintance 
with Torigni. 

Preceding the Princess of Conde, and bearing a white wand, 
together with the grand prize of the tourney, a magnificent diamond 
ring, which he ostentatiously displayed to the spectators, marched 
the pursuivant. The judges of the camp, headed by Montjoie, and 
■followed hy a band of pages and trumpeters, brought up the rear of 
this brilliant cavalcade. 

Arrived within a short distance of the royal canopy, the jocund 
troop came to a halt, and formed a long line in front of the king, 
of which Esclairmonde constituted the centre. Rapid as thought, 
the page of each dame, attired in her colours, then advanced, and 
-placed himself at the bridle of her steed. Executed with grout 



THE PRIZE. 321 

precision and quickncs?, tliis manoeuvre produced :ui agreeable 
eiFect, and was loudly applauded by the gallant Bourbon, whose 
eye wandered over the fair plialanx in a manner that plainly 
evinced of what intlammable material his valiant heart was com- 
posed. 

" Vcntre-saint-gris !" he ejaculated; "such a legion would be 
irresistible." Just then his ardent gaze chanced upon his queen. 
"Pcstc!" he added, averting his glances, " the snake will always 
intrude itself into Eden." 

It was, in sooth, a pleasant sight to look upon that array of lovely 
dames (Catherine's famous ^^ petit bcnide"), u.nd lo mark their diflerens 
attractions, now so forcibly, yet so advantageously, contrasted — each 
acting as a foil to the other — each unconsciously contributing to 
lier neighbour's lliscination. Oh ! how various arc the aspects of 
beauty — how beautiful are all its aspects. 

Making his way through the press. Montjoie now bent the knee 
before Henri, and repeating a formula similar to that of the pursui- 
vant, entreated permission for the Queen of the Lists to award the 
prize to him who had demeaned himself the most valiantly in the 
jousts; concluding with the almost unnecessary assurance, that all 
would be done " with loyalty and justice." To this solicitation 
Henri vouchsafed a gracious response, and the king-of-arms having 
fulfilled his duty, retired. 

Holding the bridle of Esclairmonde's palfrey, the pursuivant 
next led her towards Crichton, who, perceiving the intention of the 
princess, advanced to meet her, and threw himself at her feet. 
Taking the ring from the pursuivant, Esclairmonde then placed it 
iipon the finger of her lover. The Scot joyously arose. The 
reward to which he looked forward with most eagerness was yet to 
be conferred. 

Amid the thunder of acclamations that succeeded, the voices of 
the heralds were heard exclaiming, " A Crichton ! — a Crichton ! 
— largesse 1 largesse !" 

The Scot motioned to his esquire. Raising the shield of his 
master, the youth filled it with broad golden pieces, which he dis- 
tributed amongst the officers of the tilt-yard, who thereupon re- 
doubled their joyous vociferations 

While this was passing, Montjoie, with stately step, drew near 
the principal group of this vast and resplendent picture. 

" Remove your helm, sir knight," he said ; " the Queen of the Lists 
desires to thank you for the fair courses you have run in her honour, 
and to bestow upon you the priceless reward of your prowess." 

A deep blush mantled Esclairmonde's cheek as Crichton obeyed 
the injunctions of the king-of-arms. The next moment he felt the 
glowing lips of the princess pressed upon his brow. That salute 
annihilated all his prudential resolutions. He forgot their disparity 
of rank — his own danger — her perilous position. He did not rclin- 

Y 



322 CRicnxoN. 

quisli the liund she had confided to hhu — hut, in the d^ilinum of 
the iiiomeut, raised it to liis lips. 

Esclairmonde was equally agitated. Suffused with hlushes, and 
anon becoming Avhite as marble, palpitating, faint, she could 
scarcely maintain her seat upon the luiruly palfrey; and in order 
to prevent mischance, Crichton deemed it necessary to pass his 
arm around her waist. The situation w^as rather embarrassing, 
and awakened the ire of the two monarchs. 

"Esclairmonde," whispered Crichton, passionately, "you are 
mine." 

" I am — I am," returned the princess, in the same tone. " I 
would abandon my newly-discovered title — my rank — life itself, 
rather than my love." 

" I liave the queen's assent to our espousals," rejoined Crichton. 
in an altered voice. " She has promised me your hand — on certain 
conditions." 

"On what conditions?" asked Esclairmonde, tenderly regarding 
her lover. 

" Conditions which I cannot, dare not fulfil — conditions which 
involve the sacrifice of my honour," replied Crichton, gloomilv. 
*' Esclairmonde," he added, in accents of despair, " the dream is 
passed. You are the Princess of Conde. It is madness to indulge 
these vain hopes longer. 1 may serve you, but 1 may not love 
you — farewell !" 

" Stay !" exclaimed the princess, detaining him with a gentle 
grasp. " I have a painful, a dreadful duty to fulfil to-night. 
I have to take an eternal farewell of one who has been a friend, 
an adviser, a father to me." 
" Of Fiorent Chretien?" 

" Intelligence of the martyrdom to which he is adjudged by the 
merciless Catherine has just readied me. An hour before midnight 
I shall be within his cell to receive his parting benediction," she 
added, with some hesitation, and gazing at the Scot with eyes that 
swam with tears. 

" Were it to encounter certain destruction I Avould be there," 
returned the Scot, fervently. 

" And you ivill encounter certain destruction if you carry this 
presumptuous passion further. Chevalier Crichton," said Henri of 
Navarre, advancing towards them. " You cannot plead ignorance 
of the exalted station of the maiden to whose love you aspire. 
The bright blood of the Bourbon will never mingle with that of a 
Scottish adventurer. Your pardon, fair cousin," he continued, 
addressing Esclairmonde in a conciliatory tone, "it is with extreme 
reluctance that I interfere in an affair of the heart. I would 
rather forward a lover's suit than oppose it, especially the suit of a 
cavalier so accomplished as Crichton. But I must act as the Prince 
of Conde would have acted. Take this decision, then, from his 



THE riuzt:. 323 

lips. The daughter of Louis of Bourbou can only bestow her 
liantl upon her equah" 

" The daughter of Louis of Bourbon will only bestow lier hand 
upon him she loves," returned Esclainnonde, with a spirit such as 
she had never before exhibited; " and your own experience of her 
race will inform you, sire, that her heart is as little likely to he 
<',ontrolled as her hand." 

" As I expected," rejoined the Bourbon; " but it cannot be. It 
is one of the curses of exalted birth, that the hand and the heart 
can never go together." 

" And why should they be divided in this case," asked Cath.erino 
de Medicis, advancing, " if my consent be given to the match?" 

'• For a sutHcient reason, madame," said Henri IIL, joining t!v; 
group; " because our plensure is otherwise; and because we forbid 
the Chevalier Crichton.on pain of banishment I'rom our presence — 
from our kingdom — as he would escape the doom of a traitor, and 
a dungeon within the Bastile — again to approach thc^ Demoiselle 
Esclairmonde in the character of a lover. We shall see whether 
he, or you, madame, will venture to disobey us." 

••' Henri!" exclaimed Catherine, in amnzeuicnt — " this to me?" 

" You aie our mother — but aou are also our subject, madame," 
returned the king, coldly. " We have issued our commands — it 
is lor you to see them obeyed." 

Catherine did not reply. Her glance fell upon Crichton, and au 
almost imperceptible smile passed across her features. At tlv3 
threat of the monarch the Scot's hand instinctively sought his 
poignard, upon the hilt of which it now rested. When too late, 
lie perceived his error, and the false constructions put upon tin? 
action by the queen. 

" If you will set at rest the question as to tlie illustrious birth 
of the Demoiselle Esclairmonde, madame, I am content to obey the 
mandates of the king," said Crichton. " On your decision," he 
added, with a significant look, " must rest her fate." 

"The time is arrived for the acknowledgment of her birth, 
which you have truly said is illustrious, mcssire," replied Catherine, 
glancing triumphantly at lier son. " Esclairmonde is a princess of 
the blood royal of France. She is a Bourbon. Let the King of 
Navarre take note of my words; let all remember them; and let 
those who reverence the memory of Louis I , Prince of Conde, 
incline then^,selves before his daughter." 

Obedient to the intimation of Catherine, a crowd of nobles 
pressed forward to kiss the hand of the newly-discovered princess; 
and many there were, who, upon that occasion, forgot their ancient 
■enmity towards the great champion of the Protestant Church, in 
the admiration excited by his lovely descendant. 

" Well, sire," said the Bourbon, turning to Henri III., " 7 have 
^ound the princess. Of course i/ou will find the convoy." 

y 2 



324 CKICHTON. 

"Pcste!" exclaimed Henri, angrily. And motioning to Du 
Haldc, he issued his commands to close the jousts. 

" Tiie princess is yours,*' said the queen-mother, aside to Crichton. 

This assurance, however, gave little encoura<xement to the Scot. 
He felt that his passion was hopeless. And the despair which 
love without hope must ever inspire, took possession of his soul. 

The llourish of trumpets which immediately succeeded aifordcd 
some relief to his oppression. Silence heing proclaimed by this 
warlike prelude, the pursuivant advanced, wand in hand, and 
uttering thrice the preliminary ''Oicz," informed the noble assem- 
bla<4e that the jousts were brought to a conclusion — that his majesty 
bade them all to the banquet within the Louvre — and that in heu 
of tlie emprise of the Cluitel dc la Joycuse Garde, and the grand 
melee by torchlight, the king would hold a masque and fete within 
the palace. 

This announcement w^as received with general surprise and 
chagrin. 

''How is this, my son?" said Catherine, in a troubled voice. 
" Have you abandoned the chivalrous spectacle to which you looked 
forward with so much pleasure? IMethought you were about to 
exhibit your own matchless skill as a tilter in the courses a la 
fouh.'' 

"Par la i\Iort-dicu! madame," replied the king, in a tone of 
raillery, " the masque will be more in character with the strange 
scene we have just witnessed than the melee. Besides, the tilt- 
yard is not the theatre for our display. The lists are unlucky to 
our race. We remember our father's fate — and shall in future 
avoid the lance." 

"Ha! betrayed," muttered Catherine. "But the traitor shall 
not escape my vengeance." 

*' To the Hotel de Nevers, mon cher," said Henri, turning to 
Crichton, " and arrest the Prince of Mantua. Interfere not with 
our passion," he added, in his blandest accents, " and we have no 
favour to refuse you." 

Amid renewed lanfares of trumpets, the splendid assemblage then 
separated. But the troop of laughino- dames did not return in the 
strict array it came. The ranks were disordered, and in place of a 
page, by the side of each bright-eyed equestrian rode a favoured 
cavalier. Henri HI. took the lead with the reluctant Princess of 
Conde; the Bourbon attached himself to La Rebours ; while 
Crichton returned to the pavilion, where the armourer proceeded 
to free him from his knightly habiliments. 

As the two monarchs quitted • the tilt-yard, loud shouts Avere 
raised of " Vive le roi ! vivent les rot's .'" 

" You hear, Hosni," said the Bourbon, addressing his counsellor. 
" Vivent les rois ! 'tis a good augurv." 

By-and-by three figures alone remained within the precincts of 
the arena. 



THE DLXGKON. 325 

•' Since tlie melee is abandoned, thy scheme falls to the ground, 
my hidalgo," said the foremost, who was no other than the !Sor- 
bonist. 

" Perdition !" exclaimed Caravaja, twisting his moustache, after 
his -wonted ferocious fashion. " I know not what to think of it. 
I would give my soul to Sathanas, that that accursed Scot should 
fall in my way." 

"The compact is concluded," said tlio Bcrnardin, "for lo ! he 
appears." 

And as bespoke, Cilchton, attired in a pourpoint of velvet and 
short Spanish mantle, issued from the pavilion. He was followed 
by Blount, bearing Druid carefully in his arms, and directed his 
steps towards the outer court. 

'• After him," cried Caravaja, drawing a knife, and placing it in 
liis sleeve. " A muerte!" 



CHAPTER XHI. 

THE DUNGEO.V. 

Paolo. Aurait-il abjure? 

ElcL Pas encore. 

Paolo. Mais cet acte il n'est que diffe'rc? 

Casimer Delavignk. One Famille au temps du Luther. 

The Louvre once enclosed within its walls a number of subter- 
ranean cells, appropriated to the confinement of prisoners of state. 
Into one of these gloomy receptacles Florent Chretien had been 
thrust. Deprived, by the rigour of his persecutors, of the conso- 
lation which had ever been afforded him in hours of affliction by 
reference to the " healing balm" of Scripture, the good man passed 
the brief space allotted him on earth in deepest prayer. As the 
time drew nigh when his dreadful sentence was to be carried into 
execution, his devotions were interrupted by the entrance of one 
of the hooded officials, who introduced a masked female into the 
dungeon, and then silently departed. The dull light of a brazen 
cresset suspended from the ceiling imperfectly illumined the apart- 
ment, and a few moments elapsed ere Chretien, whose eyes had 
been closed In earnest supplication, could distingui^i the muffled 
■object that stood before him. 

" Is it you, my daughter? ' he asked, as the figure remained 
stationary. 

"It is," replied Esclairmondc, unmasking; "but I feared to 
disturb your devotions." 

" Approach," rejoined the preacher; "your name has mingled 
with my prayers, let your voice also ascend with mine towards the 
throne of mercy. The sand of my life is almost run out. Each 
moment Is precious. I have much counsel to give you. But ere I 



326 CRICHTON. 

oficr such precepts for your guidance as niny be needful for the 
spiritual -welfare of one wliose passage will be longer than mine 
own through this Vale of Tears, I would fain invoke a blessing on 
your head." 

Esclairinonde knelt by his side. Tiie benediction was befouglit 
and bestowed. The voice of the princess joined in the fervent 
petition for hcavenlv grace tliat succeeded. Scarcely, however, 
was their devout employment brought to a close — scarcely liad the 
holy man begun to address himself to those instructions Avhich he 
deemed it necessary to impart to his religious pupil, when the door 
again opened, and tlie hooded official having introduced another 
figure enveloped in a large mantle, departed as noiselessly as he 
had entered the chamber. 

•' He comes!" cried Esclairmonde. 

"The executioner?" asked Chretien, calmly, 

" The Chevalier Crichton," returned the princess. 

"He here!" exclaimed Chretien, a slight shade passing across 
his benevolent countenance. 

" He is here to bid me an eternal firewell," sighed Esclairmonde. 

" Princess of Conde," said tlie preacher, with some severity, 
" it tiiust be an eternal farewell." 

" You have said it, good father," replied Esclairmonde, in a tone 
of sorrowful resignation. 

"Your rank Ibrbids an alliance so disproportionate, even if the 
Chevalier Crichton's religious opinions coincided with your own," 
pursued Chretien. 

"Alas!" murmured Esclairmonde, "our creeds are adv(>rse; a 
wide disparity of rank exists between us; but our hearts are indis- 
solubly imited." 

" You love him then most tenderly, my daughter?" 

" Love him !" echoed the princess, passionately. " Father, to 
you I look to strengthen me in the resolution 1 have taken. This 
interview is my last." 

" 1 will not fail you, my daughter," replied the old man, kindly. 
" Think only that he is the enemy of youi- laith ; and that were yon 
united to him he miglit interfere with the important services it 
may hereafter be in your power to render to your persecuted church. 
The thought that will most alleviate the anguish of my latest 
moments is, that I have sown the good seed within your bosom, 
which, in due season, shall bring forth a plenteous harvest for our 
suffering people. Princess of Conde, promise me solemnly that 
you will never wed a Komanist." 

" Esclairmonde," said Crichton, advancing. 

" Hesitate not," said the preacher, severely, " or you are lost. 
Promise me." 

" ]My t^oul is wedded to the Reformed Faitli," replied the 
princess, firmly; " and I here vow never to bestow my liand upon 
a Catholic." 



'J HK DUNGEOX. :}27 

"Amen!" responded Chretien, fervently. 

A deep groan burst I'roin tlu> bosom of tlie Seot. 

" Chevaber Crichton," said Esclairmonde, " you have heard my 
vow." 

" I have," replied the Scot, mournfully. 

" Hear me yet further," continued the princess. " i\Iy zeal — 
my love — my gratitude, prompt me to lay aside feminine reserve. 
When I desired that our final interview should take place in the 
presence of this reverend man, it was that I might address you 
freely; it was, that I might avow my love in the presence of one 
whose holier aspirations have not rendered hini insensible or indif- 
ferent to the frailties of his fellows; it was" — slie added, with some 
hesitation, and blushing deeply as she spoke, " in the hope that our 
united efforts might induce you to embrace the religion I profess ; 
and that as convert to a faith, the purity of which your severest 
judgment must acknowledge, I might, without violation of my 
conscientious scruples, though in disregard of the elevated position 
I am compelled to assume, offer you my liand, and request him 
from whose lips I have imbibed the precepts of truth and humanity, 
Avhich inspire me at this moment, to alliance us together before 
heaven." 

" You have spoken with a voice of inspiration, my daughter," 
said Chretien, with a benignant smile, " and I have offered no in- 
terruption to your words, because they flow from a source whence 
true wisdom only springs. You have appealed to me in a manner 
which I cannot resist. Your heart, I know, is already betrothed 
to the Chevalier Crichton. Let him cast off the bondage to which 
he has so long heedlessly subjected himself Let him not view 
religion through the medium of the senses, but by the purer lii^ht 
of the sacred Scriptures. Let him abjure the errors and idolatries 
of Rome, and e.xert the mighty intellectual powers with Avhich he 
has been intrusted for the noblest purposes from on high — in the 
advancement of the true faith, and your betrothment shall not, for 
one moment, be delayed." 

" Crichton," inquired Esclairmonde, tenderly, "is this our last 
meeting, or are we for ever united?" 

" It is our last," replied the Scot, in a despairing tone, " if the 
condition annexed to the continuance of our love be my apostacy^ 
Esclairmonde, for you I v/ould make any sacrifice consistent with 
honour and rectitude of principle. For you I would resign those 
projects of ambition winch have hitherto engrossed my soul; for 
you I would repress that desire for universal distinction which 
has ever formed the ruling passion of my existence; for you I 
would be aught but a renegade to my faith — a traitor to my God. 
Glory has been my guiding star; my gaze has been steadfastly fixed 
upon it; I have steered my barqite by its rays. Fame is dearer to 
me than life; love is dearer than fame; but honour is dearer than 
love. Listen to me, Esclairmonde. You are the Princess of Conde. 



328 CKICHTON. 

Your rank is the most illustrious in France; but that rank has had 
no inllucnce in engaging my aflections. jSIy heart was yours when 
our stations were supposed to be equal; my heart is yours now a 
barrier is placed between us. I can neither cease to love, nor feel 
increase of passion. To me you are unchanged. To me you 
are the orphan Esclairmonde. Rank can add nothing to your 
beautv, as it can detract nothing from it. To link my fate with 
yours was to realise the wildest dream of my youthful imagination. 
it were to attain at once the goal to which I have aspired. It 
were to raise me to the proudest pinnacle of felicity to which man 
may attain." 

" Rcllect/' said Chretien. 

" I have reflected," returned the Scot. " Think not my lixed 
resolve upon a point involving my eternal welfare has been the 
result of inconsiderate caprice; — tiiink not because I have clung to 
the faith of my fathers, through trials, of which this, though the 
severest, is not the most formidable — think not it has been from a 
preverse adherence to wrong; tliink not, because you are strong 
in vour own belief — a belief which I regard as false and pernicious 
— that I am not equally inflexible. I have disputed on the tenets 
(if my iaith with my sage preceptor, Buchanan, and he has failed 
to convince me of my errors. 1 am a Catholic from conviction ; 
and as such, am as fully prepared as yourself to embrace the alter- 
native of death rather than departure from that religion which is 
derived from truth, and sustained by holiest tradition." 

"If the great Buchanan has failed to work your conversion, my 
son, my endeavours must pro\*e ineffectual," returned the preacher, 
shaking his head; " nevertheless, I will essay — " 

" It is in vain," replied Crichton, sternly. " ]\Iy martyrdom is 
past — yours is to come, old man. I have twice endured temp- 
tation to-day — I have twice resisted it. The hand of the Princess of 
Conde was to have been the price of my disloyalty — the same 
hand has been made a lure to drag me to perdition." 

" Say rather to direct you to salvation," rejoined Esclairmonde. 
" Oh ! Crichton, if I have any influence over your heart I 
would now exert it — if, as the iuimble instrument of the divine 
will, I can wean you from the dangerous and idolatrous creed to 
which you are bigoted, the whole of my iuture lite shall evince 
the extent of my gratitude and devotion." 

"Esclairmonde!" exclaimed Crichton, mournfully, "for that 
creed I have quitted my father's roof — ibr that creed I have braved 
a liithci's malediction — for that creed I now renounce all I hold 
dear on earth. We must part for ever." 

" Crichton, you love me not." 

" Let the sacrifice I have just made attest my love," returned 
the Scot, bitterly. " Tempt me not, Esclairmonde. My bosom is 
torn asunder by conflicting emotions — my brain reels — I caimot 
tupport this struggle longer. Your own lips shall seal my fate." 



THE DUNGEON. 329 

*' Be mine, then." 

A shudder ran tlirouifli Crlcliton's frame. 

" I am lost," lie nmniuired. 

" No, you are saved," re])lied the princess, triumphantly; " kneel 
^Yith me at the feet of this holy man." 

" Hold!" exclaimed Chretien; " this must not be. Gladly as I 
would number the Chevalier Crichton among the faithful ser- 
vants of the true God, his conversion must be accomplished by 
other influence than that of the passions. Evil means cannot work 
ijood ends. The laith -whic-li is )iot the result of conviction is 
little better than hypocrisy. Differing as I do with him upon essen- 
tial points of religious credence, I applaud the Chevalier Crichton's 
constancy: — nor would I attempt to shake it save by arguments 
such as my brief span of life will not permit me to employ; and I 
must think better of a creed which can strengthen the bosom of 
one so young against snares and temptations that hoary zealots 
might have found it difficult to resist." 

" Your hand has arrested my downfal, jjood father," said 
ricliton. 

" I rejoice at it, my son," replied the preacher. " Fly while 
your resolution still continues. I would not incur your reproaches. 
You must part from the princess, but not, I hope, for ever. A 
time — not far distant — may arrive when your opinions will xm- 
dergo a change, and Avhcn she may bestow her hand without 
violating her sacred promise." 

A tear stood in Esclairmonde's eve as she regarded her lover, 
and, unable to control herself, she fell into his outstretched arms. 

" When 1 uttered that fatal vow, 1 pronounced my own sentence 
of death," she cried. 

" Alas !" returned Crichton, *' I would have prevented it — but it 
is now too late." 

" It is," rejoined Chretien, in a severe tone. *' Depart quickly. 
You interrupt my devotions. I would prepare for eternity."" 

" Father," said Crichton, " I trust you will have a longer period 
for that preparation than your persecutors would allow you. Your 
life is of more consequence than mine; the services which you can 
render the Princess Esclairmonde are greater than I can render her. 
Live then for her." 

" You speak in parables, my son," returned the preacher, in 
surprise. 

"Take this mantle and this ring," said Crichton, "and your 
evasion is easy. It is the signet of the king. Display it to the 
guard at the portals of the Louvre, and the gates will fly open at 
your approach. Waste no time, but muffle up your features, and 
iigure in this cloak." 

" And you ?" 

" Heed me not. I will remain here in your stefld ." 

" I cannot accept freedom on such terms, my son." 



330 CRICHTON. 

" Hear me, Cfood futhor," replied Crichton, earnestly. " You 
go not forth alone. Esclairmonde must accompany you. If she 
returns to the masque she is lost." 

" Gracious heaven !" exclaimed the preacheri 

" Henri's plans arc so contrived that she cannot escape him. 
The King of Navarre is the dupe of his royal brother, and will 
iniNvittingly increase the risk, if not precipitate the fate of his new- 
found cousin, in the wild scheme he has devised for her flight. 
Catherine dc jMedicis is occupied witli her own dark designs. But 
>;he will not interfere witli, it i^he declines to forward, those of her 
son. An hour hence the Louvre may be the scene of fiercest 
strife. But an hour hence it may be too late to save the princess 
from dishonour." 

"And your life will be the sacrifice of your devotion?" said 
J'^sclairmonde. " No, I will rather return to the banquet, and 
place myself under the protection of Henri of Navarre." 

" He Is unable to protect you," replied Crichton. " Fear nothing 
for me." 

" Why should not you accompany the princess, Chevalier 
C'richton?" asked the preacher. 

" Question me not, but go," replied Crichton, hastily : " her life, 
her honour is endangered by tills delay." 

" I will not consent to your destruction," said Esclairmonde, 
passionately. 

" You destroy me by remaining," rejoined Crichton ; '• a moment 
more, and it may be too late." 

As he spoke, the iron door revolved upon its hinges, and a 
hulssier, bearing a flambeau, entered the cell, and in a loud voice 
announced " The king." 

Accompanied by INlarguerite de Valols, Henri IH. immediately 
followed this announcement. A malicious smile played upon tlie 
features of the monarch as he noticed the dismay of the group at 
his appearance. " You were right in your conjecture, sister," he 
said, turning to the Queen of Navarre; "our stray turtle-doves 
have flown hither. The prison of a Huguenot is as favourable, I 
find, to the assignations of love as the bower of a Phrync. INIessIre 
Florent Chretien might, perhaps, have found fitter occupation for 
his latest moments than to assist at such a rendezvous. But it is 
quite in character with his doctrines. His meditations, however, 
shall not be longer disturbed. Tiie damps of this cell strike chilly 
on my senses alter the perfumed atmosphere I have quitted. Prin- 
cess of Conde," he continued, advancing towards Esclairmonde, 
who recoiled at his approach, " the masque claims your presence." 

" Sire," replied the princess, firmly, " I will rather remain a 
captive for Hie within this duniieon tlian return to your polluted 
halls." 

"Obey him," whispered Crichton; " I may yet be able to de- 
liver you from this perilous strait." 



THE DUNGKOX. 331 

♦' Our attendants are at hand, fiiir cousin," said the Icing, sicnifi- 
cantly; "I neither mean to detain thctn as prisoners, nor to en- 
danger my own health, by longer continuance in this uuAvholesomc 
vault." 

" (to, my daughter," said Chretien; " tlic Power that watches 
over innocence will protect you. Fear nothing." 

"Your hand, lair cousin," said Henri, impatiently. 

" Your majesty will not rel'use to conduct mo to the King Ol 
Navarre ?" said Esclairmonde, reluctantly complying with the 
monarch's request. 

" Of a surety not," rejoined Kenri, smiling; " but you will find 
him so completely engrossed by the languishing regards of La 
llebours, tliat he will scarcely desire your company." 

"'Indeed !" exclaimed the princess, starting. 

" Chevalier Crichton," said Henri, pausing, " vou luive dis- 
obeyed our injunctions. Hencefortli you are banished from our 
presence." 

" Henri," interposed ^larguerite de Valois, " for my sake over- 
look his fault." 

" For 7/OMr sake, Marguerite!" returned the king, in surprise; 
" a moment ago you would have changed his banishment to death." 

" Tax me with inconsistency if you will; but grant my request." 

'■' Souvent Jcmme varied' returned Henri, luughing; "he it as 
you please. To banish him froni the revel might tend to throw a 
shade over its gaiety, llctain him by your side, and 1 am content. 

"Marguerite," snid Crichton, as tlic Queen of Navarre took his 
arm, " your generosity has saved your brother's croAvn." 

" \{ it has revived your love I am satisfied," returned Marguerite, 
tenderly. 

" You ma}' revive it, my queen," ;;aid Crichton. 

" In wliat Avay ? ' demanded IMurgucrite, trembling with eager- 
ness. — " But I can guess. You rccpiire my assistance to free the 
Princess of Conde from her present danger. You shall have it." 

" Yours is a noble heart. Marguerite." 

" It is a faithful and a fond one, Ciichton. Ti-ifle not witlii 
tenderness." 

" If I survive this night, my life is yours." 

" Survive it, Crichton! — what mean you?" 

" I am half distracted. Marguerite. But linger not. Henri 
already gone." 

" And Esclairmonde," added the queen, with a look of jealous 
reproach. 

iMany minutes had not elapsed after their departure, when 
Chretien, who had again addrcj^sed himself to his devotions, was 
aroused by the harsh voice of the hooded official, who commanded 
him to arise. The good man instantly obeyed. The cell was 
filled with a crowd of figures in s:ible robes and masks. 



332 ClilCIlTON. 

" Tliv last hour is come," said tlie official. 

'■ I am prepared," returned Chretien, in a firm tone. " Lead me 
I'orth." 

While the hands of tlie preacher were bound together, the voice 
of a priest, who formed one of the dismal group, thundered forth 
tlie following psalm : — " Exurge, quare obdonnis Domine? exurge, 
et ne repellas in linem : quare faciem tuam avertis? oblivisceris 
tribulationcm nostrum: adha3?it in terra venter noster: exurge, 
l)i)mine, adjuva nos. et libera nos." 

Chretien was then conducted through a variety of intricate pas- 
sages to the edge of the Seine, now lighted up by the huid glare 
ot the torches borne by the expectant crowds on the other side of 
the river, and being placed in a barque was rowed swiftly over to 
the Prc-aux-clercs, where a fierce shout of exultation welcomed his 
arrival. 

'• Kindle the pile," sliouted a thousand voices; " let the heretic 
die!" 

" We are starved to death," cried the Sorbonist; " and want a 
lire to warm us — to the stake — quick — quick I 

Death to the IIug:nonot! — fagot and flame! 
Death to the Huguenot! — torture and shame!" 

The red glare which shortly afterwards tinged the inky water? 
of the Seine Avas the reflection of Chretien's funeral pyre. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE CONSPIRACY. 

Dis-moi, mon maitre, comment crois-tu que finira cet imbroglio? 

L. ViTKT. Les Barricades. 

When the royal party returned to the masque the festivity of 
the evcniu'r was at its lieiirht. The music was breathing; its softest 
strains — the cavaliers were whispering their most impassioned love- 
speeches — the dames were makinir their tenderest responses. The 
imivcrsal freedom that prevailed gave the revel somewhat of the 
character of an orgie. Esclairmonde shrunk back as she beheld 
the license of the scene, and would have retreated, had retreat 
been possible. But Henri hurried her quickly onwards. 

"The King of Navarre is seated near yon beaufet," he said; 
" his right hand grasps a goblet, while his left is passed around the 
waist of his mistress. W^e shall be rather in the way. No matter. 
I am ready to commit you to his care." 

Esclairmonde hesitated. 

" At all events we had better v.-ait till he has finished his song," 
c(jntinucd Henri; "for it is evident from his gestures that he is 
pouring forth his passion in verse. In the mean time, you will 
oblige us by resuming your mask, fiir cousin." 



TIIK CONSriKACV. 333 

As the ])nncc?s coinplicd wlili tlie irionavcirs request, Henri of 
Kavarrc arose. Taking the luind vi' liis partner, lie liastened to 
join the (hmcers, and was quiekly lost to view. 

" You must, perforce, remain witli ine a few moments longer," 
said Ilenri; " let us take our station within yon embrasure, whence 
we can command the room, and as soon as the bransle is ended, I 
will sumiiion the Bearnais to our presence." 

Esclairmoi;de suflered herself to be led towards the window. As 
they proceeded thither, Henri ventured to take her hand within 
his own. 

" Sire," slie said, gently endeavouring to withdraw it from his 
f2Crasp. " I will only consent to remain with you, on the condition 
that you do not renew the suit which has hitherto so much dis- 
tressed me " 

" Your condition is a hard one, fair cousin; but I will strive to 
obey you." 

The princess looked around for Crichton. Amid the crowd of 
gay masks, however, that surrounded her, she could not discern his 
sta'tely figure, or that of Marguerite de Valois. " He has left me," 
she mentally ejaculated; " that royal syren has regained all her in- 
fluence over his soul." 

Henry divined her thoughts. " My sister lias imposed no such 
condition on her lover as you would impose on me, fair cousin," 
he said. " Their quarrel is evidently arranged, and he is restored 
to his old place in her affections." 
" Sire I" 

" They have disappeared. Shall we pay another visit to the 
oratory?" 

" Suffer me to join the queen-mother, sire. I perceive her 
majesty in the further salon conversing with the Due de Nevers." 

"With De Nevers," repeated Henri, angrily. " No, ma mie, I 
cannot part with you thus. I have a word or two to say respecting 
this Admirable Scot. A little more this way, fair coz. 1 would 
not be overheard. What if I tell you that Crichton's life hangs 
on your compliance." 

" His life, sire?" gasped Esclairmonde. 

"Your hand alone can arrest the sword that trembles o'er his head." 
" You terrify me, sire." 

" I would not do so, mignonne," replied Henri ; " ./A the con- 
trary, I wish to re-assure you. Princess," he added, passionately, 
" it is in your power to save him." 

" I understand your majesty," said Esclairmonde, coldly. 
"Not entirely," returned the king; " you may divine my mo- 
tive, but you scarcely, I think, foresee the proposal I am about to 
make to you. I must premise by recounting the history of my 
earliest amourette. Renee de Rieux, my first mistress, before 1 
beheld her, had disposed of her heart to Philippe Altoviti." 
" Spare me this recital, sire." 



i 34 CRICHTOX. 

" She is now his consort. You love the ChcvaHcr Crichton. 
On the same terms you shall be his bride." 

" I am the daughter of Louis oi' Bourbon, sire." 

" The Chevalier Crichton shall be a peer of France." 

" Were the King of France to sue lor my hand I would refuse 
him!" replied Esclairmonde, haughtily; '"let him seek out his 
minions among those complaisant dames who, because he 25 a king, 
have nothing to refuse him." 

" You have sealed your lover's fate, lair cousin," rejoined Henri. 
" Du Halde," added he, motioning to the chief valet, " bid the 
Due de Nevers attend us." 

" Sire," said Esclairmonde, becoming pale as death, but speak- 
ing in a firm tone, " take heed how you proceed to extremities. I 
am a woman, and a threat Irom me may weigh little with your 
inajesty. But, it from mere jealous anger, and on no just ground, 
vou adjudge a knight, loyal and true as Crichton, to a sliameful 
death, such vengeance as one of my sex rninj take, I will have. 
Look to it, sire. My threat is neither an idle nor a light one." 

"Par la JNIort-dieu!" exclaimed Henri; "if I had entertained 
any doubts as to your origin, fair cousin, the spirit you have just 
displayed would have removed them. The fire of the old Bour- 
bons is not extinct. I accept yoiu" defiance. Crichton dies — or 
you are mine. Decide, for here comes his executioner." 

" I answer, as the Chevalier Crichton woidd," replied Esclair- 
monde, " Death rather than dishonour." 

Whatever reply Henri meditated was cut short by a merry peal 
of laughter from a party of frolic dames who occupied a fauteuil 
near them, and the voice of the Abbe dc Brantome was heard 
reciting the following lines, which produced a very edifying effect 
upon the fair auditors: 



Itobc's fBomilv). 

Saint Augustin, one day, in a fair maiden's presence. 

Declared that pure love of the soul is the essence! 

And that faith, be it ever so firm and potential, 

If love be not its base, must prove lui-influential. 

Saint J5ernard, likewise, has a homily left us — 

(Sole renmaiit of those, of which fate hath bereft us!) 

Wiu'ic the L'ood Saint confers, without any restriction, 

On those who love most, his entire benediction. 

Saint Ambrose, again, in his treatise, "Z>e Virgme," 

To love one another is constantly urging ye; 

vVnd a chajjter he adds, -where he curses — not blesses — 

The ill-fated wight who no mistress possesses! 

Wise De J.yra, hereon, makes this just observation, 

That the way to the heart is the way to salvation; 

.\nd tlie further from love — we're the nearer damnation.' 

Besides, as remarks this profoiuid theologian, 

OVho was perfectly versed in the doctrine Ambrogian) — 

He, Avho loves not, is worse than the infamous set yc call 

J^rofane, unbelieving, schismatic, heretical- 



THE CONSPIKACY. n.T"* 

Fcr, if he the fire of one region should sniotlicr. 
lie is sure to be scorched i)y the flames of the other! 
And tliis is tlie reason, perliajis, wliy Saint (Jroyjory 
(The I'ope, wlio reduced the stout Arians to beggary) 
Averred — (keep tliis counsel for ever before ye) 
'i'hat the lover on earth has his sole purgaiory! 

^crovntion. 

Let your minds then he wrapp'd in devout contemplation 
Of tlie precepts convey'd by this grave exhortation; 
Be loving, beloved, and never leave off — it's 
The way to fulfil both the law and the prophets! 

To return to Cricliton. Upon entering tlie grand palon tlic 
Scot detached himself from jMarguerite de Valois, and hastily re- 
suming his mask, proceeded with a quick ste}> in the direction of 
the qiiccn-mother. Catherine, at that moment, was engaged in 
deep conference with the Due de Nevers, and the Scot was enabled 
to approach her unperceived. Stationing himself behind a pillar, 
his quick ear failed not to catch each Avord of their discourse, 
though it was carried on for the most part in whispers. 

" And the Due d'Anjou, you say, madame, alarmed at the dis- 
covery of his letter contained in the missal, has quitted the Louvre 
without striking a blow?" said De Nevers. 

" The moment I received your billet I despatched it to him by 
a faithful messenger," returned Catherine. " Apprehensive of dis- 
covery, he fled." 

" Confusion!" muttered the duke: "his head was to have been 
the price of my lieutenant-generalship. Henri will dare nothing 
against the queen-mother." 

" You are thoughtlul. Monsieur le Due," said Catherine, sus- 
piciously. 

" I am full of regret that our plot is defeated," replied De 
Nevers. 

" It is not attcrly defeated," answered the queen. 

" Indeed !" 

" What Anjou dared not do I will execute alone." 

" You, madame?" 

" Failing in my attempts upon the honesty of our incorruptible 
Scot, I have found a hand as sure as his, and less reluctant. Hold 
your partisans in readiness, De Nevers. Henri dies to-night." 

" And your majesty can fully rely upon the instrument of your 
will?" 

" Fully," replied Catherine; " he is a Spanish bravo, accustomed 
to the use of the stiletto — and will not need to repeat the blow." 

" 'Tis well," rejoined the duke — " and the signal?" 

" AVill be the king's assassination," said Catherine. " Mark 
me, De Nevers. I will contrive that Henri and Crichton shall 
enter the oval chamber together. The assassin is already posted 
behind the arras. As the king passes he will strike. Do you and 



336 CRICHTON. 

vour attendants rush in at the cry and despatch the Scot. Hew 
him down without mercy. Henri's death -will lie at his door." 

" It sliall he done, madame." 

" Ah ! here comes Du Halde. We must separate." 

Possessed of the plans of Ills enemies, Crichton hastened back to 
^Marguerite de Valois, who awaited his return with impatience. 
" To tlie oval chamber, my queen," he said; " quick — quick." 

" AVherefore?" demanded Marguerite. 

" Henri's life is menaced by an assassin," replied Crichton. " I 
must seek him, and apprise him of his danger." 

" Henri is there already," returned iMargucrlte. " He has this 
moment entered that chamber Avith Esclairmonde." 

"Ha!" exclaimed Crichton, darting from her; "I maybe too 
late to save him." 

It will be necessary to return for a moment to the Princess of 
Conde. After rejecting Henri's proposal in the disdainful manner 
described, and in order to escape from his further assiduities, while 
he lent an attentive ear to Brantome's homily, Esclairmonde re- 
tired into the embrasure, and throwing open the window, stepped 
forth upon the balcony. A terrible spectacle was presented to her 
view. In the midst of a bright and spiring flame which mounted 
high in the still air of night, brilliantly illuminating a confused 
mass of threatening figures, hung a black and shapeless object. 
The princess turned aside in horror. Just then a loud exulting 
roar arose from the multitude. Ihe remains of the martyred 
Chretien had dropped into the devouring element. Esclairmonde 
heard no more. She fell, without sense, into the arms of Henri, 
and, by his command, was instantly conveyed to the oval chamber. 

When Crichton arrived at the doors of this chamber he found 
them closed. Two huissiers stationed before them peremptorily 
refused him admittance. 

" Follow me," said iNIarguerite de Valois; "I will show you a 
secret entrance to the room." 

Passing through a suite of apartments with the rapidity of 
thought, Crichton and the queen reached a small ante-chamber, 
in the corner of which, a suite of tapestry having been removed by 
Marguerite, a masked door was disclosed. Another valve admitted 
them to the oval chamber. 

"Help!" exclaimed Henri, who, pursued bv Caravaja w'ith a 
drawn dagger in his hand, flew in the direction of the sound — 
" an assassin ! help !" 

" Sangre di Dios ! I have missed my first blow," cried the 
Spaniard, catching hold of Henri's mantle — " but this shall find 
the way to thy heart, tyrant." 

But as he uttered the words, the sword of Crichton passed 
through his body, and he fell heavily upon the person of the king,. 
which he deluged with his blood. 

"Crichton!" exclaimed Esclairmonde, aroused from her insensi- 



THE CONSriKACY. 337 

billty Ly Henri's outcries; " ali ! what do I Lchuld ?— tlic king 
assassiniitcd !" 

"No, fair cousin," replied Henri, extrlcatinn- liimsclf witli dilli- 
culty IVoni tlie gripe, whicli death ]iad not relaxed, fixed bv the 
Spaniard u])on his cloak. " The Virn;in bo prai^^ed, I have escaped 
■without injury — though not -without alarm. Chevalier Crichton, 
let tliosc doors be tlirown open." 

The command was obeyed; and the moiKiich, ])ale, trembling, 
and covered with blood, was revealed to the general gaze, iiy his 
side stood Crichton with his drawn sword in his hand, still giving 
ghastly evidence of tlie execution he liad dune. Amid the uni- 
versal consternation that prevtdled, the voice of the Due de Nevers 
was heard exclaiming — 

" The king is mortally wounded — the assas-in stands beftjrc us. 
It is Crichton. Slay him ! Cut him in pieces 1" 

" Hold I" ejaculated Henri, checking the movement of this 
faction. " I am unhurt, messieurs," he contiimed, addressing the 
guard ; "I command you to attach the person of the Due de 
Nevers, whom we accuse of leze-majeste and treason. — Madame," 
added he, turning to Catherine, " you will answer me on the same 
charges." 

" At once, and boldly, my son," replied the queen-mother. 
*' You are deceived. The sole traitor stands by your side. I 
will prove the Chevalier Crichton guilty of the crimes you have 
imputed to me." 

" Let Cosmo Ruggieri stand forth," said Crichton. 

At this summons the astrologer forced his way through the 
crowd. 

" What hast thou to advance against me?" demanded the queen, 
imperiously. 

" That you have conspired against tlie life of the king, your son, 
and against his crown," returned liuggleri, (irmly, "and that the 
Due de Nevers is your accomplice. Will your majesty deign to 
regard this scroll?" 

*' It is thine own condemnation, Ruggieri," said Henri, glancing 
at the document; " thou art deeply implicated in this conspiracy." 

" I deny it not," replied the astrologer; "let equal justice be 
-dealt upon all who have betrayed you." 

" Ruggieri," said the king, " thy doom is the galleys. De Nevers 
shall lose his head. For you, madame," he added, looking at the 
queen-mother, "I will rellect upon your sentence." 

"1 am content," said Ruggieri, with a look of gratified revenge; 
^' one of these accursed Gonzagas will fidl by my hands." 

"Away with him," said Henri. "Chevalier Crichton," he 
added, embracing the Scot, " you arc my preserver, and henceforth 
my brother. I have played the tyrant and the libertine long 
enough. I will now endeavour to assume the part of the generous 

z 



338 CRICHTON. 

monarch. The hand of tlie Princess of Conde is yours — ha ! what 
means this hesitation?" 

" Sire ! a greater obstacle than you liave raised divides us," re- 
phcd Crichton; " our creeds are dilierent." 

" What of that?" said Henri of Navarre, who had joined the 
group; " Marguerite de Valois is a Cathohc. I am a Protestant." 

'* An excellent example, certes," said Chicot, screaming with 
laughter. 

" There is one flivour which you can confer, sire, and which I 
can accept," said Crichton. 

" Name it." 

" The freedom of the King of Navarre." 

" It is granted," replied Henri, " on condition that he takes his 
queen Avitli him." 

" Excuse me, sire," re])lied the Bourbon. " I have too much 
consideration to separate licr from the Admirable Crichton, Fair 
cousin of Conde, you will accompany me. His majesty has pro- 
mised you a fitting escort." 

" I have," replied Henri; " but I would rather find her a fitting 
husband." 

" Crichton," said Esclairmonde, blushingly turning towards her 
lover, " have I your dispensation if I break my vow?" 

" From the bottom of my heart," replied Crichton, passionately. 
*' And I begin to find I am not so staunch a Catholic as 1 fancied 
myself when I quitted Florent Chretien's cell." 

" I would be of any creed for the woman I love," said the 
Bourbon. 

" And I," said Henri III. 

" Then no more need be said about the matter, ' cried Chicot, 
"Let us send for a priest at once. He will remove every diffi- 
culty. Points of faith are easily settled where love plays the 
umpire." 



APPENDIX. 



During Crichton's residence in Venice in the autumn of Mu; yc:ir 
loSO, when, as he himself has told us, 

Dum procul a Patria IlaJriiici prope litora I'oiiti 
Consedi, • 

when his eloquence had electrified the do^e and the asscmhled sif^nory— 
when he had disputed in utraniqiie partem upon the subtllo doctrines of 
the Thomlsts and Scotists (a parte, rei, et a parte mentis) with the learned 
Padre Fiamma, e con molti altri valorosi prelati, in the presence of the 
Cardinal Ludovico D'Este, the jjatron of Tasso, and the brother of 
Alfonso II., Duke of Ferrara ; had discussed with the Greek theologians, 
in the house of the Patriarch of Aqulleia, the mysterious subject of the 
procession of tlie Holy Ghost, overwhelming- his opponents with the 
weight of authorities which he adduced; had astonished the ready Italian 
improvlsatore by a faculty more wonderful than his own ; had confounded 
the mathematician, the astrologer, and the cabalist ; had foiled the most 
expert swordsman, and the most brilliant wit at their own weapons — 
wlien his grace and beauty had captivated many a fair signora, and his 
unequalled prowess in the revel and the masque had driven many a rival 
gallant to despair ; and when, at length, satiated with enjoyment, and 
crowned with success, to escape from the enervating allurements of the 
sea Phryne, he crossed her blue lagoons, and secluaed himself in some 
villa on the Brenta, to prepare for that final triumph which he was 
destined so gloriously to achieve in the three days' disputation held in the 
Chiesa San Giovanni e Paolo ; then it was, that Aldus Manutius, 
prompted by his ardent admiration of the youthful Scot, or urged to the 
task by the curiosity of his noble correspondent, furnished Jacomo Buon- 
compagno, Duke of Sora, an eminent patron of men of letters, and bro- 
ther to the reigning pontiff, Gregory XIII., with the following particulars 
of the mostro de mostri. 

Eki,atione della qualita dl Jacomo di Crettone fatia da Aldo Manutio ai. 
DucA m Sora Adix Otlobre, 1581.* 

Lo ScozzESE detto Jacomo di Crettone e giovane di xx anni, finiti alii \9 
d'Agosto passato, grande di statiira. di pelo biondo, e d'aspetto bellissimo. Pos- 
siedo diece lingue, la latina piu beHa et piu pronta di quella di Monsignore 

* Kelatione delle qualita di Jacomo di Cretone fotta da Aldo IVIanutio all 
Illustrimo ed eceelentissimo S. Jacomo Bonconipauno Duca di Sora e Cover. 
Gea. di S. C. In Vencgia, M.DLXXXI Appresso Aldo. 

z 2 



340 ArrEXDix. 

Moretto,* la Francese ed Italiana in ccoellenza, la Greca bcllissima e ne fa 
I'pigrammi. I'llebrea, la Caldea, la Spagmiola, la Fiamciiga, Inglesa, Scozzesa, e 
iiitende la TeJesca. Possiede Filosofia, Tlieologia, Matlieiiiatica, ed Astrologia, 
e tiene tutti i calcoli fatti sin ad lioggi per falsi. Di Filosofia e Tlieologia ha 
(lisputato pill volte in questa Citta con 11 priaiL letterati di questa professione con 
Btupore di tutti. Ha pcrtL-ttissiuia cognitione della Cabala, e di niemoria tale clio 
non sa she cosa sia il diiiu'nticarji ed ogid oratione iidita da lui recita a parola 
per parola. Fa versi all" iinproviso di tutti li nietri, e di tutte le inaterie vulgare 
latine e ne la improvise e belle. Kagiona di cose di stato con fondaniento. 
Cortcgiano con niaraglivi e gratissinio nelle consnltationi, soldato a tutta botta, e 
ha sjieso due ainii in Francia alia guerra con carico assai honorato; salta e balla 
per eccellenza; arnieggia e giuoca d'ogni sorta d'arnu e ne ha fatto qui la prova; 
maneggiatore aggarbato di cavalli, giostratore singolare, di sangue nobile anzi per 
niadre Kegale 8tuardo.f Jla disputato con greci in casa del Nuntio e del Pa- 
triarca d'AquiL-la in materia deila proeessione del Spirito Santo con grande ap- 
plauso e con grandissima copia d'autorita de Dottori e consigli come Aristotele e 
conimentatori alle niani recitando le faceiate intiere non che le righe greche. Sa 
tutio S. Thomaso, Scoto, Thomisti e Scotisti a mente, e disputa in utramque 
partem, il che ha fatto folicemente I'altro giorno col Padre Fiamma, e con niolti 
altri valorosi Prelati alia presenza di Monsignore lUustrissimo il Cardinale da 
Este. Volse il Patriarca c la Signora ndirlo e ne restorono maravigliosi e stnpe- 
fatti; da S. Serenitu fu premiato tli WO seudi. In somma e mostro de niostri. e 
tale che niolti udendo cosi fatte (lualitii in nn sol corpo benissimo proportionato e 
loiitano dalla malinconia fanno di niolte chimere. Hieri si ridusse fuori in vdla, 
per stendere due niila conclusioni le quali in tutte le pcrfettione vole mantenere 
qui in Veiietia nelle Chiesa di S. Giovan e Paolo; fra due niesi tutto in mondo 
corre per udirlo. 

There is onlv one perplexing- point about tliis letter; and if I could 
follow niv Uncle Toby's advice to Corporal Trim, and "leave out the 
dafe entirely," much tedious speculation might be spared. Yor the 
ijenuineiiess of the edition in my possession — that it is actually, as its 
title states, apprcsso Ahlo — I cannot vouch. Counterfeits of the pro- 
ductions of this celebrated press are too numerous and too skilful to suffer 
me to hazard such an assertion. But at all events it is, beyond doubt, a 
facsimile of the original. Obtained from Milan, my copy consists of a few 
leaves, yellow with age, with the device of the elder Aldus on the title-page, 

* The famous Marcus Antonius JIuretus, the friend of the Manutii, and one 
of the most proionnd scholars of his da}'. He was succeeded in the IJoman 
chair of philosophy by the j'ounger Aldus. The wonderful skill of ]\Iuretus in 
Latin versification will readily be conceived when it is stated that ho palmed 
certain scenes of his own composition tipon the learned Joseph Scaliger as frag- 
ments of two ancient comic writers, Attius and Trabea, which that great philo- 
logist unhesitatingly introduced into his edition of Tcrentius Varro. 

f Compare the above description with the following passage from the "Dedica- 
tion to the l*aradoxes of Cicero," subsequently published by Aldus: — "Magna 
sunt ista profecto, et inaudita. niediocria tanien, si cetera spectemus; quod, 
scilicet decem linguarum, niultoruni idioniatum, omnium disciplinarnm cog- 
nitionem ante vigessimuin primuni ajtatis annum, sis adeptus; et digladiandi, 
saltandi, omnium gymnasticarum exercitationum, et equitandi studia, tanta cum 
alacritate ingenii, animique liumanitate, mansuetudine, et facilate conjunxeris, ut 
nihil te adniirabilius rcperiri possit. Sed non innumerabiles vitaj tuaj transactaj 
laudes; non mirificani illam coram Screnissimo Principe ac Illustrissimis Yenetas 
Tlciiniblicae ])roceribus actionem; non subtilissimas tuas de Tlieologia, philo- 
sophia et rebus ^lathematicis, disputationes in plorisque niaximorum hominum 
concessilius, recensebo; non tantoruni hominum ad te videndum concursura, ut 
i)lini Platoni a Sicilia revertenti, relicto Olympico spectaculo, tota Atheniensium 
celebritas oecnrrisse fertur; cum te omnes, signo rubeai IJosae, quod tihi natura 
<-irca dextru'm lumen impressit, tamquam unicam et raram in terris avcm, 
homines cngnoscerent." 



APPENDIX. 3U 

and purports to have been printed " i« Venegia, M.DLXXXI." The 
memoir is not mentioned by llenouard ; nor is it inchiled in the small 
quarto volume of tlie letters of Aldus Manutius, published at Home, 
none of which, as Dr. Black observes (for I have not seen the collection). 
is written prior to lo85. Havinii; premised thus much, I shall procec 
with my reasons for the emendation of the date, which, I conceive 
should be the tttitk of October, 1.380, iiot^\. From another contem- 
porarv authority (a manuscript chronicle cited by Serassi, the writer of 
which evidently derived his information from Aldus) we learn that 
Crichtou reached Venice "«f7 inese (fAfjos/o (hi loSO." Coupling;" 
this intellig-ence with the final ])assage of the liehitinne, ^^ jra due mi si 
tntto ilmondo corre per udlrlo,^^ we have the exact period of his arrival 
and dejiarture, ami my hypothesis is confirmed. lie remained in Venice 
two months. And here 1 may note that the Affiche (the date of wliicli 
is lu8()) is made, owiiii^ to its faulty punctuation, to announce to the 
learned world that Crichton's disputation in the Church of Saint John 
and Paul would take place irithin two months; whereas we are expressly 
told by Aldus Manutius, who was Tjot only the adviser, but a spectator, 
of this Tuemorable controversv, that it commenced on the day of Pen- 
tecost. loSl. Aldus, indeed, seems to refer to some such panefj^yric as 
this lieldtiiiiie, when he states in the *' Dedication to the Paradoxes of 
Cicero," " nunc vera eliam hctor, loll ItalicB, et orbi fortasse terrarum 
idiirersn jferspectiim, esse judicium de te ineum^ y.t ea quae cum ju c 
VKXissKS SCKIPTIS COMMKNDAVI ;" and mark what follows, '■'■ quce t'lJii 
■i/Ksi, ac JwtiHuilis acerrituis censoribus, aspira atque injucunda vuh- 
hantur. K(im, licet turn amorem mnlui ostendere, quamprudentlam, 
nunc ambo, cum a/nicis tuts, turn i/timicis, si qui amvlius tamjeriatque 
iuliumaui reperiutitur, manifcsta sunt, postijuam tuj, virtus tarn clarum 
aui s/)/cndorcm diffudit.'' Influenced by a desire to serve his friend, the 
great printer may have allowed hi? letter to the Duke of Sora to be 
widely circulated, and perhaps connived at its publication by the brothers 
Guerra, for which injudicious zeal he appears to have incurred the cen- 
sure, as well of the high-minded object of his adulation, as of those 
envious detractors, which a celebrity like that of Criehton was certain to 
awaken. That Dr. Black, after a careful investigation of the collected 
letters of Aldus, could oidy discover this solitary passage, which he 
thinks may relate to Criehton—" Sa V. S. lUustrissima, die to sempre 
functus sum officio cotis, o deve ricordarsi dello Scozzese, il quale (jode 
la benignilu, e libera lita di cotesta Republica, favorito anche da lei, die 
si masse e per fai'orir lui, e per obligar we" — proves nothing. Aldus 
might not probably desire to introduce his letter to Buoncompagno in a 
volume containing a similar eulogy on the Folish Criehton, Stanislaus 
Niegossevio, addressed to the same nobleman. 

It follows, from what has been advanced, that upon the validity of the 
evidence afforded by Aldus Manutius — whether considered as the author 
or originator of the Affiche, the Relatione, the " Manuscript Chro- 
nicle," or the '* Dedication to the Paradoxes" (for they are one and the 
same thing), rests Crichton's claim to that glorious epithet by which he 
has since been distinguished. His mighty intellectual powers are attested 
by Astolfo and Scaliger ; but his universal accomplishments and personal 
graces are recorded by Imperialis, Dempster, David Buchanan, Johnston, 



342 APPENDIX. 

and other later writers on the testimony of Aldus.* And that testimony, 
notwithstanding' it has been impugned by Doctors Kippis and Black, has 
been satisfactorily shown by Mr. Fraser Tytler to be unimpeachable. 

If any proof, indeed, were wantincr of tlie sincerity of Aldus's affection 
for, and admiration of, his friend, it would be found in the following' 
pathetic lament, which (deceived by a false rumour of Crichton's death) 
lie inscribed to his memory : — 

Aldus Manutics to thk Memoky of .Tame-s Crichtox. 
'•O Crichton, it is just that praise sliouM attond thy memory, since we have 
been deprived of tliee hy an untimely death: Wlio is there that did not admire 
thee in life? who that does not mourn thee dead? W/iile alive, Ihe judu^nent I had 
jonned of thy merits irris m>/ honimr and advanlnge; and now that thou art no more, 
'vujiiriefis immeasiira/jlc. Would to (lod tliou wert yet alive, and that this fatal 
land (tliough the native country of Virsil) had never possessed thee! For such 
lias been our wretched destiny, tliat the same land whicli to him gave birth, 
should in this latter year deprive thee of life (a/as, in thi/ ticcntij- second year, a 
.fpan (if existence, though sujlici.jnt Jor thy glory, yet too sitort J'ur its). For ever shall 
I revere tliy uiemory 1 For ever shall thy image be present to my eyes! To me 
thou wilt ever be the same, ever cherished in my heart, as in the atl'ections of all 
worthy men I God grant that thy lot above may be the consummation of 
heavenly felicit}-, as on earth thou wert ever attached to what was of heavenly 
origin, and ever employed in tlie contemplation of such objects. O melancholy 
dait. the third if .1 Illy .' Tills to thee I write, from this mel nicholy sojourn on 
earth, to that lieavcnly habitation, with my eiirntst, prayer fur every blessing to 
thy spirit."t 

Tlie date of this affectionate tribute is the 4th of November, 1.>S3: it 
is j)refixed to the Aldine edition of "Cicero de Universitate." I mention 
these circumstances because they are important to the consideration of 
two inedited poems of Crichton, which have fulleu into my hands, tu 
which I shall now proceed. 

I do not know how I can better introduce the subject than in the 
words of Mr. Tvtler. " Serassi," says this gentleman, ;J; "an author of 
high character fo." accuracy, asserts that he has amongst his miscellanies 
an ' Epiccdion,' written on the death of the Cardinal and Saint, Charles 
Borromeo, by James Crichton, a Scotsman, and printed the very dav 
after his death. Serassi copies the title of this ' Epicedion' verbatim, 
and evidently must have had it before him when he wrote the passage. 
All supposition of mistake upon his part is thus nearly precluded. Tiie 
coincidence of the two names, Jacobus Critonii/s, the additional appella- 
tive Scotus, and the circumstance that the elegy was written, printed, 
and {lublished the day after the death of tlie cardinal, fixes the poem upon 
James Crichton of Cluny ; as the improbability of the supposition that 

* It may be curious to glance at the different terms of culog}' applied to 
Crichton by various authors. By Aldus Manutius, in the llelatione and the 
Affiche, he is styled " mostro dc mnstri ;" by the same writer, in the " Dedication 
to the Paradoxes of Cicero," " unicam et raram in tcrris avem ;" and in the address 
prefixed to the " Dialogue de Amicitid," '■'^ divinam plane juvenem ;" by Astolfi, "mustro 
maraviglioso ;" by Imperialis, '■'scecniimonstrum — urbisphcenix — dceniuniuin ))rorsus ;" 
by Scaliger, "ingenium prodixjiosum ;" by liocalini (satirically), " ilporten/o di nalura" 
by Kotinus, " Phienix Crilonins ;" by Ilonconius, '^ Ligeniu Phteuix " by Dempster, 
" miraculum orbit ;" by .Johnston, "omnibus in atudiis adnnrabilis ;" byAbernethy, 
"Juvenis incompurabilis ;" and by Sir Thomas Urquhart he was lirst entitled, 
" TiiK Admiradle CuicnroN." 

t This translation appears In Dr. Black's "Life of Tasso." It was furnished 
by Lord Woodhouselee. 

t Life of Crichton, pp. 2 11 - 1 2 1 3 Second edition. 



APPENDIX. 343 

there should have been aiidthor Scotsman of the name of James Crich- 
ton in Italy, in the year 1584, possessed of the same remarkable facility 
in poetical composition, is quite apparent. And lastly, the subject on 
which this elegy was composed, renders any error almost impossible. 
Had it been a poem on any indiiferent subject, or a prose work relating 
to any disputed point in physics or in morals, we might have been allowed 
to conjecture that the date 1584 was erroneous; but the death of the 
cardinal, Charles Borromen, fixes us down to a certain time. An * Epi- 
oedion' on this venerable character could not have been written anterior 
to the year 1584. On the one hand, therefore, we have Aldus, Impe- 
rialis, and all his succeeding biographers, fixing the death of Crichton to 
the year 1582 or 1583; on tlie other hand, we have it asserted, that tlie 
Admirable Crichton, on the 4th of November, 1584, composed an ' Epi- 
eedion' on the Cardinal Borromeo. On which side the truth lies, must 
be left for future writers to discern." 

To this I answer by producing the " Epicedion" in question. 

Epicedium Illustrissimi et Keverendissimi Cardinalis Caroli Borom-ei, ab 
Iacobo Critonio Scoto, kogatu Clarissimi, Summaque in optimum Pasto- 

REM SUUM riETATE, VIRI, lOANNIS AnTONII AIaGII MeDIOLANEM. TroXIMO 
post oUITL'M bib EXARATU3I. De CONSENSU SuPERIOKUM. [MeDIOLANI. EX. 
TvPOGRAPniA rACIFICI PONTIJ. M ULXXXIIl.] 

IIou pulla claniydo, et scissis Elegia capillis 

Trodcat, ct calamos Egloga nacta iiigros. 
Nox erat, ct nioestas agitabam pectore curas, 

Iloraque me noctis tertia vexat atrox. 
Nulla ilatur requics; seel mens insaiia vagatur 

Semper, et objectis horret imagiiiibus. 
Ast tandem scro duclinant lumiiio soiimo, 

Et (dolor) obrcpunt somnia dira milii. 
Namque fretum ingressus porta prodire vidobar, 

Quique ratcm re-gerot Navita imlliis erat. 
Ilic Epbyre, Drvmu, Cydippc, Glaucia, Doris, 

Xanthia, Cyiiuxloce, Lysis et Opis erant. 
llffic velut ill gyrum duplicato poplite fertur, 

llemigat liajc pedibus, nee resupina jacet. 
Intonat liorrisonu Cti'lum se murinure miseens, 

Him: Notus, hinc Boreas, Africus inde ruiuit- 
Involuere diem nubes, ca'cajque teiiebrtE 

Insurgunt, et nox ingruit atra salo. 
Deficit eximio spoliata carina Magistro, 

Atque procellosis ingemit icta notis. 
Extimui, steteruntque coma-, et timor occupat artus, 

Proh dolor, en veris somnia mixta noto. 
Pro stupor, Arctois jKregrinns Scotus ab oris, 

Nauclerum Latii defleo jure pium. 
EJLte Viri, lugete senes, discindite vultus 

O pueri, heu juvenes inibre rigate genas. 
Stridulus emissis certatim ululatibus gather 

Horreat, et tinein non habL-ant gemitus. 
Quales cum Troi;e jam tum Fortuna labaret, 

Iliades scisso crine dedere Nurus. 
Xe niea suspensum tcncant te mctra, bcnigne 
Lector, C'hristigenx" Navita, puppis liic est. 
Carolus Insubri Bohom.eus sanguine cretus, 

Cui virtus claro stemmate major erat. 
Carolvs a;terno Borom.eus Numine fultus, 

Et miseraj gentis dux toret ille suae. 



344 APPENDIX. 

Non jirece, non pretio, non vi sed coelitus almura, 

Illius tcxit purpura sacra caput, 
Meiitiq>ie porpetua Christum spcctabat Iesvm, 

Purpurcos inter gloria suninia Patres. 
Non alitor fiuUin vol radiis solaribus aether 

Cynthia vel bigis nox taciturna suis. 
Scilicet Insubrcs vitiorcm mole ruentes, 

Ercxit praesul dexteritate plus. 
Erectosque manu valida fulcivit Ephebus, 

Contuilit et sacra Kelligione scelus. 
Ilunc Deus elegit solida^ pietatis alumnum, 

Ut magnus i)atriaj splendor ubique foret. 
Siepiiis ille homines media de morte recei)it, 

Quum pestis late serperet atra Lues. 
Ille J)ei classem renus, velisque carenteni 

Instituit medio Fortius ire freto. 
Et licet extinet\i» sit eorpore nomine vivit, 

Cujus lama Tiitent puisat utrumque pulum. 
In quo virtutes fixere sedilia cuncta^, 

Do vitiisque feruiit alta troph.Ta Deo. 
Integritas aiiimi. jjlacidoque modestia vidtu, 

Et nuJlis probitas eoutemerata malis. 
Despectu-que sui, jegis respectus avita-, 

I'lovidus, et casto pleiius aniore.timor 
Fact is eulta tides, non soils lumea verbis, 

Sed snpero accensas qua; dat ab igne facoa. 
Aiires nobilibus mites pra'bebat; egenis 

Consuluit pariter nobilis ille parens. 
Ergo non alio fas est liunc nomine dici. 

Quiim sua, (pio, pictas nota sit, atque fides. 
Sic virtute sua clarus, nee carmine nostro, 

Laude nee alterius darior esse potest. 
Ilaud equidem varios cristallina globa colores 

Tot dabit, hie morum quot simulachra nitent,. 
Et tamen (o Pietas) vitales exuit auras, 

Et cceli proprias itque rcditque vias. 
Elieu nil valuit fugientem sistere vitam, 

All lul morte homini certius esse patet. 
Ilia malis re(]uiem, metamque laboribus affert, 

Onmiaque alternas constat habere vices. 
Sic pluvialis liyems, Zephyro s{)irante rei.-edit. 

Sic pia nauclerus pra'mia vester habet. 
Admonet ecce Deus, Deus a-there missus ab alto, 

Currat ut in portus tuta carina suos. 
Interea Pr;esul visit pia fana ^'aralla', 

Ut pra'sagus olor lata subire parans. 
Suncie, quem dederat, cursum Natura peregit, 

Molliter ossa cubant, spiritus astra colit. 
Quem nunc felicem, terris ])elagoquo relictis, 

Fatidiito cecinit Delpliicus ore Deus.* 

• A free translation of this Elegy will be found in the following page. A 
copy alluded to by M. Eyries (the writer of the article on " Crichton" in the Biog. 
Univciselle) is preserved in the Eibliotheque du l!oi at Paris, of which I have pro- 
cured a transcript, agreeing in all respects with another impression obtained from 
Milan* 



APPENDIX. 



I;picctiiiim : 



CARDINAL CARLO BORKOMEO 

I. 

(N'^itli black fiiiuToal robe, and f ressos sborn, 

OVrwbeliiicd with jrriet', sad Elegy apju'ars; 
And by her side, sits Ecioga forlorn, 
Eloitiiijj 'jacli line she traces witli her tears 

II. 

'Twas night I — long pondcrinij; on my secret woea^ 
The thin! hour broke upon my vijjil lone ; 

Far Ironi my breast had sorrow chased repose. 
And fears presagetul threatened ills unknown. 

IIL 

Slumber, at length, mj- heavy eyelids sealed; 

The self-same terrors scared me as I slej)!. 
Portentous dreams events to come revealeil, 

And o"cr my couch fantastic visions swept. 

IV. 

L'jion the shoreless sea methought I sailed, 
is'o lielm>man steered the melancholy barque; 

Around its sides the pityinj^ Nereids wailed, 

Cleaving with snow-white arms the waters dark. 

V. 

Cydippe. doli)liiii-borne, Ei)hyra fair, 

And Xanthia leave their halc.von-haunted caves^ 
With Doris and Cymodece tc share 

The maddening strife of storin-awaken'd waves 

VL 
Drawn, unresisting, where tiie whirling gyre 

Vexes the dee[), the ship her prow inclines; 
WHiile, like a pharos' gleam, the lightning's fire 

Over the raging vortex redly shines. 

VII. 
Mix'd with the thunder's roar that shakes the skies, 

Notus and Africus and Boreas sound ; 
Black wreathing clouds, like shadowy legions, rise, 

JShrouding the sea in nndnight gloom profound. 

VI n. 

Disabled, straining, by the tempest lashed, 

Keft of her storm-tried helmsman's guiding hand. 

The vessel sinks I — amid the surges dashed. 
Vainly I struggle — vainly cry for land! 

IX. 

Alas! stern truths with dreams illusive meet ! 

Latium the shipwreck of her hopes deplores ! 
The pious leader of the Insubrian fleet 

1 mourn — a wandering Scot from Nortliern shores ! 



34^ 



346 APPKKLMX. 

X. 

Weep, youths ! weep, aged men . weep I rend your hair ! 

Let your wild plaints be on the hreezes tost I 
"Weep, virgins! matrons! till your loud despair 

Outbraves her children's wail for Ilion lost ! 

XL 

In that wreck'd barque Ihe Ship of Christ behold! 

In its lost chief the Cardinal divine. 
Of princely Lombard race;* who^sc worth untold 

Kcli[)sed the lofty honours of his line. 

XIL 

His sutlering countrymen to rule, sustain, 

By the All-wise was Boukomeo given ; 
And he, wiio stoop'd not dignity to gain,f 

Derived his high investiture from heaven. 

XI IL 

Bright as tlie stui o'er all ])re-eininent. 

Or Cynthia glittering from lier star-girt throne, 
The saintly Ciiai:i-es, on truths sublime intent. 

Amid tlie purple hierarchy shone. 

XIV. 

The Christian fleet, devoid of helm ami sail. 7 
He mann'd and led where rougliest billows roll ; 

And, though no more, his virtues wide prevail. 
Their sacred intluence spreads from pole to pole. 

XV. 
His, was the providence that all foresees. 

His, the trust placed, uncliangeably, above 
His, strict observance of his sires' decrees, 

Kapt adoration, and fear-chasten'd love. 

XVL 

The faith in practice, not profession, sliown, 

Which borrows all its glory from on high 
Was his : — nor did his holiness, alone. 

Consist in outward forms of sanctity. 

* Saint Carlo Borromeo was horn at Arona, near the Lago Alaggiore, the love- 
liest of Italian lakes, on the 2nd of October, 1538. His family was, and still con- 
tinues to be, the most illustrious in Lombardy. It derives, however, its proudest 
distinction from its connexion with the virtuous cardinal and his exalted nephew 
Frederigo, whose sublime character has been of late so exquisitely portrayed by 
Manzoni. If ever man deserved canonisation, it was the subject of this elegy, 
whose whole life was spent in practices of piety ; and whose zeal, munificence, 
wisdom, toleration, and beneficence, have conferred lasting benefits on his creed 
and country. 

+ He was made Cardinal and Archbishop in liis twenty-third year by his uncle, 
Pius VI., who had resigned several rich livings to him twelve years before. 
— Eustace. Classical Tour through Italy. 

X Borromeo found the diocese of Milan in the most deplorable state of disorder. 
But with a vigorous and unsparing hand he reformed all ecclesiastical abuses — • 
" C'est ainsi," observes jM. Tabauraud, the writer of his life in the Biog. Uni- 
versclle, "que I'Kglise de Milan, tombe'e dans une espece d'anarchie depuis quartre- 
vingts ans que ses archeveques n'y re'sidaient pas, re^ut en peu d'anne'es cette 
forme admirable qui, par la vie toute angclicpie de son clergc', la rendit le modele 
de toutes les autres Eglises. Tant de reformes ne purent se faire sans de 
grands obstacles, qu'il surmonta par sa fermete', sa patience et son imper- 
turbable charite'." 



APPENDIX. m 

xvir. 

A willing ear unto the nobly-born, 

Nobler himself, be ne'er refused to jiekl; 
Nor, Jesus' meek disciple, did he scorn 

The humble prayer that to his heart appealed.* 

xviir. 

Can no remembrance dearer than his name 

Bequeathed us, link his memory with the earth 

Nor can my praise add lustre to his fame — 
Proud heritage of unexampled worth If 

XIX. 

When o'er his desolated city fell 

The livid plaj^ue's inexorable breath ; 
Oft, in the lazzaretto's tainted cell, 

Fervent, he prayed beside the couch cf death.* 

XX. 

,\s through the fane the ]);de procession swept.]] 

Before its shine he bent in lowliest wise ; 
lmi)loring heaven, in nierc}-, to accept 

His life, for them, a willing sacrifice. 

xxr. 

\Vlien from the assassin's arm tlie bullet sjied. 
He bk'iicb'd not, nor his deep devotions stopt ; 

'• Be not (lixmai/'d in /icnrt!'' — the anthem said. 
lie rose — the bullet from his vestment dropt !§ 

* So unbounded was Borromeo's charity, that he sold his principality of Oria, 
and distributed the proceeds amongst tiie poor. 

f The private virtues of Saint Charles, that is, the qualities which give tru9 
sterling value to the man, and sanctify him to the eyes of his Creator — I mean 
liumility, self-command, temperance, industry, prudence, and fortitude — were not 
inferior to his public endowments. His table was for his guests; his own diet was 
confined to bread and vegetaldes ; ho allowed himself no amusement or relaxation, 
alleging that the variety of his duties was in itself a sufficient recreation. His 
dress and establishment were such as became his rank, but in private lie dispensed 
with the attendance of servants, and wore an under dress, coarse and common ; 
his bed was of straw; his repose short; and in all the details of life he manifested 
an utter contempt of personal ease and indulgence. — ■Ecstack. 

J During a destructive pestilence he erected a lazzaretto, and served the for- 
saken victims with his own liands. — Eustace. 

II The incidents described in this and the following stanza do not occur in the 
original. As, however, they api)ear necessary to complete the picture of the holy 
Primate's career presented by the poeni, I have ventured upon tlus introduction. 
These actions, as well as his heroic devotion to the plague-stricken in the lazza- 
retto, mentioned in the preceding verse, form subjects for part of the eight 
magnificent silver bas-reliefs which adorn the vaulted roof of the gorgeous 
subterranean chapel in the Huonio at ^Milan, wiicre the body of the Saint reposes 
enshrined amid " barbaric pearl and f;old." During the period of the plague. 
Borromeo was indefatigable in his exertions to arrest the terrible calamity. 
" Cherchant," saj-s M. 'J'abauraud, "ii desarmer la colere du ciel par des proces- 
sions ge'nerales. auxquelles ilassistait nu-pieds, la cordeau cou, les yeux fixes sur 
son crucifix, qu'il arrosait de ses larmcs, en n'offrant a Dteu comme une victtiite dc 
propitiation pour les pic/ics de sou peuple !" 

§ The ecclesiastical reformation effected by Saint Charles met, as was natural, 
with considerable opposition on the jwrt of the corrupt and disorderly priesthood, 
and he became the object of their bitterest animosity. " Les plus opposes ii la 
rt'fbrme," writes M. Tabauraud ; " suscitereiit un frerc Farina, qui se posta a 
I'entre'e de la chapelle arcliiepiscopale, ou lo Saint Pre'lat faisait sa priere avec 
toute sa maison • et, au moment ou Ton chantait cette autienne : 2Von tuibttur cor 



348 APPF.VDIX. 

XXIL 

Not in the prism more varied lines reside. 

Than bright examples in his course are traced .— 
Alas I liis longer sojourn here denied, 

ilis guiding star is from its sphere effaced. 

xxrii. 

Alas I life's ebbing tide no liindrance knows! 

With man is nothing certain but to die I 
Mortality, alone, presents a dose 

Immutable, 'mid mutability. 

XXIV. 
As, in sf)me streuii remote, the swan expires. 

Breathing, unheard, lier fate-foreboding strain. 
So the declining Cardinal retires 

To steej) \'aralla's solitary fane.* 

XXV. 

Like the fair flower tliat springs from winter's cru<t, 
Lombards ! your I'rimate bursts his earthly chains ; 

And, in his Father's mansion with the Just, 
A portion and inheritance obtains. f 

XXVI. 
Within his chosen tomb calm may he sleep I J 

Beatified, aloft, his spirit soars! 
While Virtue's loss irreparable, deep, 

With reverential grief the Muse deplores. 

The autlieiiticity of this poem cannot for an instant be disputed. It 
bears tlie strongest internal evidence of emanating' from the same mindl 

Tcstnim veqne formiilet, I'assassin, eloigne seulcment de cinq ou si.x pas, tire \in 
eouj) d'arquebuse sur Saint Charles, ii genonx devant I'autel. A ce bruit, le 
chant cesse, la consternatiivi est ge'ne'rale ; le Saint, sans s'emouvoir, fait signe de- 
continuer la priere : il se croyait cependant blesse' mortellement, et offrait a Dieu 
le sacrifice de sa vie. La pru're finie, il se relive, et rnit tomber a scs pieds la ballc 
(jn'on luL aruit tiree dans le dos, et qui riavait fait qu'ejfleurer son rochet.'* — BroG- 
L'niverselle. The holy primate endeavourcil, ineffeciually, to preserve Farina 
and tlie instigators of his crime from the punishment they merited. Thej' were 
put to death, and Pius \l. dissolved the order ( Gli Umili) to which they belonged. 

* The Monastery of Monte Varalla is situated in the Piedmontese states, near 
the banks of the Sesia. Thith«r Saint Charles retired immediately previous to. 
his dissolution, attended only by his confessor, the Jesuit Ailorno, — and returned 
thence to Milan in a dying state. '" Franciscum Adornum Societatis Jesuplurimi 
fecit qui cum in extreme vitaj curriculo per dies jilurimos, quo tempore in Monte 
A'arallo ineditationibus se totum tradiderat Cakoi.ls ab ejus latere nunquam 
discesserit." — Caroli Cardiii. Bunonuri Vila — Valeria. AxTOiXE GoDEAU, Bishop- 
<;/■ Grasse, who has written the life of tlie illustrious Primate, gives the following 
jiarticulars of his melancholy visit to the Monastery : — " Kncore que toute la vie- 
lie Saint Chaicles fust une retraite mentate, toutefo'S il avait aecoutume d'en 
faire une locale tous les ans en quelque monastere t'carte', oil il employoit quel- 
ques jours pour faire une revue severe de sa vie, et pour jirendre un nouvel esprit 
e zl'le et de pie'tc'. Avant que de s'en retourner li Milan, il voulut passer ati 
Mont Varalle, dont nous avons parle. et y faire ses exerciees." — Vie de S. Ch 
Horromee. Lit: II. Ch. dernier. M. Meli.in, in his Voyage dans le Milanaix, de- 
scribing the mountain oratory of Varese, observes : — " On va de la a Varalle, ois 
les Histoires de I'Ancien et du Nouveau-Testament sunt figurees dans cinquante- 
deux chapelles." 

t The earthly pilgrimage of Saint Charles terminated on the 4th of November^ 
15S4. at the age of forty-six years. He was canonized by Paul V. in 1610. 

+ " Cupiens hoc loco sibi monumep*um vivens elegit." — Epitaph insr.rihed rtpom 
liurnimeo' $ tomb by h is own desire. 



APPENDIX, 349 

tliat coticeivetl tlic A})/)uIsns ad Venetnm ; aiul the vexalu fpunHtin so 
long ngitated, as to Cricliton's having survived the perilous Nones of 
July may he now considered finally settled. As an extemporaneous 
eflusion (and its author twice intimates tliat it is to he so esteemed), it 
must he allowed to he a remarkahle production. Its versification is 
singidarly fluent and harmonious; and it hreathcs a spirit of tender 
melancholv perfectly in unison with the suhject. It was dashed off at 
a heat, at the request of a friend, with its writer's characteristic rapidity; 
and, if wc should fail to discover passages of such transcendent beauty 
as miglit he expected from a genius of au order so high as that of 
Crichton, we must bear in mind the disadvantageous circumstances 
under which, in all [U'obability, it was composed. The grief of the 
youthful Scot \\'\'., I am persuaded, no [loetic fiction. Be this as it 
mnv, his reputation will suffer no diminution from tlie connexion of tliis 
*• Kpicedion" with his name. 

Faniigoras iterum Critonius exit in auras 
Et volat ingeaio ilocta per ora virum. 

Not onlv, however, -was Crichton alive in November, 1584 — not only 
on the death of tlie divine Borromeo did he pour forth his elegiac 
strains ; but in the succeeding month we have further proof of his ex- 
istence and unabated poetical powers in the following congratulatory 
address, with which he celebrated the induction of Caspar Visconti to 
the archiepiscopal see of 3Iilan. 

JaCOBI CriTONII ScOTI ad AMPLISSIMUM AC EEVERENDISSIMDM VIRDM Ga8- 

parem vicecomitem* summa omnium ordinum voluntate, ad pr^eclaham 
Arciiiepiscopatus ]\Iediolaxen. Admixistrationem, delectum. 

GRATULATIO.f 

IVinms in Exequiis ferali carmine Scotus 

Piistoris dolui funera moe.sta pii. 
FiHiera moesta pii Borom.ei Praisulis all ali, 

Dujilanxit tristi nostra Thalia stylo. 
^Vspice jiost iiimbos, nitidum quam sa'po reducat 

Vectiis Lucifero Cynthius axe, dieni. 
>."ani(iue sale pridem Xavis spoiiata .Magistro, 

^lorc poctarum, fiuctibus obniitur. 
Sa^vit liyems, vcnti ingeniinant striduntque rudentes, 

Soil citoque treniuut corda pavore viniiu. 
Nee spes uUa fuit melior, quin deficit oiniiis 

Naucleri pdsito, turba, niagisterio. 
Ncc quicquani nisi vota tacit divosqiie deasque 

Orat, ut afllictis rebus adesse vcluit. 
Tauta sed icterni fuerit dementia Patris 

Ut non liumanas deseruisset opes. 
Sic pelagi tandem compescuit ^Eolus ;estus, 

Atque rcluctantes traxit in antra Notos. 

* Caspar Visconti, a prelate eminent for learning and piety (though thrown 
into the shade by the superior sanctity of his immediate precursor and successor, 
Saint Charles, and Ercderick Borromeo) was appointed to the archbishopric of 
^lilan, on the 29th of November, and consecrated during the ides of December, 
l.')S4 {Vide Sa.rii iSeries Archiejiic. Mil. Tom. III.), the period when Cricliton's con- 
gratulatory poem was published. A translation of the address will be found in 
the ensuing page. 

t Mediolani. Ex. Typographia PaciJIci Fontii, M.DLXXXIII. 



3o0 APPENDIX. 

Et caput exeruit forniosior a?quore Titan, 

Illuxit votis niille i)etita dies. 
Ec'ce vclut fulgur media quod nocte coruscat, 

Alter adest prajstans navita puppis, Vo. 
Cujus opes niagnas, virtus et irloria I'.nuf 
Exuperant, hujus noii levis urbis noiior. 
l\t)stra Kotae,* Koma-, recta ratione rotubat, 

Kiiuantique rateni relligione reget. 
Coilocjuio pra>sens pra?seiitcni denique iiovi, 

Seiisibus injecit qui pia vincla meis. 
I'ra'sule ter felix o nunc Insubria tali, 

Inclyta cui virtus cernitur esse parens. 
Quein propriis ultro tendcntem laudilms. onines 

Hoc noruiit sacrum proineruisse jiibar. 
Ciirrite jam cives, dignis ornate lapillis, 

Nubile, facundum, conspicuumque caput. 
Exojjtatus ades patrite rectorque paterque 
Gaspar prffisignis nomine requc Conies. 
Quid potuit mcESta; contingere laetius Urbi? 

Qui suavi pasccs pectora nostra cibo. 
Participes hujus concurruut undique gentes 

Lx'titito. et ciira est omnibus una tui, 
Deponunt luctus, et te succedere gaudent, 

Nam cui succedis non latet orbe virus. 
Ilium Sarmaticus Boreas, et Caucasus asper 

Protulerit, Charites qui neget ore tuas. 
JIagnanimum sydus, tu gloria splendor avorum, 

Tu generis columen, portus et aura tui. 
Integritas morum, pietas, facundia. virtus, 

Musa, tibi probitas, dexteritasque placent. 
Eelligione Numam, antiquum gravitate Catonem, 

Augustum illustrem nobilitate refers. 
Hinc te Guegokius, sunnni qui Kuminis instar, 

Clavigera, reserat regna beata, manu. 
Eximio magnus donavit munere Pastor, 
U t tegat emeritas sacra Tiara comas. 
Auguriis sibi quisque animum felicibus implet, 

Exoptat longos, et tibi (juisque dies. 
Critonius Scotis Arctoa; in finibus orse 

Progenitus, Gaspak, gratulor ecce tibi, 
Sis felix, carmenque nieum lege fronte screna, 
Gaudebit, Prcesul, Musa favore tuo. 

CID ID XXCIV. Y. Idas Decembria. 



^0 Gaspar Uisconti. 
I. 

When her fair land with grief o'erspread, 
Insubria mourn'd her Frimate dead; 
Wiien Eorromeo to the tomb 
"Was borne 'mid all-pervading gloom; 
AVhcn dinnn'd with tears was every eye, 
When breathed one universal sigh 
The sorrowing lyre for him who slept, 
I first — a Scottish minstrel — swept. 

• The well-known Papal court called the liola. Gaspar Visconti was one of 
the twelve judges, as we learn from Sa.cius, who says that he proceeded to Kome 
— ut una cum auditorihus cjuos vacant EoTiE RoMAN^a; in eo insi()7ii sapientum collegia 
considerct. The reader will admire the singular alliterative splendour of tiiia 
couplet. 



ArrENDix. 351 



II. 

Tliu night is pass'd, and dawn awakes, 
liriplit Cynthius throni;li tlie- vapour breaks 
Aiul Lucifer, witii cheering beams, 
From out his golden axle gleams. 
Where late upon tiie raging sea 
Tiie wild winds rush'd luimiltuo\isly ; 
And the frail barque by surges tost. 
Her tempest-braving helmsman lost. 
Her timbers strain'd, her canvas riven, 
Wide o'er tiie weltering waste was driven; 
While her ])ale crew, with fear aghast, 
(iazed (as they deem'd) on li^avcn their last! 
With shrieks their hapless fate bewailing! 
With prayers the threatening skies assailing! — 

A change is wrought !— liushed are the gai«» 

A soft and sunnner calm prevails; 
And tlie glad ship, in safety, glides 
Over the gently- rolling tides. 
In troops o'er the ocean's broad expanse, 
Day's rosy liarbingers advance; 
Bland Eolus careers the wave, 
Fierce Notus hurries to his cave; 
Young Titan from the waters springs, 
With new-born lustre on his wings; 
And over all things shines that sun. 
Whose light a thousand vows have woo. 

in. 

lo! with shouts the deck resound! 

16! another chief is found! 

Another leader hath been sent 

To rule the Christian armament; 

Whose firmness and undaunted zeal 

I'ji.sure uninterrupted weal: 

"Whose voice tlic Human Jiotfi sway'd, 

Whose laws that synod sage obey'd: 

Whose hand will guide witii equal ease, 

Ueligion's barque through stormy seas: 

Whose power in exliortation shown, 

W^liose wisdom I myself have known; 

When by his eloquence subdued, 

In admiration lost, I stood. 

llejoice, thrice-happy Lombardy! 

That such a chief is given to thee! 

A chief so free from aught of sin, 

Virtue might be his origin: 

Whose heavenly purpose, onward-tending. 

Whose resolution— calm, unbending. 

Shall lead thee through the shades of night 

To realms of everlasting light. 

IV. 

Haste, Milanese! your Primate greet! 
Prelates! your leader fly to meet! 
Hun, maidens! youths! let each one bring 
Some gift, some worthy offering! 
Surrounding nations bail your choice, 
Surrounding nations loud rejoice! 
Like him, whom ye have lost, was none 
Save him your choice has fall'n upon! 



352 APPENDIX. 

V. 

A father fonrl, a ruler wise 

Oaspar, in thee, we rccojjnise : 

Thy name, Vi.sconti, seems to be 

An earnest of prosperity. 

To us thou art in our distress, 

As matnia in llie Aviklerness. 

Inhospitable Caucasus, 

Sarniatian Boreas rigorous, 

Seize nn the eaitift", who denies 

Tliy all-acknowledg'd chariticsl 

A glory art thou, and a star, 

A light, a pharos seen afar! 

And, clotlied with mnjesty divine, 

Shalt prove the pillar of tliy line. 

High rectitude and prescience 

Are thine, and wide beneficence-, 

A Numa in thy sanctity, 

A Cato in thy gravitj^ 

Augustus in nobility. 

Hence the High I'ontifT Gregory,* 

Who holds of I'aradise the key. 

For thee earth's chains hath cast aside, 

For thee heaven's gate hath opened wide; 

Milan's white robe hath round thee spread, 

Her mitre placed upon thy head. 

VI. 

In thy blest advent all men see 

Of peace a certain augury; 

All tongues are clamorous in tliy })raise, 

All pravers are fur thy length of days. 

Amid tlio crowd, I, Chichtox, bora 

On Caledonian shores forlorn. 

Not all unknown, congratulate 

Thee, Gaspai;, on thine honour'd state. 

Perpetual happiness be tiiinel 

Thy bright, approving smile be minel 

Nor let thy taste, severe, disdain. 

Primate, this welcome-breathing strain. 

Unnoticed by, and evidently unknown to all Iiis former biographers, 
tills congrattilatory poem closes the intellectual career of the Admirable 
Crichton.f All beyond Is wrapped In obscurity. 

To the consideration of the present and the preceding performance 
should be brought a knowledge of Crichton's strong devotion to the 
Church of Rome ; to that ancient faith — shorn of its glory In his own 
land, for which, after encountering those unhapp}' difterences adverted 
to by Aldus {prcBlia domestica contra te suscitata quce cum patrc 
gessisti), and rejecting the brilliant offers held out to him bv the leaders 
of the popular faith, whose cause and opinions his family had em- 

* Gregory XHI., the Pope by whom Caspar Visconti was appointed to the 
Archiepiscopal see of Milan. 

f Any further information respecting Crichton will probably be derived from 
tlie voluminous manuscript letters of San Carlo Borromeo, preserved in the Am- 
brosian Library at Milan; — from the letters of Sperone Speroni, in the edition of 
Forcellini, which have not come under my observation: or from some contem- 
l)orary memoir or correspondence published at Mantua. 



APPENDIX. 353 

braced, he had so lonii; absented liimself from liis country, his 
friends, his home.* 

Attached to the Church of Rome, he was necessarily attached 
to her priesthood. Milan, luider the sway of the divine Bor- 
romeo, became the model of ecclesiastical jurisdiction. To 
Milan, Cricliton repaired. His grief for the loss of the exalted 
primate was deep and heartfelt; his rejoicing at the appoint- 
ment of his successor, whose piety he himself, as he informs us, 
had approved — 

Whose power in exlioitafion shown, 
Whose wisdom, I myself have known, 
When by his eloquence subdued. 
In admiration lost, I stood — 

was unfeigned: — and if the verses just quoted do nothing more, 
they at least prove that the adherence to the faith of his an- 
cestry, Avhich sent him forth a wanderer from their heresy-girt 
halls, was still unchanged. 

Efforts have been made on tlie part of some recent writers to 
shake the celebrity of the Admirable Scot, by assailing the few 
poetical pieces which he has left us, and by measuring the grasp 
of his intellect by this unfair standard. This is to judge of the 
fire of Sappho by her twin odes ; of the comic humour of 
Menander by his fragments. The prejudices of the learned 
biographer of Tasso must indeed have been blinding, if he could 
see no beauties in the " Appulsus" — no ins[)iration, no poetic 
nerve, no classic taste and feeling in the odes to Massa and 
Donatus. It is not, howevei', from what remains to us of his 
writings, but from the effect produced upon his contemporaries 
(and such contemporaries), that we can form a just estimate of 
the extent of Crichton's powers. By them he was esteemed a 
miracle of learning — divinum plane juvenem: and we have an 
instance in our own times of a great poet and philosopher, whose 
]iublished works scarcely bear out the high reputation he enjoyed 
for colloquial ability. The idolised friend of Aldus Manutius, 
of Lorenzo Massa, Giovanni Donati, and Sperone Speroni, 
amongst the most accomplished scholars of their age ; the an- 
tagonist of the redoubted Arcangelus ]Mercenarius and Giacomo 
Mazzoni — (whose memory Avas so remarkable that he could re- 
cite entire books of Dante, Ariosto, V^irgil, and Lucretius, and 
who had sounded all the depths of philosophy) — could not have 

* Quod scilicet regno, patria, doiiioque, ob CathoHcfie fidei ardorcui, tain 
lougue abes. — Aldi Bedicatio in Farodoxa Ciceroiiis. 

2 A 



354 APPENDIX. 

been other than an extraordinary person ; and we may come to 
the conclusion respecting him, arrived at by Dr. Jolmson, that 
" whatever we may suppress as surpassing credibility, yet we 
shall, upon incontestible authority, relate enough to rank him 
among prodigies." 



THE ENO. 



PKINTEI) BV BAI.I.ANTVNF, HANSON AND CO. 
LONDON AND EUINBL'RGH 




^.^Ie^ 



-i'd Ainswo 
4002 Crichton. 




