^ 




THE LIBRARY 

OF 

THE UNIVERSITY 

OF CALIFORNIA 

LOS ANGELES 



GIFT OF 



FREDERIC THOMAS BLANCHARD 




S'"j"i>„,K:<*wit 



_J>;»^. ^A'y^- r.-// ', •//f//^,- 



• /, v- 



GUY FAWKES 



OR 



THE GUNPOWDER TREASON 



AN HISTORICAL ROMANCE 



BY 

WILLIAM HARRISON AINSWORTH 

AUTHOR OF 

"THE TOWEK OF LONDON," ETC 



" You shall »wear by the blessed Trinity, and by the sacrament you now propose to receive, 
never to disclose directly or indirectly, by word or circumstance, the matter that shall be proposed 
to you to keep secret, nor desist from the execution thereof till the rest shall give you leave." — 
Oath of the Conspirators. 



W^\i\) Illustrations an Steel bg (Seorse Cruifis^anft 



LON J) ox 
GEORGE ROUT LEDGE AND SONS, Limited 

UROADWAV. LUDGATK IIII.L 



W. HARRISON AINSWORTH'S NOVELS. 

The Original Edition, with Illustrations by 

Cbobcb Cruikshank, Hadlot K. Browns, Sir John Gilbbrt, R.A., 

and other Artists. 



Demy 8vo« Cloth, 6s. each. 



THE TOWER OF LONDON. 

WINDSOR CASTLE, 

CRICHTON. 

THE FLITCH OF BACON; or, 

TrfB Custom of Dunmow. 
THE STAR CHAMBER. 
J50SC0BEL ; or, The Rovai. Oak. 
OVINGDEAN GRANGE ; ATale 

OF THE South Downs. 
MEUVYN CLITHEROE. • 



THE SPENDTHRIFT. 

THE MISER'S DAUGHTER. 

GUY FAWKES. 

ROOKWOOD. 

JACK SHEPPARD. 

THE LANCASHIRE WITCHES. 

AURIOL. 

OLD SAINT PAUL'S; A Talb 

OF THE PlAGUB and THE FlKB. 



TO 



MRS. HUGHES, 

KINGSTON LISLE, BERKS. 



My dear Mrs. Hughes, 

You are aware that this Romance was brought to a close 
during my last brief visit at Kingston Lisle, when the time 
necessary to be devoted to it deprived me of the full enjoyment 
of your society, and, limiting my range — no very irksome 
restriction, — to your own charming garden and grounds, pre- 
vented me from accompanying you in your walks to your 
favourite and beautiful downs. This circumstance, which will 
suffice to give it some interest in your eyes by associating it with 
3'our residence, furnishes me with a plea, of which I gladly avail 
myself, of inscribing it with your name, and of recording, at the 
same time, the high sense I entertain of your goodness and 
worth, the value I set upon your friendship, — a friendship shared 
in common with some of the most illustrious writers of om 
time, — and the gratitude I shall never cease to feel for attentions 
and kindnesses, little less than maternal, which I have experienced 
lit your hands. 

In the hope that you may long continue to diffuse happiness 
round your own circle, and contribute to the instruction and 
delight of the many attached friends with whom you maintain 
so active and so interesting a correspondence ; and that you may 
live to see your grandsons fulfil their present promise, and tread 
in the footsteps of their high-minded and excellent-hearted 
father, — and of his father ! I remain 

Your affectionate and obliged friend, 

W. Harrison Ainsworth. 

Kensal Manor House, Harrow Road, 
July 26, 1841. 



G84975 



PREFACE. 



The tyrannical measures adopted against the Roman Catholics 
in the early part of the reign of James the First, when the severe 
penal enactments against recusants were revived^ and with addi- 
tional rigour, and which led to the remarkable conspiracy about 
to be related, have been so forcibly and faithfully described by 
Doctor Lingard,* that the following extract from his history will 
form a fitting introduction to the present work. 

" The oppressive and sanguinary code framed in the reign of 
Elizabeth, was re-enacted to its full extent, and even improved 
with additional severities. Everv individual who had studied or 
resided, or should afterwards study or reside in any college or 
seminary beyond the sea, was rendered incapable of inheriting, 
or purchasing, or enjoying lands, annuities, chattels, debts, or 
sums of money, within the realm ; and as missionaries sometimes 
eluded detection under the disguise of tutors, it was provided that 
no man should teach even the rudiments of grammar in public 
or in private, without the previous approbation of the diocesan. 

" The execution of the penal laws enabled the king, by an 
ingenious comment, to derive considerable profit from his past 
forbearance. It was pretended that he had never forgiven the 
penalties of recusancy ; he had merely forbidden them to be 
exacted for a time, in the hope that this indulgence would lead 
to conformity ; but his expectations had been deceived ; the 
obstinacy of the Catholics had grown with the lenity of the 
sovereign ; and, as they were unworthy of further favour, they 
should now be left to the severity of the law. To their dismay, 
the legal fine of twenty pounds per lunar month was again 
demanded, and not only for the time to come, but for the whole 
period of the suspension ; a demand which, by crowding thirteen 
payments into one, reduced many families of moderate incomes 
to a state of absolute beggary. Nor was this all. James was 
surrounded by numbers of his indigent countrymen. Their 
habits were expensive, their wants many, and their importunities 
incessant. To satisfy the more clamorous, a new expedient was 
devised. The kinjr transferred to them his claims on some of 

* Vide History of England, voL ix. New Edition. 



vi PREFACE. 

the more opulent recusants, against whom they were at Hberty 
to proceed b}' law, in his name, unless the sufferers should sub- 
mit to compound, by the grant of an annuity for life, or the 
immediate payment of a considerable sum. This was at a time 
when the jealousies between the two nations had reached a 
hright, of which, at the present day, we have but little concep- 
tion. Had the money been carried to the royal coffers, the 
recusants would have had sufficient reason to complain ; but that 
EngHshmen should be placed by their king at the mercy of 
foreigners, that they should be stripped of their property to 
support the extravagance of his Scottish minions, this added 
indignity to injustice, exacerbated their already wounded feelings, 
and goaded the most moderate almost to desperation." From 
this deplorable state of things, which is by no means over- 
:roi0ured in the above description, sprang the Gunpowder Plot. 

The county of Lancaster has always abounded in Catholic 
families, and at no period were the proceedings of the ecclesi- 
astical commissioners more rijijorous against them than at that 
under consideration. Manchester, " <.he Goshen of this Egy])t,'* 
as it is termed by the fiery zealot. Warden Heyrick, being the 
place where all the recusants were imprisoned, the scene of the 
early part of this history has been laid in that town and its 
immediate neighbourhood. For the introduction of the muni- 
ficent founder of the Bhie Coat Hospital into a tale of this 
description I ought, perhaps, to apologize ; but if I sliould 
succeed by it in arousing my fellow-townsmen to a more lively 
a])prcciation of the great benefits they have derived from him, 
I shall not regret what I have written. 

In Viviana RadclifFe I have sought to portray the loyal and 
devout Catholic, such as I conceive the character to have existed 
at the period. In Catesby, the unscru{)ulous and ambitious plotter, 
masking his designs under the cloak of religion. In Garnet, 
the subtle, and yet sincere Jesuit. And in Fawkes the gloomy 
and superstitious enthusiast. One doctrine I have endeavoured 
to enforce throughout, — Toleration. 

From those who have wilfully misinterpreted one of my former 
productions, and have attributed to it a purpose and an aim 
utterly foreign to my own intentions, I can scarcely expect fairer 
treatment for the present work. But to that wider and more 
discriminating class of readers from whom I have experienced 
so much favour and support, I confidently commit this volume, 
certain of meeting with leniency and impartiality. 



CONTENTS. 



VAGI 

DEDICATION i" 

PREFAOK ▼ 



12 
26 



33oofe tbe jpirst. 

THE PLOT. 

CHAPTBE 

I. AN EXECUTION IN MANCHESTER, AT THE BEGINNING OP THE 

SEVENTEENTH CENTURY 1 

II. ORDSALL CAVE • 1<5 

III. ORDSALL HALL 

IV. THE SEARCH 

V. CHAT MOSS 31 

VI. THE DISINTERMENT 49 

VII. DOCTOR DEE 50 

VIII. TUK MAGIC GLASS 56 

IX. THE PRISON OX SALFORD BRIDGE 62 

X. THE FATE OF THE PURSUIVANT 66 

XI. THE PILGRIMAGE TO S.VINT WI.MFKED'S WELL 71 

XII. THE VISION 83 

XIII. THE CONSPIRATORS 87 

XIV. THE PACKET 93 

XV. THE ELIXIR ] 05 

XVI. THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH AT MANCHESTER 115 

XVII. THE RENCOUNTER 129 

XVIir. THE EXPLANATION 131 

XIX. THE DISCOVERY 133 

XX. THE DEPARTURE FROM THE HALL 139 



THE DISCOVERY. 

I. THE LANDING OP THE POWDER .147 

II. THE TRAITOR 156 

IM. THE ESCAPE PREVENTED 163 

IV. THE MINE l*i!^ 

V. THE CAPTURE OF VIVIANA 179 

VI. THE CELLAR 187 

VII. THE STAR-CHAMBER 19.'> 

VIII. THE jailer's daughter 193 

IX. THE COUNTERPLOT 212 

X. WHITE WEBBS 220 

XI. THE MARRIAGE IN THE FOREST 22S 

XII. THE FIFTH OP NOVEMBER 2:57 

XIII. THE FLIGHT OF THE CONSPIRATORS 245 

XIV. THE EXAMINATION 255 



viii CONTENTS. 



i3ook t!)C ^f){rlf. 

THE CONSPIRATORS. 

CniPTEB FtOB 

I. HOW GUY FAWKE3 WAS PUT TO THE TORTURE 2G2 

11. SHOWING THE TROUBLES OF VIVIANA 274 

in. HUDDINGTON 278 

IV. HOLBEACH 292 

V. THE CLOSE OP THE REBELLION 294 

VI. UAGLEY 304 

VII. VIVIANA'S last NIGHT AT OKDSALL HALI 313 

VIII. HENDLIP 319 

IX. WHITEHALL 327 

X. THE PARTING OF VIVIANA AND HUMPHREY CHETHAM 331 

XI. THE SUBTERRANEAN DUNGEON 332 

Xn. THE TRAITOR BETRAYED 330 

SIII. THE TRIAL 341 

XIV. THE LAST MEETING OF FAWKE3 AND VIVIANA 344 

XV. SAINT Paul's churchyard 347 

XVI. OLD PALACE YARD , . 352 

ZTJI. THE LAST EXECUTION So5 



GUY F A W K E S. 



THE PLOT. 



Their searches are many and severe. They come either in the niglit or early in 
the morning, and ever seek their opportunity, when the Catholics are or would be 
best occupied, or are likely to be worse provided or look for nothing. They 
willino'liest come when few are at home to resist them, that they may rifle coffers, 
and do what they list. They lock up tlie servants, and the mistress of the house, 
a::d the whole family, in a room by themselves, while they, like young princes, go 
riiSing the house at their will. 

Letter to Verstegan, ap. Stonyhurst MSS. 

What a thing is it for a Catholic gentleman to have his house suddenly beset on 
all sides with a number of men in arms, both horse and foot ! and not only his 
iijusic and gardens, and such enclosed places all beset, but all highways laid, for 
some miles near unto him, that none shall pass, but they shall be examined ! Then 
are these searchers oft-times so rude and barbarous, that, if the doors be not 
opened in the instant they would enter, they break open the doors with all violenc*, 
oa if they were to sack a town of enemies won by the sword. 

Father Gerard's MS. 



CHAPTER I. 

AN EXECUTION IN MANCHESTEE, AT THE BEGINNING OF THE 

SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 

ZnIore than two hundred and thirty-five years ago, or, to speak 
•with greater precision, in 1605, at the latter end of June, it was 
rumoured one morning in Manchester that two seminary priests, 
condemned at the late assizes under the severe penal enactments 
then in force against the Papists, were about to suffer death on 
that day. Attracted by the report, large crowds flocked towards 
the place of execution, which, in order to give greater solemnity 
to the spectacle, had been fixed at tlic southern gate of the old 
Collegiate Church, where a scaffold was erected. Near it was 
a large blood-stained block, the use of which will be readily 
divined, and adjoining the block, upon a heap of blazing coals, 
smoked a caldron filled with boiling pitch, intended to receive 
the quarters of the miserable sufferers. 

The place was guarded by a small band of soldiers, fully 

B 



2 GUY FAWKES 

accoutred in corslets nnd morions, and armed with swords, half- 
piiies, and calivers. Upon the steps of the scaflold stood the 
executioner, — a square-built, ill-favoured personage, busied in 
arranging- a bundle of straw upon the boards. He was dressed 
in a buff jerkin, and had a long-bladcd, two-edged knife thrust 
into his girdle. Besides these ])crsons, there was a pursuivant, 
— an officer appointed by the Privy Council to make search 
throughout the provinces for recusants, Popish priests, and other 
religious offenders. He was occupied at this moment in reading 
over a list of suspected persons. 

Neither the executioner nor his companions appeared in the 
slightest degree impressed by the butcherly business about to be 
enacted ; for the former whistled carelessly as he pursued his 
task, while the latter laughed and chatted with the crowd, or 
jestingly pointed their matchlocks at the jackdaws wheeling 
above them in the sunny air, or perching upon the pinnacles and 
tower of the neighl)Ouring fane. Not so the majority of the 
assemblage. Most of the older and wealthier families in Lan- 
cashire still continuing to adhere to the ancient faith of their 
fathers, it will not be wondered that many of their dependents 
should follow their example. And, even of those who were 
adverse to the creed of Rome, there were few who did not mur- 
mur at the rigorous system of persecution adopted towards hi- 
professors. 

At nine o'clock, the hollow rolling of a muffled drum was 
heard at a distance. The deep bell of the church began to toll, 
and presently afterwards the n")urnfnl procession was seer' 
advancing from the market-place. It consisted of a troop of 
mounted soldiers, equipped in all respects like those stationed at 
the scaffold, with their captain at their head, and followed by 
two of their number wuth hurdles attached to their steeds, on 
which were tied the unfortunate victims. Both were young men 
— both apparently prepared to meet their fate with firmness and 
resignation. They had been brought from Radcliffe Hall — an 
old moated and fortified mansion belonging to a wealthy fan)ily 
of that name, situated where the close, called Pool Fold, now 
stands, and then recently converted into a place of security for 
recusants; the two other ])risons in Manchester — namely, the 
New Fleet on Hunt's Bank, and the gaol on Salford Bridge, — 
not being found adequate to the accoumiodation of the numerous 
religious offenders. 

By this time, the cavalcade had reached the place of execu- 
tion. The soldiers drove back the throng with their pikes, and 
cleared a space in front of the scaffold; when, just as the cords 
that bound the limbs of the priests were unfastened, a woman in 
a tattered woollen robe, with a hood partially drawn over her 
face, — the features of which, so far as they could be discerned, 
were sharp and attenuated, — a rope girded round her waii3t, bare 



EXECUTION AT MANCHESTER. 3 

feet, and having altogether the appearance of a sister of Charity, 
sprang forward, and flung herself on her knees beside them. 

Clasping the hem of the garment of the nearest priest, she 
pressed it to her lips, and gazed earnestly at him, as if imploring: 
a blessing. 

" You have your wish, daughter," said the priest, extending 
his arms over her. " Heaven and our lady bless you I" 

The woman then turned towards the other victim, who was 
audibly reciting the Miserere. 

"Back, spawn of Antichrist!" interposed a soldier, rudely 
thrusting her aside. " Don't you see you disturb the father's 
devotions ? He has enough to do to take care of his own soul, 
without mindino; vours." 

" Take this, daughter," cried the priest who had been first 
addressed, offering her a small volume, which he took from his 
vest, "and fail not to remember in your prayers the sinful soul 
of Robert Woodroofe, a brother of the order of Jesus." 

The woman put out her hand to take the book ; bsit before it 
could be delivered to her, it was seized by the soldier. 

" Your priests have seldom anything to leave behind them,*^ 
he shouted, with a brutal laugh, " except some worthless and 
superstitious relic of a saint or martyr. What's this ? Ah I a 
breviary — a mass-book. I've too much regard for your spiritual 
welfare to allow you to receive it," he added, about to place it in 
his doublet. 

*'Give it her," exclaimed a young man, snatching it from 
him, and handing it to the woman, who disappeared as soon a^ 
ohe had obtained possession of it. 

The soldier eyed the new-comer as if disposed to resent the 
interference, but a glance at his apparel, which, though plain, 
and of a sober hue, was rather above the middle class, as well as 
a murmur from the crowd, who were evidently disposed to take 
part wi^h the young man, induced him to stay his hand. He, 
therefore, contented himself with crying, " A recusant 1 a Papist !" 

" I am neither recusant nor Papist, knave I" replied the other, 
sternly; "and I counsel you to mend your manners, and show 
more humanit}', or you shall find I have interest enough to pro- 
cure your dismissal from a service which you disgrace." 

This reply elicited a shout of applause from the mob. 

" Who is that bold speaker?" demanded the pui'suivant from 
one of his attendants. 

"Humphrey Chetham of Crumpsall," answered the man: 
*' son to one of the wealthiest merchants of the town, and a 
zealous upholder of the true faith." 

" He has a strange way of showing his zeal," rejoined the pur- 
suivant, entering the answer in his note-book. " And who is the 
woman he befriended ?" 

" A half-crazed being called Elizabeth Orton," replied the 



4 GUY FAWKES. 

attendant. " She was scourj^cd and tortured during Queen 
Eli/.abetli's rci<ji;n for prctcndinir to the Gjift of ]^rophocy,, and was 
compelled to utter her recantation within yonder church. Sirxe 
then she has never opened her lips." 

" Indeed," exchiimcd the pursuivant : " I will engage to m^-kc 
her speak, and to some purpose. Where does she live ?" 

" In a cave on the banks of the Irwell, near Ordsall Hall," 
replied the attendant. '* She subsists on the chance contribu- 
tions of the charitable; but she solicits nothing, — and, indeed, is 
seldom seen." 

"Her cave must be searched," observed the pursuivant; *' it 
may be the hiding-place of a priest. Father Campion was con- 
cealed in such another spot at Stonor Park, near Henley-on- 
Thames, where he composed his ^Decern Rationes ;'' and, for a 
long time, eluded the vigilance of the commissioners. We shall 
pass it in our way to Ordsall Hall to-night, shall we not?" 

The attendant nodded in the affirmative. 

" If we surprise Father Oldcorne," continued the pursuivant, 
"and can ])rove that Sir William Radcliffe and his daughter, 
both of whom are denounced in m}' list, are harbourers and shel- 
terers of recusants, we shall have done a good night's work." 

At this moment, an officer advanced, and commanded the 
priests to ascend the scaffold. 

As Father Woodroofe, who was the last to mount, reached the 
uppermost step, he turned round and cried in a loud voic^, 
" Good people, I take you all to witness that I die in th« triic 
"Catliolic religion, and that I rejoice and thank God with all v\y 
soul, that he hath made me worthy to testify my faith therein by 
fhedding my blood in this manner." He then advanced to- 
wards the executioner, who was busied in adjusting the cord round 
his companion's throat, and said, " God forgive thee — do thine 
office quickly;" adding in a lower tone, "Asperge me, Doridnc. ; 
Doniine, miserere mei /" 

And, amid the deep silence that ensued, the executioner per- 
formed his horrible task. 

The execution over, the crowd began to separate slowly, and 
■various opinions were expressed respecting the revolting and 
sanguinary spectacle just witnessed. Many, who condemned — 
and the majority did so — the extreme severity of the laws by 
which the unfortunate priests had just suffered, uttered their 
sentiments with extreme caution; but there were some whose 
feelings had been too much excited for prudence, and who 
inveighed loudly and bitterly against the spirit of religious per- 
secution then prevailing; while a few others of an entirely opj)o- 
site persuasion looked upon the rigorous proceedings adoj)ted 
against the Papists, and the punishment now inilictcd upon their 
priesthood, as a just retribution for their own severities during 
the reign of Mary. In general, the common people entertained 



EXECUTION AT MANCHESTER. 5 

a stronfT prejudice afjainst the Catholic party, — for, as it has been 
shrewdly observed, " they must have some object to hate ; here- 
tofore it was the Welsh, the Scots, or the Spaniards, but now in 
these latter times only the Papists;" but in Manchester, near 
which, as has been already stated, so many old and important 
families, professing that religion, resided, the case was widely 
different ; and the mass of the inhabitants were favourably 
inclined towards them. It was the knowledge of this feeling 
that induced the commissioners, appointed to superintend the 
execution of the enactments against recusants, to proceed with 
unusual rigour in this neighbourhood. 

The state of the Roman Catholic party at the period of this 
history was indeed most grievous. The hopes they had indulged 
of greater toleration on the accession of James the First, had 
been entirely destroyed. The persecutions, suspended during 
the first year of the reign of the new monarch, were now renewed 
with greater severity than ever; and though their present con- 
dition was deplorable enough, it was feared that worse remained 
in store for them. " They bethought themselves," writes Bishop 
Goodman, " that now their case was far worse than in the time 
of Queen Elizabeth ; for they did live in some hope that after the 
old woman's life, they might have some mitigation, and even 
those who did then persecute them were a little more moderate, 
as being doubtful what times might succeed, and fearing their 
own case. But, now that they saw the times settled, having no 
hope of better days, but expecting that the uttermost rigour of 
the law should be executed, they became desperate : finding that 
by the laws of the kingdom their owai lives were not secured, and 
for the carrying over of a priest into England it was no less than 
high treason. A gentlewoman was hanged only for relieving and 
harbouring a priest ; a citizen was hanged only for being recon- 
ciled to the Church of Rome ; besides, the penal laws were such, 
and so executed, that they could not subsist. What was asually 
sold in shops and usually bought, this the pursuivant would take 
away from them as being Popish and superstitious. One knight 
did affirm that in one term he gave twenty nobles in rewards to 
the door-keeper of the Attorney-General ; another did affirm, that 
his third part wliich remained unto him of his estate did hardly 
serve for his expense in law to defend him from other oppres- 
sions ; besides their children to be taken from home, to be 
brought up in another religion. So they did every way conclude 
that their estate was desperate ; they could die but once, and 
their religion was more precious unto them than their lives. 
They did further consider their misery; how they were debarred 
in any course of life to help themselves. They could not prac- 
tise law, — they could not be citizens, — they could have nc 
office ; they could not breed up their sons — none did desire to 
match with them; they had neither lit marriages for their 



6 GUY FAWKES. 

ilaughters, nor nunneries to put them into; for those few which 
are beyond seas are not considerable in respect of the number 
of recusants, and none can be achnittcd into them without <i;rcat 
sums of money, wliich they, being exhausted, could not supjiiy. 
The Spiritual Court did not cease to molest thciu, to excom- 
municate them, then to imprison them ; and thereby they were 
utterly disenabled to sue for their own." Such is a taitlifid 
picture of the state of the Catholic party at the commencement 
of the reifjn of James the First. 

Pressed down by these intolerable grievances, is it to be 
wondered at that the Papists should repine, — or that some 
among their number, when all other means failed, should seek 
redress by darker measures? By a statute of Elizabeth, all who 
refused to conform to the established religion were subjected to 
a fine of twenty pounds a lunar mouth; and this heavy penalty, 
remitted, or rather suspended, on the accession of the new 
sovereign, was again exacted, and all arrears claimed. Added 
to this, James, whose court was thronged by a host of needy 
Scottish retainers, assigned to them a certain number of wealthy 
recusants, and empowered them to levy the fines — a privilege of 
which they were not slow to avail themselves. There were 
other pains and penalties provided for by the same statute, which 
were rigorously inflicted. To withdraw, or seek to withdraw 
another from the established religion was accoimted high treason, 
and punished accordingly; to hear mass involved a penalty of 
one hundred marks and a year's imprisonment ; and to harbour 
r. priest, under the denomination of a tutor, rendered the latter 
liable to a year's imprisonment, and his cniploycr to a fine often 
pounds a-month. Impressed with the belief that, in consequence 
of the unremitting persecutions which the Catholics underwent 
in Elizabeth's time, the religion would be wholly extirpated, 
Doctor Allen, a Lancashire divine, who afterwards received a 
cardinal's hat, founded a college at Douay, for the reception and 
education of those intending to take orders. From this uni- 
versity a number of n)issionary priests, or seminarists, as they 
were termed, were annually sent over to England ; and it was 
against these persons, who submitted to every hardship and pri- 
vation, to danger, and death itself, for the welfare of their reli- 
gion, and in the hope of propagating its doctrines, that the 
utmost rigour of the penal enactments was directed. Aniong 
the number of seminarists des]iatched from Douay, and capitally 
convicted under the statute above-mentioned, were the two 
])riests wliose execution has just been narrated. 

As a portion of the crowd passed over the old bridge across 
the Irwell connecting Mancliester with Salford, on which stood 
an ancient chapel erected by Thomas de Booth, in the reign of 
Edv.ard tlie Third, and recently converted into a ])rison for 
recusants, they perceived the prophetess, Elizabeth Orton, seated 



EXECUTION AT MANCHESTER. 7 

upon the stone steps of the desecrated structure, earnestly 
perusing the missal given her by Father Woodroofe. A mob 
speedily collected round her ; but, unconscious seemingly of tb.cir 
presence, the poor woman turned over leaf after leaf, and pursued 
her studies. Her hood was thrown back, and discovered b.er 
bare and withered neck, over which her dishevelled hair streamed 
in lonn; sable elf-locks. Irritated bv her indifflsrence, several of 
the by-standers, who had questioned her as to the nature of her 
studies, began to mock and jeer her, and endeavoured, by])lucking 
her robe, and casting little ])ebbles at her, to attract her atten- 
tion. Roused at length by these annoyances, she arose ; and 
fixing her large black eyes menacingly upon ihem, was about to 
stalk away, when they surrounded and detained her. 

" Speak to us, Bess," cried several voices. '* Prophesy — pro- 
phesy." 

" I icill speak to you," replied the poor woman, shaking her 
hand at them, " I will prophesy to you. And mark me, though 
ye believe not, my words shall not fall to the ground." 

*' A miracle 1 a miracle!" shouted the by-standers. "Bess 
Orton, who has been silent for twenty years, has found her 
tongue at last." 

" I have seen a vision, and dreamed a dream," continued the 
prophetess. " As I lay in my cell hist night, meditJiting upon 
the forlorn state of our religion, and of its professors, methought 
nineteen shadowy figures stood before me — ay, nineteen — for I 
counted them thrice — and when I questioned them as to their 
coining, — for my tongue at first clove to the roof of ray mouth, 
and my lips refused their office, — one of them answered, in a 
voice which yet rings in my ears, ' We are the chosen deliverer?; 
of our fallen and persecuted church. To us is intrusted the re- 
building of her temples, — to our hands is committed the destruc- 
tion of our enemies. The work will be done in darkness and in 
secret, — with toil and travail, — but it will at length be made 
manifest; and when the hour is arrived, our vengeance will be 
terrible and exterminating.' With these woi'ds, they vanished 
from my sight. Ah I" she exclaimed, suddenly starting, and 
passing her hand across her brow, as if to clear her sight, "it 
was no dream — no vision. I see one of them now." 

"Where? where?" cried several voices. 

The prophetess answered by extending her skinny arm 
towards some object immediately before her. 

All eyes were instantly furned in the same direction, when they 
beheld a Spanish soldier — for such his garb proclaimed hin'. — 
standing at a few })aces' distance from them. He was wrajiped 
in an ample cloak, with a broad-leaved steeple-crowned hat, 
decorated with a single green feather, pulled over his brows, and 
wore a polished-steel Inigandine, trunk hose, and buff boots 
drawn up to the knees. His arms consisted of a brace of petronels 



8 GUY FAWKES. 

thrust into his belt, whence a long; rapier depended. His featnrea 
were dark as bronze, and well- formed, though strongly marked, 
and had an expression of" settled sternness. His eyes were grey 
and penetrating, and shaded by thick beetle-brows ; and his 
ph3'siognomy was completed by a black peaked beard. His per- 
son was tall and erect, and his deportment soldier-like and 
commanding. Perceiving he had become an object of notice, 
the stranger cast a compassionate look at the prophetess, who 
still remained gazing fixedly at him, and throwing her a few 
pieces of money, strode away. 

Watching his retreating figure till it disappeared from view, 
the crazed woman tossed her arms wildly in the air, and cried, 
in a voice of exultation, " Did I not speak the truth ? — did I 
not tell you I had seen him ? He is the deliverer of o\ir church, 
and is come to avenge the righteous blood which hath been this 
day shed." 

" Peace, woman, and fly while there is yet time," cried the 
young man who had been designated as Humphrc}'^ Chetham. 
" The pursuivant and his myrmidons are in search of 3'ou." 

" Then they need not go fur to find me," replied the pro- 
phetess. " I will tell them what I told these people, that the 
day of bloody retribution is at hand, — that the avenger is 
arrived. 1 have seen him twice, — once in mv cave, and once 
again here, — even where you stand." 

"If 3'ou do not keep silence and fly, my poor creature," re- 
joined Humphrey Chetham, "you will have to endure what you 
suflfered years ago, — strij)cs, and perhaps torture. Be warned by 
me — ah ! it is too late. He is aj)proaching." 

" Let him come," replied Elizabeth Orton, *' I am ready for 
him." 

" Can none of you force her away?" cried Humphrey Chet- 
ham, a])pealing to the crowd ; " I will reward you." 

" I will not stir from this spot," rejoined the prophetess, obsti- 
nately ; " I will testify to the truth." 

The kind-hearted young merchant, finding any further 
attempt to preserve her fruitless, drew aside. 

By this time, the pui'suivant and his attendants had come up„ 
*' Seize her!" cried the former, " and let her be placed within 
this prison till I have reported iicr to the commissioners. Ifyou 
will confess to me, woman," he added in a whisper to her, " that 
you have harbouied a priest, and will guide us to his hiding- 
place, you shall be set free." 

" I know of no priests but those you have nnirdercd," returned 
the prophetess, in a loud voice, " but I will tell you something 
that you wot not of. The avenger of blood is at hand. I have 
seen him. All here have seen him. And you shall see him — 
but not now — not now." 



EXECUTION AT MANCHESTER. 9 

" What is the meaning of this raving ?" demanded the pur- 
Buivanl. 

" Pay no heed to her talk," interposed Humphrey Chetham ; 
'* she is a poor crazed being, who knows not what she says. I 
will be surety for her inoffensive conduct." 

*' You must give me surety for yourself, sir," replied the pur- 
suivant. " I have just learnt that you were last night at Ordsall 
Hall, the seat of that 'dangerous temporiser,'— for so he is de- 
signated in my warrant, — Sir William Radcliffe, And if report 
speaks truly, you are not altogether insensible to the charms of 
his fair daughter, Viviana." 

" What is this to thee, thou malapert knave?" cried Humphrey 
Chetham, reddening, partly from anger, partly, it might be, from 
another emotion. 

" Much, as you shall presently find, good Master Wolf-in- 
sheep's-clothing," retorted the pursuivant ; " if you prove not a 
rank Papist at heart, then do I not know a true man from a 
false." 

This angry conference was cut short by a piercing scream 
from the prophetess. Breaking from the grasp of her captors, 
who were about to force her into the prison, she sprang with a 
single bound upon the paiapet of the bridge ; and utterly re- 
gardless of her dangerous position, turned, and faced the soldiers, 
who were struck nmte with astonishment. 

" Tremble !" she cried, in a loud voice, — " tremble, ye evil- 
doers I Ye who have despoiled the house of God, — have broken 
his altars, — scattered his incense, — slain his priests. Tremble, 
I say. The avenger is arrived. The bolt is in his hand. It 
shall strike king, lords, commons, — all! These are my last 
words, — take them to heart." 

" Drag her off!" roared the pursuivant, furiously. 

'' Use care — use gentleness, if ye are men I" cried Humphrey 
Chetham. 

« Think not you can detain me !" cried the prophetess. 
" Avaunt, and tremble I" 

So saying she flung herself from the parapet. 

The height from which she fell was about fifty feet. Dashed 
into the air like jets from a fountain by the weight and force of 
the descending body, the water instantly closed over her. But 
she rose to the surface of the stream, about twenty yards below ^ 
the bridge. 

" Slie may yet be saved," cried Humphrey Chetham, who 
with the by-standers had hurried to the side of the bridge. 

"You will only preserve her for the gallows," observed the 
.pursuivant. 

"Your malice shall not prevent my making the attempt," re- 
plied the young merchant. " Ha I assistance is at hand. ' 



10 «UY FAWKES. 

The exclamation was occasioned by the sudden appearance of 
the soldier in the Spani>ii dress, who rushed towards the left 
bank of the river, which was here, as elsewhere, formed of red 
sandstone rock, and followin<^ the course of the current, awaited 
the next a]i]>earancc of the drowning; woman, it did not occur 
till she had been carried a considerable distance down the stream, 
when the soldier, swiftly divesting himself of his cloalrj plunged 
into the water, and dragged her ashore. 

*' Follow me," cried the pursuivant to his attendants. "1 will 
not lose my prey." 

But before he gained the bank of the river, the soldier and 
his charge had disappeared, nor could he detect any traces of 
them. 



CHAPTER II. 

ORDSALL CAVE. 



After rescuing the unfortunate prophetess from a watery grave 
in the manner just related, the soldier snatched up his cloak, 
and, taking his dripping burttien in his arms, hurried swiftly 
along the bank of the river, until he came to a large cleft in the 
rock, into which he crept, t;iking the prophetess with him, and 
thus eluded observation. In this retreat he continued upwards 
of two hours, during which time the poor creature, to whom he 
paid every attention that circumstances would admit, had so faj 
recovered as to be able to speak. But it was evident that the 
shock had been too much for her, and that she was sinkiu;^' fast. 
She was so faint that she could scarcely move ; but she ex})ressed 
a strong desire to reach her cell before she breathed her last. 
Having described its situation as accurately as she could to the 
soldier — who before he ventured forth peeped out to recon- 
noitre — he again raised her in his arms, and by her direction 
struck into a narrow lane skirting the bank of the river. 

Pursuing this road for about half a mile, he arrived at the fool 
of a small knoll, covered by a clump of magnificent beech-trees, 
and still acting under the guidance of the dying woman, whose 
voice grew more I'eeble each instant, he mounted it, and from its 
summit took a rapid survey of the surrounding country. On 
the opposite bank of the river stood an old hall, while further 
on, at some distance, he could perceive through the trees tlic 
gables and chimneys of another ancient mansion. 

" Raise me up," said Elizabeth Orton, as he lingered on this 
spot for a moment. " In that old house, which you see yonder, 
IJulme Hall, I was born. I would willingly take one look at it 
before I tlie." 




tefekxs, vn/OrcUill Cavt 



ORDSALL CAVE. 11 

" And the other hall, which I discern through the trees, is 
Ordsall, is it not?" inquired the soldier. 

" It is," replied the prophetess. " And now let us make what 
haste we can. We have not far to go; and I feel I shall not 
last long." 

Descending the eminence, and again entering the lane, which 
here made a turn, the soldier appi'oached a grassy space, walled 
in on either side by steep sandstone rocks. At the further ex- 
tremity of the enclosure, after a moment's search, by the 
direction of his companion, he found, artfully concealed by 
overlianging brushwood, the mouth of a small cave. He crept 
into the excavation, and found it about six feet high, and of 
considerable depth. The roof was ornamented with Runic 
characters and other grotesque and half-effaced inscri{)tions, 
while the sides were embellished with Gothic tracery, amid 
which the letters I.H.S., carved in ancient church text, could be 
easily distinguished. Tradition assigned the cell to the priests 
of Odin, but it was evident that worshippers at other and holier 
altars had more recently made it their retreat. Its present 
occupant had furnished it with a straw pallet, and a small wooden 
crucifix fixed in a recess in the wall. Gently depositing her 
upon the pallet, the soldier took a seat beside her on a stone 
slab at the foot of the bed. He next, at her request, as the cave 
was rendered almost wholly dark by the overhanging trees, 
struck a light, and set fire to a candle placed within a lantern. 

After a few moments passed in {)rayer, the recluse begged him 
to give her the crucifix that she might clasp it to her breast. 
Tliis done, she became more composed, and prepared to meet 
her end. Suddenly, as if something had again disturbed her, 
she opened wide her glazing eyes, and starting up with a dying 
effort, stretched out her hands. 

" I see him before them !" she cried. " They examine him — 
they adjudge him! Ah! he is now in a dungeon ! See, the 
torturers advance ! He is placed on the rack — once — twice — - 
thrice — they turn the levers ! His joints snap in their sockets — 
his sinews crack ! Mercy ! he confesses ! He is led to execu- 
tion. I see him ascend the scaffold I" 

" Whom do you behold?" inquired the soldier, listening to 
her in astonishment. 

"His face is hidden from me," replied the prophetess; *' but 
his figure is not unlike your own. Ha! I hear the executioner 
pronounce his name. How are you called ?" 

" Guy Fawkes," replied the soldier. 

" It is the name I heard," rejoined Elizabeth Orton. 
■ And, sinking backward, she expired. 

Guy Fawkes gazed at her for some time, till he felt assured 
that the last spark of life iiad fled. He then turned away, and 
placing his hand upon his chin, became lost in deep reflection. 



J? GUY FAWKES. 

CHAPTER III. 

ORDSALL HALL. 

Soon after sunset, on the evening of tlic events previously related, 
the inmates of Ordsall Ilall were disiurbed and alarmed (for 
in those times of trouble any casual disturbance at night was 
sufficient to occasion alarm to a Catholic family) by a loud 
clamour for admittance from some one stationed at the farther 
side of the moat, then, as now, surrounding that ancient 
manorial residence. The drawbridge being raised, no appre- 
hension was entertained of an attempt at forcible entrance on 
the part of the intruder, who, so far as he could be discerned in 
the deepening twilight, rendered yet more obscure by the shade 
of the trees under which he stood, appeared to be a solitary 
horseman. Still, for fear of a surj)rise, it was judged prudent by 
those inside the hall to turn a deaf ear to the summons ; nor wtis 
it until it "had been more than once repeated in a peremptory 
tone, that any attention was paid to it. The outer gate was 
then cautiously opened by an old steward, and a couple of 
serving-men, armed with pikes and swords, who deuianded the 
stranger's business, and were answered tiiat he desired to speak 
with Sir William Radcliffe. The steward rejoined that his 
master was not at home, having set out the day before for 
Chester: but that even if he were, he would take upon himself 
to affirm that no audience would be given, on any pretence 
whatever, to a stranger at such an unseasonable hour. To this 
the other replied, in a haufrhty and commanding voice, that he 
was neither a stranger to Sir VVilliam Radcliffe, nor ignorant of 
the necessity of caution, though in this instance it was altogether 
superfluous ; and as, notwithstanding the steward's assertion to 
the contrary, he was fully persuaded his master ivas at home, he 
insisted upon being conducted to him without further parley, as 
his business would not brook delay. In vain the steward de- 
clared he had spoken the truth. The stranger evidently dis- 
believed him ; but, as he could obtain no more satisfactory 
answer to his interrogations, he suddenly shifted his ground, 
and inquired whether Sir William's daughter. Mistress Viviana, 
was likewise absent from home. 

" Before I reply to the cjuestion, I must know by whom and 
wherefore it is put ?" returned the steward, evasively. 

" Trouble not yourself further, friend, but deliver this letter 
to her," rejoined the horseman, flinging a packet across the 
moat. " It is addressed to her father, but there is no reason 
why she should not be accjuainted with its contents." 

" Take it up, Olin Birtwissel," cried the steward, eyeing the 
packet which had fallen at his feet suspiciously ; " take it up, I 



ORDSALL HALL. 1 



• 



say, and hold it to the light, that I may consider it well before 
I carry it to our young mistress. I have heard of strange 
treacheries practised by such means, and care not to meddle 
with it." 

" Neither do I, good Master Heydocke," replied Birtwissel. 
*' I would not touch it for a twelvemonth's wages. It may burst, 
and spoil my good looks, and so ruin my fortunes with the 
damsels. But here is Jeff Gellibronde, who, having no beauty 
to lose, and being, moreover, afraid of nothing, will pick it up 
for you." 

*' Speak for yourself, Olin," rejoined Gellibronde, in a surly 
tone. " I have no more fancy for a shattered limb, or a scorched 
face, than my neighbours." 

" Dolts I" cried the stranger, who had listened to these ob- 
servations with angry impatience, " if you will not convey my 
packet, which has nothing more dangerous about it than an 
ordinary letter, to your mistress, at least acquaint her that Mr. 
Robert Catesby, of Ashby St. Legers, is without, and craves an 
instant speech with her." 

" Mr. Catesby 1" exclaimed the steward, in astonishment. 
" If it be indeed your worship, why did you not declare yourself 
at once ?" 

" I may have as good reason for caution as yourself. Master 
Heydocke," returned Catesby, laughing. 

" True," rejoined the steward ; " but, methinks it is somewhat 
strange to find your worship here, when I am aware that my 
master expected to meet you, and certain other honourable 
gentlemen that you wot of, at a place in a clean opposite direc- 
tion, Holywell, in Flintshire." 

"The cause of my presence, since you desire to be certified 
of the matter, is simply this," replied Catesby, urging his steed 
towards the edge of the moat, while the steward advanced to 
-meet him on the opposite bank, so that a few yards only lay 
between them ; " I came round by Manchester," he continued, in 
a lower tone, " to see if any assistance could be rendered to the 
unfortunate fathers Woodroofe and Forshawe ; but found on my 
arrival this morning that I was too late, as they had just been 
executed." 

" Heaven have mercy on their souls I" ejaculated Heydocke, 
shuddering, and crossing himself. Yours was a pious mission, 
Mr. Catesby. Would it had been availing !" 

" I would so, too, with all my soul !" rejoined the other, fer- 
vently ; "but fate ordained it otherwise. While I was in the 
town, I accidentally learnt from one, who informed me he had 
just parted with him, that your master was at home; and, fearing 
he might not be able to attend the meeting at Holywell, I 
resolved to proceed hither at nightfall, when my visit was not 
likel'y to be observed ; having motives, which you may readily 



X4 GUY FAWKES. 

conjecture, for prcservinf; the strictest secrecy on the occasion. 
The letter was pre{)ared in case I should fail in meeting with 
him. And now that I have satisfied your scruples, good master 
steward, if Sir William be really within, I pray you lead me to 
Inm forthwith. If not, your young mistress may serve my turn, 
for I have that to say which it imports one or other of them 
to know." 

" In regard to my master," replied the steward, " he departed 
yesterday for Chester, on his way to join the pilgrimage to St. 
\Vinifred's Well, as I have already assured your worship. And 
whoever informed you to the contrary, spoke falsely. But I 
will convey your letter and message to my young mistress, 
and on learning her pleasure as to receiving you, will instantly 
return and report it. These are dangerous times, your wor- 
ship ; dangerous times. A good Catholic knows not whom to 
trust, there are so many spoilers abroad." 

" How, sirrah I" cried Catesby, angrily, " do you apply that 
observation to me ?" 

" Far be it from me," answered Heydocke, respectfully, *' to 
apply any observation that may sound offensive to your worship, 
whom I know to be a most worthy gentleman, and as free from 
heresy, as any in the kingdom. I was merely endeavouring to 
account for w^hat may appear my over-caution in detaining you 
where you are, till I learn my lady's pleasure. It is a rule in 
this house not to lower the drawbridge without orders after sun- 
set; and I dare not, for my place, disobey it. Young Mr. 
Humphrey Chetham, of Crumpsall, was detained in the like 
manner no later than last night ; and he is a visitor," he added, 
in a significant tone, " who is not altogether unwelcome to my 
mistress — ahem ! But duty is no respecter of persons ; and in 
my master's absence my duty is to protect his household. Your 
worship will pardon me." 

" I will pardon anything but your loquacity and tcdiousness," 
rejoined Catesby, impatiently. "About your errand quickly." 

" I am gone, your worship," returned the steward, disappear- 
ing with his companions. 

Throwing the bridle over his horse's neck, and allowing him 
to drink his fill from the water of the moat, and afterwards to 
pluck a few mouthfuls of the long grass that fringed its brink, 
Catesby abandoned himself to reflection. In a few moments, as 
the steward did not return, he raised his eyes, and fixed them 
upon the ancient habitation before him, — ancient, indeed, it was 
not at this time, having been in a great measure rebuilt by its 
possessor. Sir William lladcliffc, during tiie latter part of the 
reign of Elizabeth, in the rich and ])ictures(jue style of that 
period. Little could be distinguished of its projecting and 
retiring wings, its walls decorated with black and white chequer- 
work, the characteristic of the class of architecture to which it 



ORDSALL HALT. 15 

bclontred, or of its ni;ignificent embayed windows filled with 
stained iilass ; but the outline of its heavy roof, with its nume- 
rous gables, and groups of tall and elaborately-ornamented chim- 
neys, might be distinctly traced in strong relief against the warm 
and still-glowing western sky. 

Though much gone to decay, grievously neglected, and 
divided into three separate dwelling-houses, Ordsall Hall still 
retains much of its original character and beauty; and viewed at 
the magic hour above described, when the changes produced by 
the lapse of years cannot be detected, it presents much the same 
striking appearance that it offered to the gaze of Catesby. 
Situated on the north bank of the Irwell, which supplies the 
moat with a constant stream of fresh water, it commands on the 
south-west a beautiful view of the winding course of the river, 
here almost forming an island, of Trafford Park and its hall, of 
the woody uplands beyond it, and of the distant hills of Cheshire. 
The mansion itself is an irregular quadrangle, covering a con- 
siderable tract of ground. The gardens, once exquisitely laid out 
in the formal taste of Elizabeth's days, are also enclosed by the 
moat, surrounding (except in the intervals where it is filled up) 
a space of some acres in extent. At the period of this history, 
it was approached on the north-east by a noble avenue of syca- 
mores, leading to within a short distance of its gates. 

As Catesby surveyed this stately structure, and pondered 
upon the wealth and power of its owner, his meditations thus 
found vent in words: — "If I could but link Radcliffe to our 
cause, or win the hand of his fair daughter, and so bind him to 
me, the great attempt could not fail. She has refused me once. 
No matter. I will persevere till she yields. With Father Old- 
corne to back my suit, I am assured of success. She is necessary 
to my purpose, and shall be mine." 

Descended from an ancient Northamptonshire family, and 
numbering among his ancestry the well-known minister of the 
same name who flourished in the reign of Richard the Third, 
Robert Catesby, — at this time about forty, — had in his youth led 
a wild and dissolute life ; and though bred in the faith of Rome, 
he had for some years abandoned its worship. In 1580, when 
the Jesuits, Campion and Persons, visited England, he was 
reconciled to the church he had quitted, and thenceforth became 
as zealous a supporter and promoter of its doctrines as he had 
heretofore been their bitter opponent. lie was now actively 
engaged in all the Popish plots of the period, and was even sup- 
posed to be connected with those designs of a darker dye which 
were set on foot for Elizabeth's destruction, — with Somcrville'f 
conspiracy, — with that of Arden and Throckmorton, — the latter 
of whom was his uncle on the maternal side, — with the plots ot 
Bury and Savage, — of Ballard, — and of Babingtou. After the 
execution of the unfortunate Queen of Scots, he devoted himself 



16 GUY FAWKES. 

to what was termed the Spanish faction, and endeavoured 
carry out the schemes of a jiarty, who, distrusting the vague pro- 
mises of James, were anxious to secure the succession to a 
Cathohc, — the Infanta of Spain, or the Duke of Parma. On the 
insurrection of the Earl of Essex, he took part with that ill-fated 
nohlenian; and, thougli he escaj)ed condign punishment for the 
offence, he was imprisoned and heavily fined. 

From this time his career ran in darker channels. *' Hunger- 
starved for innovation," as he is finely described by Camden, — 
iiubued with the fiercest religious fanaticism, — eloquent, wily, 
resolute, — able alike to delude the powerful and intimidate the 
weak, — he possessed all tlie ingredients of a conspirator. Asso- 
ciating with men like himself, of desperate character and broken 
fortunes, he was ever on the look out for some means of retriev- 
ing his own condition, and redressing the wrongs of his church. 
Well informed of the actual state of James's sentiments, when, 
on that monarch's accession, confident hopes were entertained by 
the Romanists of greater toleration for their religion, Catesby 
was the first to point out their mistake, and to forctel the season 
of terrible persecution that was at hand. On this persecution he 
grounded his hopes — hopes, never realized, for the sufferers, 
amid all the grievances they endured, remained constant in their 
fidelity to the throne — of exciting a general insurrection among 
the Catholics. 

Disappointed in this expectation, — disappointed, also, in his 
hopes of Spain, of France, and of aid from Rome, he fell back 
upon himself, and resolved upon the execution of a dark and 
dreadful project which he had long conceived, and which he 
could execute almost single-handed, without aid from foreign 
powers, and without the co-operation of his own party. The 
nature of this project, which, if it succeeded, would, he imagined, 
accomplish all or more than his wildest dreams of ambition or 
fanaticism had ever conceived, it will be the business of this his- 
tory to develope. Without going further into detail at present, 
it may be mentioned that the success of the plot depended so 
entirely on its secrecy, and so well aware was its contriver of the 
extraordinary system of espionage carried on b}' the Earl of 
Salisbury and the Privy Council, that for some time he scarcely 
dared to trust it out of his keeping. At length, after much deli- 
beration, he comnmnicated it to five others, all of whom were 
bound to silence by an oath of unusual solemnity; and as it was 
necessary to the complete success^of the conspiracy that its out- 
break should be instantaneously followed by a rise on the part 
of the Catholics, he darkly hinted that a plan was on foot for 
their deliverance from the yoke of their oppressors, and coun- 
selled them to hold themselves in readiness to fiy to arms at a 
moment's notice. But here again he failed. Few were disposed 
to listen to him; and of those who did, the majority returned for 



ORDSALL HALL. 17 

answer, -' that their part was endurance, and that the only arma 
which Christians could use against lawful powers in their seve- 
rity were prayers and tears." 

Among the Popish party of that period, as in our own time, 
were ranked many of the oldest and most illustrious families in 
the kingdom, — families not less remarkable for their zeal for 
their religion than, as has before been observed, for their loyalty ; 
— a loyalty afterwards approved in the disastrous reign of James 
the Second by their firm adherence to what they considered the 
indefeasible right of inheritance. Plots, indeed, were constantly 
hatched throughout the reigns of Elizabeth and James, by per- 
sons professing the religion of Rome ; but in these the mass of 
the Catholics had no share. And even in the seasons of the 
bitterest persecution, when every fresh act of treason, perpetrated 
by some lawless and disaffected individual, was visited with addi- 
tional rigour on their heads, — when the scaffold reeked with 
their blood, and the stake smoked with their ashes, — when their 
quarters were blackening on the gates and market-crosses of 
every city in the realm, — when their hearths were invaded, their 
religion proscribed, and the very name of Papist had become a 
by-word, — even in those terrible seasons, as in the season under 
consideration, they remained constant in their fidelity to the 
crown. 

From the troubled elements at work, some fierce and turbulent 
spirits were sure to arise, — some gloomy fanatics who, having 
brooded over their wrongs, real or imaginary, till they had lost 
all scruples of conscience, hesitated at no means of procuring 
redress. But it would be unjust to hold up such persons as 
representatives of the whole body of Catholics. Among the con- 
spirators themselves there were redeeming shades. All were not 
actuated by the same atrocious motives. Mixed feelings induced 
Catesby to adopt the measure. Not so Guy Favvkes, who had 
already been leagued with the design. One idea alone ruled him. 
A soldier of fortune, but a stern religious enthusiast, he supposed 
himself chosen by Heaven for the redemption of his Church, 
and cared not what happened to himself, provided he accom- 
plished his (as he conceived) holy design. 

In considering the causes which produced the conspiracy 
about to be related, and in separating the disaffected party of the 
Papists from the temperate, due weight must be given to the 
influence of the priesthood. Of tlie Romish clergy there were 
two classes — the secular priests, and the Jesuits and missionaries. 
While the former, like the more moderate of the laity, would 
have been well-contented with toleration for their religion, tuir 
latter breathed nothing but revenge, and desired the utter sub- 
version of the existing government, — temporal as well as eccle- 
siastical. Men, for the most parr, of high intellectual powers, 
of untiring energy, and unconquerable fortitude, they were 

c 



1& GUY FAWKESL 

enabled by their zeal and ability to make many proselytes. By 
their means, secret correspondence was carried on with the 
different courts of Europe ; and they were not without hope that, 
taking; advantage of some flxvourable crisis, they sliould yet 
restore tlieir church to its former supremacy. To these persons, 
— who held as a maxim, " Qui religioncm Gatholicam deserit 
reijnandi jus omne amisit," — Catesby and his associates proved 
ready and devoted agents. Through their instrumentality, they 
hoped to accomjilish the great work of their restoration. To 
Father Garnet, the provincial of the English Jesuits, of whom 
it will be necessary to speak more fully hereafter, the plot had 
been revealed by Catesby under the seal of confession ; and, 
though it subsequently became a question whether he was justified 
in withholding a secret of such importance to the state, it is suf- 
ficient for the present purpose to say that he did withhold it. 
For the treasonable practices of the Jesuits and their faction some 
palliation may perhaps be found in the unrelenting persecution 
to which they were subjected; but if any excuse can be admitted 
for them, what opinion must be formed of the conduct of their 
temperate brethren ? Surely, while the one is condemned, 
admiration may be mingled with the sympathy which must be 
felt for the unmerited sufferings of the other I 

From the foregoing statement, it will be readily inferred that 
Sir William Radcliffe, a devout Catholic, and a man of large 
possessions, though somewhat reduced by the heavy fines im- 
posed upon him as a recusant, must have appeared an object of 
importance to the conspirators; nor will it be wondered at, that 
every means were used to gain him to their cause. Acting, how- 
ever, upon the principles that swayed the well-disposed of his 
party, the knight resisted all these overtures, and refused to take 
any share in proceedings from which his conscience and loyalty 
alike revolted. Baffled, but not defeated, Catesby returned to 
the charge on a new point of assault. Himself a widower (or 
.-supposed to be so), he solicited the hand of the lovely Viviana 
Radcliffe, Sir William's only child, and the sole heiress of his 
possessions. But his suit in this quarter was, also, unsuccessful. 
The knight rejected the proposal, alleging that his daughter had 
no inclination to any alliance, inasmuch as she entertained serious 
thoughts of avowing herself to heaven. Thus foiled, Catesby 
ostensibly relinquished his design. 

Shortly before the conmiencement of this history, a pilgrimage 
to Saint Winifred's Well, in Flintshire, was undertaken by 
Father Garnet, the provincial of the Jesuits before mentioned, 
in company with several distinguished Catholic personages of 
both sexes, and to this ceremonial Sir William and his daughter 
were urgently bidden. The invitation was declined on the part 
of Viviana, but accepted l)y the knight, who, though unwilling 
to leave home at a period of so much danger, or to commit his 



ORDSALL HALL. IS 

daughter to any care but his own, even for so short a space, felt 
it to be his duty to give couHtenance by his presence to the 
ceremonial. 

Accordingly, he departed for Chester on the previous day, as 
stated by the steward. And, though Catesby professed ignorance 
on the subject, and even affirmed he had heard to the contrary, 
it may be doubted whether he was not secretly informed of the 
circumstance, and whether his arrival, at this particular con- 
juncture, was not preconcerted. 

Thus much in explanation of what is to follow. The course 
of Catesby's reflections was cut short by the return of the 
steward, who, informing him that he had his mistress's commands 
to admit him, immediately lowered the drawbridge for that 
purpose. Dismounting, and committing his steed to one of the 
serving-men, who advanced to take it, Catesby followed his con- 
ductor through a stone gateway, and crossing the garden, was 
ushered into a spacious and lofty hall, furnished with a long 
massy oak table, at the upper end of which was a raised dais. 
At one side of the chamber yawned a huge arched fire-place, 
garnished with enormous andirons, on wliich smouldered a fire 
composed of mixed turf and wood. Above the chimney-piece 
hung a suit of chain-armour, with the battle-axe, helmet, and 
gaimtlets of Sir John Radcliffe, the first possessor of Ordsall, 
who flourished in the reign of Edward the First: on the right, 
masking; the entrance, stood a magnificent screen of carved oak. 

Traversing this hall, Heydocke led the way to another large 
apartment; and placing lights on a Gothic-shaped table, offered 
a seat to the new-comer, and departed. The room in which 
Catesby was left was termed the star-chamber — a name retained 
to this day — from the circumstance of its ceiling being moulded 
and painted to resemble the heavenly vault when studded with 
the luminaries of night. Jt was terminated by a deeply-em- 
bayed window filled with stained glass of the most gorgeous 
colours. The walls, in some places, were hung with arras, in 
others, wainscoted with dark lustrous oak, embellished with 
scrolls, ciphers, and fanciful designs. The mantel-piece was of 
the same solid material, curiously carved, and of extraordinary 
size. It was adorned with the armorial bearings of the family — • 
two bends engrailed, and in chief a label of three, — and otlier 
devices and inscriptions. The hearth was considerably raised 
above the level of the floor, and there was a peculiarity in the 
construction of the massive wooden pillars flanking it, tiiat at- 
tracted the attention of Catesby, who rose with the intention of 
examining them more narrowly, when he was interrupted by the 
entrance of the lady of the mansion. 

Advancing at a slow and dignified pace, Viviana Radcliffe 
courteously but gravely saluted her guest; and, without offering 
him her hand, motioned him to a chair, while she seated herself 



20 GUY FAWKES. 

at a little distance, Catcsby had seen her twice before; and 
whether the circumstances under which they now met might 
have caused some channi;e in her demeanour he could not tell, 
but he thought her singularly altered. A year ago, she had beea 
a lively, laughing girl of seventeen, with a bright brown skin, 
dark flowing tresses, and eyes as black and radiant as those of a 
gipsy. She was now a grave, collected woman, infinitely more 
beautiful, but wholly changed in character. Her com[)lexion 
had become a clear, transparent white, and setoff to great advan- 
tage her large, luminous eyes, and jetty brows. Her figure was 
tall and majestic ; her features regular, delicately formed, and of 
the rarest and proudest class of beauty. She was attired in a 
dress of black wrought velvet, entirely without ornament except 
the rosary at her girdle, with a small ebony crucifix attached to 
it. She wore a close-fitting cap, likewise of black velvet, edged 
with pearls, beneath which her raven tresses were gathered in 
such a manner as to display most becomingly the smooth and 
snowy expanse of her forehead. The gravity of her manner, not 
less than her charms of person, seem to have struck Catesby 
mute. He gazed on her in silent admiration for a brief space, 
utterly forgetful of the object of his visit, and the part he intended 
to play. During this pause, she maintained the most perfect com- 
posure, and fixing her dark eyes full upon him, appeared to await 
the moment when he might choose to open the conversation. 

Notwithstanding his a2;e, and the dissolute and distracted life 
he had led, Catesby was still good-looking enough to have pro- 
duced a favourable impression upon any woman easily captivated 
by manly beauty. The very expression of his marked and 
peculiar ph3'siognomy, — in some degree an index to his cha- 
racter, — was sufficient to rivet attention ; and the mysterious 
interest generally inspired by his presence was not diminished on 
further acquaintance with him. Though somewhat stern in their 
expression, his features were strikingly handsome, cast in an 
oval mould, and clothed with the pointed beard and trimmed 
mustaches invariably met with in the portraits of Vandyck. His 
frame was strongly built, but well pro{)ortioned, and seemed 
capable of enduring the greatest fatigue. His dress was that of 
an ordinary gentleman of the period, and consisted of a doublet 
of quilted silk, of sober colour and stout texture ; large trunk- 
hose swelling out at the hips ; and buff boots, armed with spurs 
with immense rowels. He wore a high and stiffly-starched ruff 
round his throat ; and his apparel was completed by a short cloak 
of brown cloth, lined with silk of a similar colour. His arms 
were rajjier and poniard, and his high-crowned ])lumed hat, oi 
the peculiar form then in vogue, and looped on the " leer-side" 
with a diamond clasp, was thrown upon the table. 

Some little time having ela[)sed, during which he made na 
effort to address her, Viviana broke silence. 



ORDSALL HALL. 21 



t( 



I understood you desired to speak with me on a matter of 
urgenc}^ Mr. Catcsby," she remarked. 

'* I did so," he repHed, as if aroused from a "everie ; " and I 
can only excuse my absence of mind and ill manners, on tlie plea 
that the contemplation of your charms has driven all other 
matter out of my head." 

" Mr. Catesby," returned Viviana, rising, " if the purpose of 
your visit be merely to pay unmerited compliments, I must at 
once put an end to it." 

" I have only obeyed the impulse of my heart," resumed the 
other, passionately, "and uttered what involuntarily rose to my 
lips. But," he added, checking himself, " I will not offend you 
with my admiration. If you have read my letter to your father, 
you will not require to be informed of the object of my visit." 

"I have not read it," replied Viviana, returning him the 
packet with the seal unbroken. " I can give no opinion on any 
matter of difficulty. And I have no desire to know any secret 
with which my father might not desire me to be acquainted." 

" Are we overheard?" inquired Catesby, glancing suspiciously 
at the fire-place. 

" By no one whom you would care to overhear us," returned 
the maiden. 

" Then it is as I supposed," rejoined Catesby. " Father Old- 
corne is concealed behind that mantel-piece ?" 

Viviana smiled an affirmative. 

" Let him come forth, I pray you," returned Catesby. " What 
I have to say concerns hiui as much as yourself or your father ; 
an 1 I would gladly have his voice in the matter." 

" You shall have it, my son," replied a reverend personage, 
clad in a priestly garb, stepping from out one side of the mantel- 
piece, which flew suddenly open, disclosing a recess curiously 
contrived in the thickness of the wall. " You shall have it," 
said Father Oldcorne, for he it was, approaching and extending 
his arms over him. " Accept my blessing and my welcome." 

Catcsby received the benediction with bowed head and bended 
knee. 

" And now," continued the priest, " what has the bravest 
soldier of our church to declare to its lowliest servant?" 

Catcsby then briefly explained, as he had before done to the 
steward, why he had taken Manchester in his route to North 
Wales ; and, after lamenting his inability to render any assist- 
ance to the unfortunate priests, he went "on to state that he had 
accidentally learnt, from a few words let fall by the pursuivant 
to his attendant, that a warrant had been sent by the Earl of 
♦Salisbury for Sir William Radcliffe's arrest. 

" My father's arrest I" exclaimed Viviana, trembling violently. 
*• What — what is laid to his charge ?" 

" Felony," rejoined Catesby, sternly — " felony, without benefit 



'2'2 GUV FAWKES. 

of clergy — for so it Is accounted l)y the ])rcsent execrable laws of 
oar land, — in harbo'irinii; a Jesuit priest. If he is convicted of 
the offence, his punishment will be death — death on the jiibbet, 
accompanied by indignities worse than those shown to a conunon 
felon." 

" Holy Virgin !" ejaculated Father Oldcorne, lifting up his 
hands, and raising his eyes to heaven. 

'* From what I gathered, the officers will visit this house to- 
night," continued Catesby. 

" Our Lady I)c praised, they will not find him I" cried Viviana, 
who had been thrown into an agony of distress. *' What is to be 
done in this frighttul emergency, holy father?" she added, 
turnins; to the ])riest, with a supplicating look. 

" Heaven only knows, dear daughter," replied Oldcorne. 
" You had better appeal for counsel to one who is more able to 
afford it than I am, — Mr. Catesby. Well aware of the crafty 
devices of our enemies, and having often eluded their snares 
himseltj he may enable 3'oa to escape them. My own course is 
clear. I shall quit this roof at once, deeply and bitterly regret- 
ting that by entering it, I have placed those whom I hold so 
dear, and from whom I have experienced so much kindness, in 
such fearful jeopardy." 

" Oh, no, father !" exclaimed Viviana, "yon shall not go." 

" Daughter," replied Oldcorne, solemnly, " I have long borne 
the cross of Christ, — have long endured the stripes, inflicted 
upon me by the adversaries of our faith, in patience ; and my 
last actions and last breath shall testify to the truth of our holy 
religion. But, though I could endure aught on my own account, 
I cannot consent to bring misery and destruction upon others. 
Hinder me not, dear daughter. 1 will go at once." 

" H(jld, father I" interposed Catesby. " The step you would 
take may bring about what you are most anxious to avoid. If 
you are discovered and apprehended in this neighbourhood, 
suspicion will still attach to your protectors, and the secret of 
your departure will be wrung from some of the more timid of the 
household. Tarry where you are. Let the pursuivant make his 
search. I will engage to baflle his viu;ilance." 

" He speaks the truth, dear father," returned Viviana. " You 
must not — shall not depart. There are plenty of hiding-places, 
as you know, within the mansion. Let them be as rigorous as 
they may in their search, they will not discover you." 

" Whatever course you adjudge best for the security of others, 
I will pursue," rejoined Oldcorne, turning to Catesby. " Put 
me out of the question." 

" My opinion has already been given, father," replied Catesby. 
"Remain where you are." 

*'But, if the officers should ascertain that my father is at 



ORDSALL HALL. 23 

Chester, and pursue him thither?" cried Viviana, sviddenly 
struck by a new cause of alarm. 

" A messenger must be immediately despatched after hita to 
give [lim warning," returned Catesby. 

" Will you be that messenger ?" asked the maiden, eagerly. 

" I would shed my heart's best blood to pleasure you," re 
turned Catesby. 

*' Then I may count upon this service, for which, rest assured, 
I will not prove ungrateful," she rejoined. 

" You may," answered Catesby. " And yet I would, on 
Father Oldcorne's account, that my departure might be delayed 
till to-morrow." 

*' The delay might be fatal," cried Viviana. " You must be 
in Chester before that time." 

" Doubt it not," returned Catesby. " Charged with yoitr 
wishes, the wind shall scarcely outstrip my speed." 

So saying, he marched irresolutely towards the door, as if 
about to depart, when, just as he had reached it, he turned 
sharply round, and threw himself at Viviana's feet. 

"Forgive me. Miss Radcliffe," he cried, "if I once again, 
even at a critical moment like the present, dare to renew my 
suit. I fancied I had subdued my passion for you, but your 
presence has awakened it with greater violence than ever." 

" Rise, sir, I pra}'," rejoined the maiden, in an offended tone^ 

" Hear me, I beseech you," continued Catesby, seizing her 
hand. " Before you reject my suit, consider well that in these 
perilous seasons, when no true Catholic can call his life his own,, 
you may need a protector." 

"In the event you describe, Mr. Catesby," answered Viviana, 
*' I would at once fulfil the intention I have formed of devoting 
myself to Heaven, and retire to the convent of Benedictine 
nuns, founded by Lady Mary Percy, at Brussels." 

" You would much more effectually serve the cause of your 
religion by acceding to my suit," observed Catesby, rising. 

" How so ?" she inquired. 

"Listen to me, Miss Radcliffe," he rejoined, gravely, "and 
let my words be deeply graven upon your heart. In your hands 
rests the <lestiny of the Catholic Church." 

"In mine !'' exclaimed Viviana. 

" In yours," returned Catesby. " A mighty blow is about to 
be struck for her deliverance." 

" Ay, marry, is it," cried Oidcorne, with sudden fervour. 
" Redemption draweth nigh ; the year of visitation approacheth 
to an end ; and jubilation is at hand. England shall again be 
called a hapj^y realm, a blessed country, a religious people. 
Those who knew the former glory of religion shall lift up their 
hands for joy to see it returned again. Righteousness shall 



24 GUY FAWKES. 

prosper, and infidelity be ]iliickcd up by the root. False error 
shall vanish like smoke, and they whieh saw it shall say where is 
it become ? The daughters of Babylon shall be cast down, and 
in the dust lament their ruin. Proud heresy shall strike her 
sail, and groan as a beast crushed under a cart-wheel. The 
memory of novelties shall perish with a crack, and as a ruinous 
house falling to the ground. Repent, ye seducers, with speed, 
and prevent the dreadful wrath of the Powerable. He will 
come as flame that burnetii out beyond the furnace. His fury 
shall fly forth as thunder, and pitch upon their tops that malign 
him. They shall perish in his fury, and melt like wax before 
the fire." 

" Amen 1" ejaculated Catesby, as the priest concluded. " You 
have spoken prophetically, father." 

*' I have but recited a })rayer transmitted to me by Father 
Garnet," rejoined Oldcorne. 

" Do you discern any hidden meaning in it ?" demanded 
Catesby. 

" Yea, verily my son," returned the priest. " In the 'false 
error vanishing like smoke,' — in the 'hovse 'perishing with a 
CRACK,' — and in the ' furg flying fortli as thunder,' — i read the 
mode the great work shall be brought about." 

" And 3'ou applaud the design ?" asked Catesby, eagerly. 

*' ^071 vera factum pr oho, sed eventum amo" rejoined the priest. 

" The secret is safe in your keeping, father ?" asked Catesby, 
Tmeasily. 

" As if it had been disclosed to me in private confession,** 
replied Oldcorne. 

" Hum !" muttered Catesby. " Confessions of as much con- 
sequence to the state have ere now been revealed, father." 

'-' A decree has been passed by his holiness, Clement VHL, 
forbidding all such revelations," replied Oldcorne. " And the 
question has been recently proj)()unded by a learned brother of 
our order. Father Antonio Delrio, who, in his Magical Disqui- 
sitions, putteth it thus: — ' Sujijiosing a malefactor shall confess 
that he himself or some other has laid Gunpowder, or the like 
comljustible matter, under a building — ' " 

" Ha !" exclaimed Catesby, starting. 

" — 'And, unless it be taken away,'" proceeded the priest, 
regarding him fixedly, '"the whole house will be burnt, the 
prince destroyed, and as many as go into or out of the city will 
come to great mischief or peril I' " * 

" Welfl" exclaimed Catesby. 

" The point then arises," continued Oldcorne, " whether the 

• Confitetur maleficus se vel alium posuisse pulverein vel quid aliud sub tali 
limine, et nisi tollantur domum comljurendani, principem interitunim, quotquot 
arbem egredienturque in niagnam perniciem aut periculuin ventures. — Delrio 
Di)i(i. Mufj., lib. vi. cap. i. [Edit. IGoO.j 



ORDSALL HALL. ^K 

priest may make use of the secret thus obtained for the good of 
the government, and the averting of such danger; and, after 
fully discussing it, Father Deh'io decides in the negative." 

" Enough," returned Catesbv. 

*' By whom is the blow to be struck ?" asked Viviana, who haa 
listened to the foregoing discourse in silent wonder. 

" By me," answered Catesby. " It is for you to nerve my 
arm." 

" You speak in riddles," she replied. *' I understand you 
not." 

" Question Father Oldcorne, then, as to my meaning," rejoined 
Catesby; "he will tell you that, allied to you, I could not fail 
in the enterprise on which I am engaged." 

" It is the truth, dear daughter," Oldcorne asseverated. 

" I will not inquire further into this mystery," returned 
Viviana, " for such it is to me. But, believing what you both 
assert, I answer, that willingly as I would lay down my life for 
the welfare of our holy religion, persuading myself, as I do, that 
I have constancy enough to endure martyrdom for its sake, — I 
cannot consent to your proposal. Nay, if I must avouch the 
whole truth," she continued, blushing deeply, "my affections 
are already engaged, though to one with whom I can never 
hope to be united." 

" You have your answer, my son," observed the priest. 

Catesby replied with a look of the deepest mortification and 
disappointment ; and, bowing coldly to Viviana, said, " I now 
depart to obey your behests. Miss RadclifFe." 

" Commend me in all duty to my dear father," replied Viviana, 
" and believe that I shall for ever feel bound to you for your 
zeal." 

" Neglect not all due caution, father," observed Catesby, 
glancing significantly at Oldcorne. " Forewarned, forearmed." 

" Doubt me not, my son," rejoined the Jesuit. "My prayers 
shall be for you. 

Gentem auferte perfidam 
Credentium de flnibus, 
Ut Christo laudes debitaa 
Persolvamus alacriter." 

After receiving a parting benediction from the priest, Catesby 
took his leave. His steed was speedily brought to the door by 
the old steward ; and mounting it, he crossed the drawbridge, 
which was immediately raised behind him, and hastened on his 
journey. 



26 GUY FAWKES. 

CHAPTER IV. 

THE SEARCH. 

Immediately after Catcsby's departure, Heydocke wassiinimoneo 
to his mistress's presence. He found her with the priest, and 
was informed that in all probability the house would be visited 
that nitiht by the messengers of the Privy Council. The old 
steward received the intelliijence as he misht have done his 
death-warrant, and looked so bewildered and affrighted, that 
Viviana half repented having accjuainted him with it. 

"Compose yourself, Master Heydocke,'' she said, tryino; to 
reason him out of his fears; "the search may not take place. 
A.nd if it does, there is nothing to be alarmed at. I am not 
afraid, yon perceive." 

" Nothing to be alarmed at, my dear young lady I" gasped the 
steward. " You have never witnessed a midnight search for a 
priest by these ruffianly calch])olcs, as I have, or you would not 
say so. Father Oldcorne will comprehend my uneasiness, and 
excuse it. The miscreants break into the house like robbers, 
and treat its inmates worse than robbers would treat them. 
They have no regard for decency, — no consideration for sex, — 
no respect for persons. Not a chamber is sacred from them. If 
a door is bolted, they burst it open ; a cabinet locked, they tarry 
not for the key. They pull down the hangings, thrust their 
rapier-points into the crevices of the wainscot, discliarge their 
fire-arms against the wall, and sometimes threaten to pull down 
the house itself, if the object of their quest be not delivered to 
them. Their oaths, abominations, and menaces are horrible ; 
and their treatment of females, even of your degree, honoured 
mistress, too barbarous to relate. Poor Lady Nevil died of the 
fright she got by such a visit at dead of night to her residence 
in Holborn. Mrs. Vavasour, of York, lost her senses; and 
many others whom I could mention have been equal sufferers. 
Nothing to be alarmed at I Heaven grant, my dear, dear 
young lady, that you may never be fatally convinced to the 
contrary !" 

" Sujipose my apprehensions are as great as your own, Master 
Heydocke," replied Viviana, who, though somewhat infected by 
his terrors, still maintained her firmness ; " I do not see how the 
danger is to be averted by idle lamentations and misgivings. 
We must meet it boldly ; and trust to Him who is our only safe- 
guard in the hour of i)eril, for ])rotection. Do not alarm the 
household, but let all retire to rest as usual." 

" Right, daughter," observed the priest. " Preparations for 
resistance would only excite suspicion." 

*' Can you depend on the servants, in case they are examined ?" 



THE SEARCH. 27 

asked Viviana of the steward, who by this time had partially re- 
covered his composure. 

" I think so," returned Heydocke ; " but the threats cf the 
ofBcers are so dreadful, and their conduct so violent and out- 
rageous, tliat I can scarcely answer for myself. I would not 
advise your reverence to remain in that hiding-place," he added, 
pointing to the chimney-piece ; *' they are sure to discover it." 

"If not here, where shall I conceal myself?" rejomed Old- 
come, uneasily. 

" There are many nooks in which your reverence might hide," 
replied the steward ; " but the knaves are so crafty, and so well 
experienced in their vocation, that I dare not recommend any of 
them as secure. I would advise you to remain on the watch, 
and, in case of alarm, I will conduct you to the oratory in the 
north gallery, adjoining Mistress Viviana's sleeping-chamber, 
where there is a panel in the wall, known only to myself and my 
master, opening upon a secret passage running many hundred 
yards underground, and communicating with a small outbuilding 
on the other side of the moat. There is a contrivance in this 
passage, which I will explain to your reverence if need be, which 
will cut off any possibihty of pursuit in that quarter." 

" Be it so," replied the priest. " I place myself in your hands, 
good Master Heydocke, well assured of your fidelity. I shall re- 
main throughout the night in this chamber, occupied in my 
devotions." 

" You will suffer me to pray with you, father, I trust?" said 
Viviana. 

" If you desire it, assuredly, dear daughter," rejoined Old- 
come; " but I am unwilling you should sacrifice your rest." 

"It will be no sacrifice, father, for I should not slumber, even 
if I sought my couch," she returned. " Go, good Heydocke. 
Keep vigilant watch : and, if you hear the slightest noise with- 
out, fail not to give us warning." 

The steward bowed, and departed. 

Some hours elapsed, during which nothing occurred to alarm 
Viviana and her companion, who consumed the time in prayer 
and devout conversation ; when, just at the stroke of two, — as the 
former was kneeling before her spiritual adviser, and receiving 
absolution for the slight offences of which a being so pure- 
minded could be supposed capable, — a noise like the falling of a 
bar of iron was heard beneath the window. The priest turned 
pale, and cast a look of uneasiness at the maiden, who said 
nothing, but snatching up the light, and motioning him to 
remain quiet, hurried out of the room in search of the steward. 
He was nowhere to be found. In vain, she examined all the 
lower rooms, — in vain, called to him by name. INo answer was 
Returned. 

Greatly terrified, she was preparing to retrace her steps, when 



2S GUY FAWKES, 

she heard the sound of muttered voices in tlie hall. Extin- 
£!:uishino; her lij2;ht, she aclvancrd to the door, which was left ajar, 
and, takinir care not to expose herself to observation, beheld 
eeveral armed fii2;nres, some of whom bore dark lanterns, while 
others surrounded and menaced with their drawn swords the 
unfortunate steward. From their discourse she ascertained that, 
having thrown a plank across the moat, and concealed them- 
selves within the garden until they had reconnoitreil the pre- 
mises, they had contrived to gain admittance unperceived 
through the window of a small back room, in which they had 
surprised IJeydocke, who had fallen asleep on his post, and cap- 
tured him. One amongst their number, who apjieared to act aa 
leader, and whom, from his garb, and the white wand he carried, 
Viviana knew must be a pursuivant, now proceeded to inter- 
rogate the prisoner. To every c|uestiou proposed to him the 
steward shook his head ; and, in spite of the threats of the 
examinant, and the blows of his followers, he persisted in main- 
taining silence. 

" If we cannot make this contumacious ra?cal speak, we will 
find others more tractable," observed the pursuivant. "I will 
not leave any corner of the house unvisited; nor a soul within it 
unquestioned. Ah I here they come 1" 

As he spoke, several of the serving-men, with some of the 
female domestics, who had been alarmed by tiie noise, rushed 
into the hall, and on seeing it filled with armed men, were about 
to retreat, when they were instantly seized and detained. A 
scene of great confusion now ensued. The women screamed 
and cried for mercy, while the men struggled and fought with 
their captors. Commanding silence at length, the ])ursuivant 
proclaimed in the King's name that whoever would guide him to 
the hiding-place of Father Oldcorne, a Jesuit priest, whom it 
was known, and could be proved, was liarbourcd within the 
mansion, should receive a free pardon and reward ; while those 
who screened him, or connived at his concealment, were liable 
to fine, imprisonment, and even more severe punishment. Each 
servant was then questioned separately. But, though all were 
more or less rudely dealt with, no information could be elicited. 

Meanwhile, Viviana was a prey to the most intolerable 
anxiety. Unable to reach Father Oldcorne without crossing the 
hall, which she did not dare to attempt, she gave him up for lost ; 
her sole hope being that, on hearing the cries of the domestics, 
he would provide for his own safety. Her anxiety was still 
farther increased when the pursuivant, having exhausted his 
])atience by fruitless interrogatories, and satisfied his malice by 
frightening two of the females into fits, departed with a portion 
of his band to search the house, leaving the rest as a guard over 
the prisoners. 

Viviana then felt that, if she would save Father Oldcorne, the 



THE SEARCH. 29 

attempt must be made without a moment's delay, and at any 
hazard. Watchinfj; her opportunity, when the troopers were 
occupied, — some in helping themselves to such viands and 
liquors as they could lay hands upon, — some in searching the 
persons of the prisoners for amulets and relics, — while others, 
more humane, were trying to revive the swooning women, she 
contrived to steal unperceived across the lower end of the hall. 
Having gained the passage, she found to her horror that the 
pursuivant and his band were already within the star-chamber. 
They were sounding the walls with hammers and mallets, and 
from their exclamations, she learnt that they had discovered the 
retreat behind the fire-place, and were about to break it open. 

" We have him," roared the pursuivant, in a voice of triumph. 
** The old owl's roost is here I" 

Viviana, who stood at the door, drew in her breath, expect- 
ing that the next moment would inform her that the priest was 
made captive. Instead of this, she was delighted to find, from 
the oaths of rage and disappointment uttered by the troopers, 
that he had eluded them. 

" He must be in the house, at all events," growled the pur- 
suivant; "nor is it long since he quitted his hiding-place, as this 
cushion proves. We will not go away without him. And now, 
let us proceed to the upper chambers." 

Hearing their footsteps approach, Viviana darted off, and 
quickly ascending the principal staircase, entered a long corridor. 
Uncertain what to do, she was about to proceed to her own 
chamber, and bar the door, when she felt her arm grasped by a 
man. With difficulty repressing a shriek, she strove to disen- 
gage herself, when a whisper told her it was the priest. 

"Heaven be praised!" cried Viviana, "you are safe. How 
—how did you escape?" 

" I flew upstairs on hearing the voices," replied Oldcorne. 
"But what has happened to the steward?" 

*' He is a prisoner," replied Viviana. 

"All then is lost, unless you are acquainted with the secret 
panel he spoke of in the oratory," rejoined Oldcorne. 

"Alas I father, I am wholly ignorant of it," she answered. 
" But, come with me into my chamber ; they will not dare to 
invade it." 

" I know not that," returned the priest, despairingly. " These 
sacrilegious villains would not respect the sanctity of the altar 
itself"' 

" The}' come 1" cried Viviana, as lights were seen at the foot 
of the stairs. "Take my hand — this way, father." 

They had scarcely gained the room, and fastened the door, 
when the pursuivant and his attendants appeared in the corridor. 
The officer, it would seem, had been well instructed where to 
search, or was sufficiently practised in his duty, for he proceeded 



86 GUY FAWKES. 

at once to several hiding-places in the different chambers which 
he visited. In one room he detected a secret staircase in the 
wall, which he mounted, and discovered a small chapel built in 
the roof. Stripping it of its altar, its statue of the Virgin, its 
crucifix, pix, chalice, and other consecrated vessels, he descended, 
and continued his search. Viviana's chamber was now the only 
one nnvisitcd. Trying the door, and finding it locked, he tapped 
against it with his wand. 

" VVJio knocks ?" asked the maiden. 

*' A state-messenger," was the reply. " I demand entrance in 
the Kinir's name." 

" You cannot have it," she replied. " It is my sleeping- 
chamber." 

"My duty allows me no alternative," rejoined the pursuivant, 
harshly. "If you will not admit me <*!uetly, I must use force." 
^ " Do you know to whom you otler this rudeness ?" returned 
Viviana. " I am the daughter of Sir William Radcliflfe." 

" I know it," replied the jiursuivant; " but I am not exceed- 
ing my authority. I hold a warrant for your lather's arrest. 
And, if he had not been from home, I should have carried him 
to ])rison along with the Jesuit priest whom, I suspect, is con- 
cealed within your chamber. Open the door, I command you; 
and do not hinder nie in the execution of my duty." 

As no answer was returned to the application, th ^ pursuivant 
commanded his men to burst open the door; and the order was 
promptly obeyed. 

The chamber was empty. 

On searching it, however, the pursuivant found a door con- 
cealed by the hangings of the bed. It was bolted on the other 
side, but sjioedily yielded to his efforts. Passing through it, he 
entered upon a narrow gallery, at the extremity of which his 
progress was stopped by another door, likewise fastened on the 
further side. On bursting it open, he entered a small oratory, 
wainscoted with oak, and lighted by an oriel window filled with 
stained glass, through which the newly-risen moon was pouring 
its full radiance, and discovered the object of his search. 

"Father Oldcorne, I arrest you as a Jesuit and a traitor," 
shouted the pursuivant, in a voice of exultation. " Seize him I" 
he added, calling to his men. 

" You shall not take him," cried Viviana, clinging despairingly 
to the ]jriest, who offered no resistance, but clas])ed a crucifix to 
his breast. 

" Leave fjo your hold, young mistress," rejoined the pursuivant, 
grasj)ing Oldcorne by the collar of his vestment, and dragging 
him along; "and rest thankful that I make you not, also, my 
prisoner." 

"Take me; but spare him I — in mercy spare him !" slvrieked 
Viviana. 



CHAT MOSS. 3; 

"You solicit mercy from one who knows it not, dauirhter," 
observed the priest. " Lead on, sir. I am ready to attend you." 

" Your destination is the New Fleet, father," retorted the pur- 
suivant, in a tone of bitter raillery; "unless you prefer the cell 
in Radcliffe Hall lately vacated by your saintly predecessor. 
Father Woodroofe." 

*' Help ! help !" shrieked Viviana. 

"You may spare your voice, fair lady," sneered the pursui- 
vant. " No help is at hand. Your servants are all prisoners." 

The words were scarcely uttered, when a sliding panel in the 
wall flew open, and Guy Fawkes, followed by Humphrey 
Chetham, and another personage, sprang through the aperture, 
and presented a petronel at the head of the pursuivant. 



CHAPTER V. 

CHAT MOSS. 

Thk pursuivant was taken so completely unawares by the sudden 
appearance of Guy Fawkes and his companions, that he made 
no attempt at resistance. Nor were his attendants less con- 
founded. Before they recorered from their surprise, Humphrey 
Cl)ctham seized Viviana in his arms, and darting througl. the 
panel, called to the priest to follow him. Father Oldcorne was 
about to compi}', when one of the soldiers, grasping the surcingle 
at his waist, dragged him forcibly backwards. The next moment, 
however, he was set free by Guy Fawkes, who, felling the man 
to the ground, and interposing himself between the j)riest and 
the other soldier, enabled the former to make good his retreat. 
This done, he planted himself in front of the panel, and with a 
[)etronel in each hand, menaced his opponents. 

" Fly for your lives !" he shouted in a loud voice to the others. 
" Not a moment is to be lost. I have taken greater odds, and in 
a worse cause, and have not been worsted. Heed me not, I say. 
I will defend the passage till you are beyond reach of danger. 
Flyl-flyl" 

" After them !" vociferated the pursuivant, stamping with rage 
and vexation ; " after them instantly I Hew down that bold 
traitor. Stiow him no quarter. His life is forfeit to the king. 
Slay him as you would a dog I" 

But the men, having no fire-arms, were so much intimidated 
by the fierce looks of Guy Fawkes, and the deadly woapoufi he 
pointed at their heads, that they hesitated to obey their leader's 
injunctions. 

" Do you hear what I say to you, cravens ?" roared the pur- 
suivant. " Cut him down without mercy." 



32 GUY FAWKES. 

" They dare not move a footstep," rejoined Guy Fawkes, in a 
decisive tone. 

" Recreants 1" cried the pursuivant, foaming with rage, " is my 
prey to be snatched from me at the very moment I have secured 
it, through your cowardice ? Obey me instantly, or, as Heaven 
shall judge me, I will denounce you to my Lord Derby and the 
Commissioners as aiders and abettors in Father Oldcorne's 
escape I — and you well know what your punishment will be if I 
do so. What ! — are you afraid of one man ?" 

" Our pikes are no match for his petronels," observed the fore- 
most soldier, sullenly. 

"They are not," rejoined Guy Fawkes; "and you will do 
well not to compel me to prove the truth of your assertion. As 
to you. Master Pursuivant," he continued, with a look so stern 
that the other quailed before it, " unwilling as I am to slied 
blood, I shall hold your life, if I am compelled to take it, but 
just retribution for the fate you have brought upon the unfortu- 
nate Elizabeth Orton. 

" Ha !" exclaimed the pursuivant, starting. " I thought 1 
recognised you. You are the soldier in the Spanish garb who 
saved that false prophetess from drowning." 

" I saved her only for a more lingering death," rejoined Guy 
Fawkes. 

"I know it," retorted the pursuivant. "I found her dead 
body when I visited her cell on my way hither, and gave orders 
to have it interred without coffin or shroud in that part of the 
burial-ground of the Collegiate Church in Manchester reserved 
for common felons." 

" I know not what stays my hand," rejoined Guy Fawkes, 
fiercely. " But I am strongly tempted to give you a grave 
beside her." 

"I will put your daring to the proof!" cried the pursuivant, 
snatching a ])ike from one of his followers, and brandishing it 
over his head. " Throw down your arms, or you die !" 

" Back !" exclaimed Guy Fawkes, presenting a petronel at 
him, " or I lodge a bullet in your brain." 

" Be advised by me, and rush not on certain destruction, good 
Master Pursuivant," said the foremost soldier, plucking bis 
mantle. " 1 see by his bloodthirsty looks that the villain is in 
earnest." 

"I hear footsteps," cried the other soldier; "our comrades 
are at hand." 

" Tiien it is time for me to depart," cried Guy Fawkes, 
springiuiT through the secret door, and closing it after him. 

" Confusion 1" exclaimed the pursuivant; "but he shall not 
escape. Break open the ])ancl." 

The order was promj)tly obeyed. The men battered the stout 
oak board, which was of great thickness, with their pikes, but it 



CHAT MOSS. S3 

resisted every effort, nor was it until the arrival of a fresh band 
of soldiers with lights, mallets, chisels, and other implements 
suitable to the purpose, that it could be forced open. This ac- 
complished, the pursuivant, commanding his attendants to follow 
him, dashed through the aperture. As they proceeded singly 
along the narrow passage, the roof became so lov.r that the}' were 
compelled to adopt a stooping posture. In this manner they 
hurried on until their further progress was stopped by a massive 
stone door, which appeared to descend from above by some 
hidden contrivance, no trace of bolt or other rastenin<T!; beinn; 
discernible. Tlie flag fitted closely in channels in the walls, and 
had all the appearance of solid masonry. After examining this 
obstacle for a moment, the pursuivant was convinced that any 
attempt to move it would be impracticable, and muttering a deep 
execration, he gave the word to return. 

" From the course it appears to take," he observed, " this 
passage must communicate with the garden, — perhaps with the 
further side of the moat. We may yet secure them, if we use 
despatch." 

To return to the fugitives. On arriving at the point where 
the stone door was situated, which he discovered by the channels 
in the wall above-mentioned, Guy Fawkes searched for an iron 
ring, and, having found it, drew it towards him, and the ponderous 
flag slowly dropped into its place. He then groped his way 
cautiously along in the dark, until his foot encountered the top 
of a ladder, down which he crept, and landed on the floor of a 
"damp deep vault. Having taken the precaution to remove the 
ladder, he hastened onwards for about fifty yards, when he came 
to a steep flight of stone steps, distinguishable by a feeble glimmer 
of light from above, and mountiuo; them, emero;ed through an 
open trap-door into a small building situated at the western side 
of the moat, where, to his surprise and disappointment, he found 
the other fugitives. 

" How comes it you are here ?" he exclaimed, in a reproachful 
tcme. " I kept the wolves at bay thus long, to enable you to 
make good your retreat." 

" Miss Radcliffe is too weak to move," replied Humphrey 
Chetham ; " and I could not persuade Father Oldcorne to leave 
her." 

" I care not what becomes of me," said the priest. *' The 
sooner my painful race is run the better. But I cannot — will 
not abandon my dear charge thus." 

"Think not of me, father, I implore you," rejoined Viviana, 
who had sunk overpowered with terror and exhaustion. " I 
•shall be better soon. Master Chetham, 1 am assured, will re- 
main with me till our enemies have departed, and I will then 
return to the hall." 

" Command me as you please. Miss lladclitre," replied Hum- 

D 



51 GUY FAWKES. 

phrcy Chethfim. *' You have but to express a wish to insure its 
I'ulllhncnt on my part." 

" Oh I that you had suffered jNIr. Catesby to tarry with us till 
the morninnj, as he himself proposed, dear daughter," observed 
the priest, turning to Viviana. 

" Has Catesby been here ?" inquired Guy Fawkes, with a 
look of astonishment. 

" He has," rephed Oldcorne. " He came to warn us that the 
hall would be this night searched by the officers of state ; and 
he also brought word that a warrant had been issued by the 
Privy Council for the arrest of Sir William lladcliffe." 

*' Where is he now ?" demanded Fawkes, hastily. 

" On the way to Chester, whither he departed in all haste, at 
Viviana's urgent request, to apprise her father of his danger," 
rejoined the priest. 

" This is strange I" muttered Guy Fawkes " Catesby here, 
and I not know it !" 

" He had a secret motive for his visit, my son," whispered 
Oldcorne, significantly. 

" So I conclude, father," replied Fawkes, in the same tone. 

"Viviana Radcliffe," murmured Hiunphrey Chetham, in low 
and tender accents, "something tells me that this moment will 
decide my future fate. Emboldened by the mysterious manner 
in which we have been brought together, and you, as it were, 
have been thrown upon my protection, I venture to declare 
the passion I have long indulged for you ; — a passion which, 
though deep and fervent as ever agitated human bosom, has 
hitherto, from the difference of our rank, and yet more from the 
difference of our religious opinions, been without hope. Wliat 
has just occurred, — added to the peril in which your worthy 
father stands, and the difficulties in which you yourself will 
necessarily be involved, — makes me cast aside all misgiving, and 
perhaps with too much presumption, but with a confident belief 
that the sincerity of my love renders me not wholly undeserving 
of your regard, earnestly solicit you to give me a husband's right 
to watch over and defend you." 

Viviana was silent. But even by the imperfect light the young 
merchant could discern that her check was covered with blushes. 

" Your answer?" he cried, taking her hand. 

"You must take it from my lips. Master Chetham," interposed 
the priest ; " Viviana Radcliffe never can be yours." 

" Be pleased to let her speak for herself; reverend sir," rejoined 
the young merchant, angrily. 

" I represent her father, and have acquainted you with his 
determination," rejoined the priest. " Appeal to her, and she 
will confirm my words." 

" Viviana, is this true ?" asked Chetham. ** Does your father 
object to your union with me ?" 



CHAT MOSS. 35 

Viviana answered by a deep sigh, and gently withdrew her 
hand from the young merchant's grasp. 

" Then there is no hope for me ?" cried Chetham. 

" Alas ! no," replied Viviana ; " nor for me — of earthly affec- 
tion. I am already dead to the world." 

" How so ?" he asked. 

*' I am about to vow myself to Heaven," she answered. 

" Viviana !" exclaimed the young man, throwing himself at 
her feet, " reflect ! — oh I reflect, before you take this fatal — this 
irrevocable step." 

*' Rise, sir," interposed the priest, sternly ; " you plead in vain. 
Sir William Radclifie will never wed his daughter to a heretic. 
In his name I command you to desist from further solicitation." 

" I obey," replied Chetham, rising. 

*' We lose time here," observed Guy Fawkes, who had been 
lost for a moment in reflection. " I will undertake to provide for 
your safety, flither. But, what must be done with Viviana? She 
cannot be left here. And her return to the hall would be 
attended with danger." 

" I will not return till the miscreants have quitted it," said 
Viviana. 

" Their departure is uncertain," replied Fawkes. " When 
they are baulked of their prey they sometimes haunt a dwelling 
for weeks." 

" What will become of me ?" cried Viviana, distractedly. 

" It were vain, I fear, to entreat you to accept an asylum with 
my father at Clayton Hall, or at my own residence at Crump- 
sail," said Humphrey Chetham. 

" Your offer is most kind, sir," replied Oldcorne, "and is duly 
appreciated. But Viviana will see the propriety — on every 
account — of declining; it." 

" I do ; I do," she acquiesced. 

"Will you entrust yourself to my protection?" observed 
Fawkes. 

" Willingly," replied the priest, answering for her. " We 
shall find some place of refuge," he added, turning to Viviana, 
" where your father can join us, and where we can remain con- 
cealed till this storm has blown over." 

" I know many such," rejoined Fawkes, " both in this county 
and in Yorkshire, and will guide you to one." 

" My horses are at your service," said Humphrey Chetham. 
" They are tied beneath the trees in the avenue. My servant 
shall bring them to the door," and, turning to his attendant, he 
gave him directions to that effect. " I was riding hither an 
hour before midnight," he continued, addressing Viviana, " to 
offer you assistance, having accidentally heard the pursuivant 
mention his meditated visit to Ordsall Hall, to one of his 
followers, when, as I approached the gates, this person," pointing 



36 GUY FAWKES. 

to Guy Fawkcs, " crossed my path, and, seizing the bridle of my 
steed, demanded whether I was a iriend to Sir WilUam Rad- 
cHflb. I answered in the afHrmative, and desired to know the 
motive of his inquiry. He then told mc that the house was in- 
vested by a numerous band of armed men, who had crossed the 
moat by means of a plank, and were at that moment concealed 
within the garden. This intelligence, besides filling me with 
alarm, disconcerted all my plans, as I hoped to have been before- 
hand with them — their inquisitorial searches being generally 
made at a late hour, when all the inmates of a house intended 
to be surprised arc certain to have retired to rest. While I was 
bitterly reproaching myself for my dilatoriness, and considering 
what course it w^ould be best to pursue, my servant, Martin 
Heydocke, son to your father's old steward, who had ridden up 
at the stranger's approach, informed me that he was acquainted 
with a secret passage communicating beneath the moat with the 
hall. Upon this, I dismounted ; and fastening my horse to a 
tree, ordered him to lead me to it without an instant's delay. 
The stranger, who gave his name as Guy Favvkes, and professed 
himself a stanch Catholic, and a friend of Father Oldcorne, 
begged permission to join us, in a tone so earnest, that I at once 
acceded to his request. We then proceeded to this building, 
and after some search discovered the trap-door. Much time 
was lost, owing to our being unprovided with lights, in the 
subterranean passage ; and it was more than two hours before 
we could find the ring connected with the stone door, the 
mystery of which Martin explained to us. This delay we feared 
would render our scheme abortive, when, just as we reached the 
panel, we heard your shrieks. The spring was touched, and — 
you know the rest." 

" And shall never forget it," replied Viviana, in a tone of the 
deepest gratitude. 

At this juncture, the tramp of horses was heard at the door ; 
and the next moment it was thrown open by the younger 
Heydocke, who, with a look, and in a voice of the utmost 
terror, exclaimed, " They are coming ! — they are coming I" 

" The pursuivant ?" cried Guy Fawkes. 

" Not him alone, but the whole gang," rejoined Martin. 
*' Some of them are lowering the drawbridge, while others are 
crossing the plank. Several are on horseback, and I think I 
discern the pursuivant amongst the number. They have seen 
me, and are hurrvinii; in this direction." 

As he spoke, a loud shout corroborated his statement. 

*« We are lost!" exclaimed Oldcorne. 

" Do not despair, father," rejoined Guy Fawkes. " Heaven 
will not abandon its faithful servants. The Lord will deliver 
us out of the hands of these Amalckites." 

" To horse, then, if you would indeed avoid them," urged 



CHAT MOSS. 37 

Humphrey Chetham. " The shouts grow louder. Your ene- 
mies are fast approaching." 

" Viviaua," said Guy Fawkes, " are you wiUing to fly with 

us .?" 

"I will do anything rather than be left to those horrible 

men," she answered. 

Guy Fawkes then raised her in his arms, and sprang with his 
lovely burthen upon the nearest charger. His example was 
quickly followed by Humphrey Chetham, who,^ vaulting on the 
other horse, assisted the priest to mount behind him. While 
this took place, Martin Heydocke darted into the shed, and 
instantly bolted the door. 

It was a beautiful moonlight night, almost as bright as day, 
and the movements of each party were fully revealed to the 
other. Guy Fawkes perceived at a glance that they were sur- 
rounded ; and, though he had no fears for himself, he was full of 
apprehension for the safety of his companion. While he was 
debating with himself as to the course it would be best to 
pursue, Humphrey Chetham shouted to him to turn to the left, 
and started off in that direction. Grasping his fair charge, 
whom he had placed before him on the saddle, firmly with his 
left arm, and wrapping her in his ample cloak, Guy Faw-kes 
drew his sword, and striking spurs into his steed, followed in the- 
same track. 

The little fabric which had afforded them temporary shelter,, 
it has already been mentioned, was situated on the west of the 
hall, at a short distance from the moat, and was screened from 
observation by a small shrubbery. No sooner did the fugitives 
emerge from this cover, than loud outcries were raised by their 
antagonists, and every effort was made to intercept them. (Jd 
the right, galloping towards them on a light but swift courser, 
taken from Sir William Radcliffe's stables, came the pursuivant,., 
attended by hali-a-dozen troopers, who had accommodated 
themselves with horses in the same manner as their leader.. 
Between them and the road leading to Manchester, were 
stationed several armed men on foot. At the rear, voices pro- 
claimed that others were in full pursuit ; while in front, a fourth 
detachment menaced them with their pikes. Thus beset on all 
sides, it seemed scarcely possible to escape. Nothing daunted, 
however, by the threats and vociferations with which they were 
received, the two horsemen boldly charged this ])arty. The 
encounter was instantaneous. Guy Fawkes warded off a blow, 
which, if it had taken effect, must have robbed Viviana of 
life, and struck down the fellow who aimed it. At the same 
• moment, his career was checked by another assailant, who, 
catching his bridle with the hook of his pike, command him to 
surrender. Fawkes replied by cleaving the man's staff asunder, 
and, having thus disembarrassed himself, was about to pursue his 



38 GUY FAWKES. 

course, when he perceived that llumj^hrey Chethani was in 
iinmhicnt dangier from a couple of" soldiers wlio had stopped 
hiu), and were tryin"; to unhorse his companion. Riding up to 
them, Guy Fawkes, by a vijrorous and well-directed attack, 
speedily drove them off'; and the fugitives, being now unim- 
peded, were enabled to continue their career. 

The foregoing occurrences were witnessed by the pursuivant 
with the utmost rage and vexation. Pouring forth a torrent of 
threats and imprecations, he swore he would never rest till he 
bad secured them, and urging his courser to its utmost speed, 
commanded his men to give chase. 

Skirting a sluice, communicating between the Irwell and the 
moat, Humphrey Chetham, who, as better acquainted with the 
country than his companions, took the lead, proceeded along its 
edge for about a hundred yards, when he suddenly struck 
across a narrow bridge covered with sod, and entered the open 
fields. Hitherto Viviana had remained silent. Though fully 
aware of the risk she had run, she gave no sign of alarm — not 
even when the blow was aimed against her life ; and it was only 
on conceiving the danger in some degree past, that she ventured 
to express her gratitude. 

" You have displayed so much courage," said Guy' Fawkes, 
in answer to her speech, " that it would be unpardonable to de- 
ceive you. Our foes are too near us, and too well mounted, to 
make it by any means certain we shall escape them, — unless by 
stratagem." 

"They are within a hundred yards of us," cried Humphrey 
Chetham, glancing fearfully backwards. " They have possessed 
themselves of your father's fleetest horses; and, if I mistake not, 
the rascally pursuivant has secured your favourite barb." 

*' My gentle Zayda I" exclaimed Viviana. " Then indeed we 
are lost. She has not her match for speed." 

" If she bring her rider to us alone, she will do us good 
service," observed Guy Fawkes, significantly. ^ 

The same notion, almost at the same moment, occurred to 
the pursuivant. Having witnessed the prowess displayed by 
Guy Fawkes in his recent attack on the soldiers, he lelt no dis- 
position to encounter so formidable an opponent single-handed ; 
and finding that the high-mettled barb on which he was mounted, 
by its superior speed and fiery temper, would inevitably place 
him in such a dilemma, he prudently resolved to halt, and ex- 
change it for a more manageable steed. 

This delay was of great service to the fugitives, and enabled 
them to get considerably ahead. They had now gained a 
narrow lane, and, tracking it, speedily reac:hed the rocky banks 
of the Irwell. Galloping along a foot-path that followed the 
serpentine course of the stream for a quarter of a mile, they 



CHAT MOSS. S9 

arrived at a spot marked by a bed of osiers, where Humphrey 
Chctham informed them there was a ford. 

Accordingly, they phmged into the river, and while stemming 
the current, which here ran with great swiftness, and rose up 
above the saddles, the neighing of a steed was heard from the 
bank they had quitted. Turning at the sound, Viviana beheld 
her favourite courser on the summit of a high rock. Tiie soldier 
to wliom Zayda was intrusted had speedily, as the pursuivant 
foresaw, distanced his companions, and chose this elevated posi- 
tion to take sure aim at Guy Fawkcs, against whom he was now 
levelling a caliver. The next moment a bullet struck against 
his brigandine, but without doing him any injury. The soldier, 
however, did not escape so lightly. Startled by the discharge, 
the fiery barb leaped from the precipice into the river, and 
throwing her rider, who was borne off by the rapid stream, swam 
towards the opposite bank, which she reached just as the others 
were landing. At the sound of her mistress's voice she stood 
still, and allowed Humphrey Chetham to lay hold of her bridle; 
and Viviana declaring she was able to mount her, Guy Fawkes, 
who felt that such an arrangement was most likely to conduce to 
her safet}', and who was, moreover, inclined to view the oc- 
currence as a providential interference in their behalf, imme- 
diately assisted her into the saddle. 

Before this transfer could be effected, the pursuivant and his 
attendants had begun to ford the stream. The former had wit- 
nessed the accident that had befallen the soldier from a short 
distance ; and, while he affected to deplore it, internally con- 
gratulated himself on his prudence and foresight. But he was 
by no means so well satisfied when he saw how it served to 
benefit the fugitives. 

"That unlucky beast!" he exclaimed. "Some fiend must 
have prompted me to bring her out of the stable. Would she 
had drowned herself instead of poor Dickon Duckcsbury, whom 
she hath sent to feed the fishes ! With her aid, Miss RadclifFe 
will doubtless escape. No matter. If I secure Father Oldcorne, 
and that black-visaged trooper in the Spanish garb, wlio, I'll be 
sworn, is a secret intelligencer of the pope, if not of the devil, I 
shall be well contented. I'll hang them both on a gibbet higher 
than Haman's." 

And muttering other threats to the same effect, he picked his 
way to the opposite shore. Long before he reached it, the fugi- 
tives had disappeared ; but on climbing the bank, he beheld 
them galloping swiftly across a well-wooded district steeped in 
moonlight, and spread out before his view, and inflamed l)y the 
" sight he shouted to his attendants, and once more started in 
pursuit. 

Cheered by the fortunate incident above related, which, ia 



40 GUY FAWKES. 

prcscntinp^ her with her own steed in a manner so surprising 
and unexpected, seemed ahnost to fjive her assurance of deUver- 
ance, Viviana, inspirited by the exercise, felt her stren<2;th and 
spirits rapidly revive. At her side rode Guy Fawkes, who ever 
and anon cast an anxious look behind, to ascertain the distance 
of their pursuers, but suffered no exclamation to escape his lips. 
Indeed, throughout the whole affair, he maintained the reserve 
belonjjing to his sombre and taciturn character, and neither 
questioned Humphrey Chctham as to where he was leading them, 
nor proposed any deviation from the route he had apparently 
chosen. To such remarks as were addressed to him, Fawkes 
answered in monosyllables ; and it was only when occasion re- 
quired, that he volunteered any observation or advice. He 
seemed to surrender himself to chance. And perhaps, if his 
bosom could have been examined, it would have been found that 
he considered himself a mere puppet in the hands of destiny. 

In other and calmer seasons, he might have dwelt with rapture 
on the beautiful and varied country through which they were 
speeding, and which from every knoll they moimtcd, every 
slope they descended, every glade they threaded, intricacy 
pierced, or tangled dell tracked, presented new and increasing 
attractions. This charming district, since formed into a park 
by the Traffords, from whom it derives its present designation, 
was at this time, — though part of the domain of that ancient 
family, — wholly unenclosed. Old Trafford Hall lies (for it is 
still in existence,) more than a mile nearer to Manchester, a 
little to the east of Ordsall Hall ; but tlie modern residence of 
the family is situated in the midst of the lovely region through 
which the fugitives were ridina:. 

But, though the charms of the scene, heightened by the gentle 
medium through which they were viewed, produced little effect 
upon the iron nature of Guv Fawkes, they were not without in- 
fluence on his companions, especially Viviana. Soothed by the 
stillness of all around her, she almost forgot her danger; and 
surrendering herself to the dreamy enjoyment generally expe- 
rienced in contemplating such a scene at such an hour, suffered 
her gaze to wander over the fair woody landscape before her, 
till it was lost in the distant moonlit wolds. 

From the train of thought naturally awakened hy this spectacle, 
she was roused by the shouts of the pursuers ; and, glancing 
timorously behind her, beheld them hurrying swiftly along the 
valley they had just quitted. From the rapidity with which they 
were advancing, it was evident they were gaining upon them, 
and she was about to urge her courser to greater speed, when 
Humphrey Chetham laid his hand upon the rein to check her. 

" lic'serve yourself till we gain the brow of this hill," he re- 
marked ; •' and then put Zayda to her mettle. We are not far 
from our destination." 



CHAT MOSS. 41 

" Indeed !" exclaimed Viviana. " Where is it?" 

*' I will show it to you presently," he answered. 

Arrived at the summit of the high ground, which they had 
been for some time gradually ascending, the young merchant 
pointed out a vast boggy tract, about two miles off, in the vale 
beneath them. 

" That is our destination," he said. 

" Did I not hold it impossible you could trifle with me at such 
a time as this, I should say you were jesting," rejoined Viviana. 
"The place you indicate, unless I mistake you, is Chat Moss, 
the largest and most dangerous marsh in Lancashire." 

" You do not mistake me, neither am I jesting, Viviana," re- 
plied the young merchant, gravely. *' Chat Moss is the mark at 
which I aim." 

" If we are to cross it, we shall need a Will-o'-the-wisp to> 
guide us, and some friendly elf to make firm the ground beneath 
our steeds," rejoined Viviana, in a slightl^'-sarcastic tone. 

" Trust to me and you shall traverse it in safety," resumed 
Humphrey Chetham. 

" 1 would sooner trust myself to the pursuivant and his band, 
than venture upon its treacherous surface," she replied. 

*' How is this, young sir?" interposed Guy Fawkes, sternly. 
"Is it from heedlessness or rashness that you are about to expose 
us to this new danger? — which, if Viviana judges correct!}', and 
my own experience of such places inclines me to think she doc& 
so, — is greater than that which now besets us." 

" If there is any danger I shall be the first to encounter it, fn' 
I propose to act as your guide," returned Humphrey Chetham, 
in an offended tone. " But the treacherous character of the 
marsh constitutes our safety. I am acquainted with a narrow 
path across it, from which the deviation of a foot will bring: 
certain death. If our pursuers attempt to follow us their destruc- 
tion is inevitable. Viviana may rest assured I would not need- 
lessly expose so dear a life as hers. But it is our best chance of 
safety." 

" Humphrey Chetham is in the right," observed the priest. 
" I have heard of the path he describes; and if he can guide us 
along it, we shall effectually baffle our enemies " 

" I cry you mercy, sir," said Viviana. " I did not a]iprehend 
your meaning. But I now thankfully resign myself to your 
care." ' 

" Forward, then," cried the young merchant. And they 
dashed swiftly down the declivity. 

Chat Moss, towards which they were hastening, though now 
'drained, in part cultivated, and traversed by the busiest and 
most-frequented raihoad in England, or the world, was, withii* 
the recollection of many of the youngest of the present genera- 
tion, a dreary and almost impassable waste. Surveyed from the 



42 GUY FAWKHS. 

hciijiits of Dunham, whence the writer has often pjazed noon it, 
envying tlic plover her winjj; to skim over its broad expanse, it 
presented with its black boggy soil, striped like a motley "-ar- 
nient, with patches of grey, tawny, and dunnish red, a singular 
and mvsterions appearance. Conjecture fixes tiiis morass as the 
site of a vast forest, whose imtnemorial and Dniid-hannteu 
groves were burnt by the Roman invaders; and seeks to account 
for its present condition by supposing that the charred trees — 
still frequently found within its depths— being left where the 
conflagration had })laced them, had choked up its !)rt)oks and 
springs, and so reduced it to a general swamp. Drayton, how- 
ever, in the following lines from the Faerie Land, places its 
origin as far back as the Deluire : — 

Great Chat Moss at my fall 



Lies fall of turf and marl, her unctuous mineral , 

And blocks as black as pitch, with boring augers found, 

There at the General Flood supposed to be drown'd. 

But the former hypothesis appears the more probable. A curious 
description of Chat Moss, as it appeared at the time of this 
histor}', is furnished by Camden, who terms it, " a swampy tract 
of great extent, a considerable part of which was carried off in 
the last age by swollen rivers with great danger, whereby the 
rivers were infected, and great quantities offish died. Instead 
thereof is now a valley watered by a small stream ; and many 
trees were discovered thrown down, and lying flat, so that one 
may suj)pose when the ground lay neglected, and the waste water 
of brooks was not drained off into the open valleys, or their 
courses stopped by neglect or desolation, all the lower grounds 
were turned into swamps, (which we call mosses,) or into pools. 
If this was the case, no wonder so many trees are found covered, 
and, as it were, buried in such places all over England, but 
especially here. For the roots being loosened by too excessive 
wet, they must necessarily fall down and sink in so soft a soil. 
The people hereabouts search for them with poles and spits, and 
al'ter marking the place, dig them up and use them for firing, for 
they are like torches, equally fit to burn and to give light, which 
is probably owing to the bituminous earth that surrounds them, 
whence the common people suppose them firs, though Caesar 
denies that there were such trees in Britain." 

But, though vast masses of the bog had been carried off I)y the 
IrwcU and the Mersey, as related by Camden, tlie general ap- 
pearance of the waste, — with the exception of the valley and the 
small stream, — was nmch the saine as it continued to" our own 
time. Its surface was more broken and irregular, and black 
gajjing chasms and pits filled with water and slime as dark- 
coloured as the turf whctico it flowed, pointed out the spots 
where the swollen and heaving swamp had burst its bondage. 



CHAT MOSS. 43 

Narrow paths, known only to the poor turf-cutters and other 
labourers who dwelt upon its borders, and feathered fuel with poles 
and spits in the manner above described, intersected it at various 
points. But as they led in many cases to dangerous and deep 
gulfs, to dismal quagmires and fathomless pits ; and, moreover, 
as the slightest departure from the proper track would have 
whelmed the traveller in an oozy bed, from which, as from a 
quicksand, he would have vainly striven to extricate himself, — 
it was never crossed without a guide, except by those familiar 
with its perilous courses. One painful circumstance connected 
with the history of Chat Moss remains to be recorded — namely, 
that the attempt made to cultivate it by the great historian 
Roscoe, — an attempt since carried out, as has already been 
shown, with complete success, — ended in a result ruinous to 
the fortunes of that highly-gifted person, who, up to the period 
of this luckless undertaking, was as prosperous as he was meri- 
torious. 

By this time the fugitives had approached the confines of 
the marsh. An accident, however, had just occurred, which 
nearly proved fatal to Viviana, and, owing to the delay it occa- 
sioned, brought their pursuers into dangerous proximity with 
them. In fording the Irwcll, which, from its devious course, 
they were again compelled to cross, about a quarter of a mile 
below Barton, her horse missed its footing, and precipitated her 
into the rapid current. In another instant she would have been 
borne away, if Guy Fawkes had not flung himself into the water, 
and seized her before she sank. Her affrighted steed, having got 
out of its depth, began to swim off, and it required the utmost 
exertion on the part of Humphrey Chetham, embarrassed as he 
was by the priest, to secure it. In a few minutes all was set to 
rights, and Viviana was once more placed on the saddle, without 
having sustained further inconvenience than was occasioned by 
her dripping apparel. But those few minutes, as has been just 
stated, sufficed to bring the pursuivant and his men close upon 
them ; and as they scrambled up the opposite bank, the 
plunging and shouting behind them told that the latter had 
entered the stream. 

" Yonder is Baysnape," exclaimed Humphrey Chetham, 
calling Viviana's attention to a ridu-e of hig-h ground on the 
borders of the waste. " Below it lies the path by which I 
propose to enter the moss. We shall speedily be out of the 
reach of our enemies." 

" The marsh at least will hide us," answered Viviana, with a 
shudder. " It is a terrible alternative." 

" Fear nothing, dear daughter," observed the priest. " The 
saints, who have thus marvellously protected us, will continue 
to watch over us to the end, and will make the [)ath over yon 
perilous waste as safe as the ground on which we tread." 



44- GUY FAWKES. 

" I like not the appearance of the sky," observed Guy Fawkes, 
lookin<z; uneasily upwards. " Before we reach the spot you have 
pointed out, the moon will be obscured. Will it be safe to 
traverse the moss in the dark ?" 

" It is our only chance," replied the young merchant, speaking 
in a low tone, that his answer might not reach Viviana's ears ; 
"and after all, the darkness may be serviceable. Our pursuers 
arc so near, that if it were less gloomy, they might hit upon the 
right track. It will be a risk to us to proceed, but certain 
destruction to those who follow. And now let us make what 
haste we can. Every moment is precious." 

The dreary and fast darkening waste had now opened upon 
them in all its horrors. Far as the gaze could reach appeared 
an immense expanse, flat almost as the surface of the ocean, 
and unmarked, so far as could be discerned in that doubtful 
light, by any trace of human footstep or habitation. It was a 
stern and sombre prospect, and calculated to inspire terror in 
the stoutest bosom. What effect it produced on Viviana may 
be easily conjectured. But her nature was brave and enduring, 
and, though she trembled so violently as scarcely to be able to 
keep her seat, she gave no utterance to her fears. They were 
now skirting that part of the morass since denominated, frcMn 
the unfortunate speculation previously alluded to, " Roscoe's 
Improvements." This tract was the worst and most dangerous 
portion of the whole moss. Soft, slabby, and unsubstantial, its 
treacherous beds scarcely offered secure footing to the heron 
that alighted on them. The ground shook beneath the fugitives 
as they hurried past the edge of the groaning and quivering 
marsh. The plover, scared from its nest, uttered its peculiar 
and plaintive cry ; the bittern shrieked ; other night-fowl poured 
forth their doleful notes ; and the bull-frog added its deep croak 
to the ominous concert. Behind them came the thundering 
tramp and loud shouts of their pursuers. Guy Fawkes had 
judged correctly. Before they readied Baysnape the moon had 
witiulrawn behind a rack of clouds, and it had become pro- 
foundly dark. Arrived at this point, Humphrey Chetham 
called to them to turn off to the right. 

" Follow singly," he said, "and do not swerve a hair's breadth 
from the path. The slightest deviation will be fatal. Do you, 
sir," he added to the priest, " mount behind Guy Fawkes, and 
let Viviana come next after me. If I should miss my way, do 
not stir for your life." 

The transfer effected, the fugitives turned off to the right, and 
proceeded at a cautious pace along a narrow and shaking path. 
The ground trembled so much beneath them, and their horses' 
feet sank so deeply in the plashy bog, that Viviana demanded, 
in a tone of some uneasiness, if he was sure he had taken the 
right course ? 



CHAT MOSS. 45 

" If I had not," replied Humphrey Chetham, " we should ere 
this have found our way to the bottom of the morass." 

As he spoke, a floundering plunge, accompanied by a horrible 
and quickly-stifled cry, told that one of their pursuers had 
perished in endeavouring to follow them. 

" The poor wretch is gone to his account," observed Viviana, 
in a tone of commiseration. " Have a care I — ^have a care, lest 
you share the same fate." 

" If I can save you, I care not what becomes of me," replied 
the young merchant. " Since I can never hope to possess you, 
life has become valueless in my eyes." 

" Quicken your pace," shouted Guy Fawkes, who brought up 
the rear. " Our pursuers have discovered the track, and are 
making towards us." 

" Let them do so," replied the young merchant. " They can 
do us no farther injury." 

" That is false I" cried the voice of a soldier from behind. 
And, as the words were uttered, a shot was fired, which, though 
<:imed against Chetham, took effect upon his steed. The animal 
staggered, and his rider had only time to slide from his back 
when he reeled off the path, and was ingulfed in the marsh. 

Hearing the plunge of the steed, the man fancied he had hit 
his mark, and hallooed in an exulting voice to his companions. 
But his triumph was of short duration. A ball from the petro- 
nel of Guy Fawkes pierced his brain, and dropping from hi? 
saddle, he sank, together with his horse, which he dragged along 
with him into the quagmire. 

" Waste no more shot," cried Humphrey Chetham ; " the 
swamp will fight our battles for us. Though I grieve for the 
loss of my horse, I may be better able to guide you on foot." 

With this, he seized Viviana's bridle, and drew her steed 
along at a quick pace, but with the greatest caution. As they 
proceeded, a light like that of a lantern was seen to rise from 
the earth, and approach them. 

"Heaven be praised I" exclaimed Viviana: "some one has 
heard us, and is hastening to our assistance." 

"Not so," replied Humphrey Chetham. "The light you 
behold is an iffnis fatuus. Were you to trust yourself to its de- 
lusive gleam, it would lead you to the most dangerous parts of 
the moss." 

And, as if to exhibit its real character, the little flame, which 
hitherto had burnt as brightly and steadily as a wax-candle, 
suddenly appeared to dilate, and assuming a purple tinge, emitted 
a shower of sparks, and then flitted rapidly over the plain. 
" Woe to him that follows it I" cried Humphrey Chetham. 
" It has a strange unearthly look," observed Viviana, crossing 
herself. " I have much difficulty in persuading myself it is not 
the work of some malignant sprite." 



46 GUY FAWKES. 

" It is only an exhalation of the marsh," repHed Chethain. 
" But, see ! others are at hand." 

Their approacli, indeed, seemed to have disturbed all the 
weird children of the waste. Lights were seen trooping towards 
them in every direction ; sometimes stopping, sometimes rising 
in the air, now contracting, now expanding, and when within a 
few yards of the travellers, retreating with inconceivable swift- 
ness. 

" It is a marvellous and incomprehensible spectacle," remarked 

Viviana. 

" The common folk hereabouts affirm that these Jack-o'- 
lanterns, as they term them, always appear in greater numbers 
when some direful catastrophe is about to take place," rejoined 
the young merchant. 

"Heaven avert it from us," ejaculated Viviana. 

« It is an idle superstition," returned Chetham. " But we 
must now keep silence," he continued, lowering his voice, and 
stopping near the charred stump of a tree, left, it would seem, 
as a mark. " The road turns here ; and, unless our pursuers 
know it, we shall now quit them for ever. We must not let a 
sound betray the course we are about to take." 

Havino- turned this dangerous corner in safety, and conducted 
his companions as noiselessly as possible for a few yards along 
the cross path, which being much narrower was consequently 
more perilous than the first, Humphrey Chetham stood still, 
and, imposing silence upon the others, listened to the approach 
of their pursuers. His prediction was speedily and terribly 
verified. Hearing the movement in advance, but unable to dis- 
cover the course taken by the fugitives, the unfortunate soldiers, 
fearful of losing their prey, quickened their pace, in the expec- 
tation of instantly overtaking them. They were fatally unde- 
ceived. Four only of their number, besides their leader, re- 
mained, — two having perished in the manner heretofore described. 
The first of these, disregarding the caution of his comrade, 
laughingly urged his horse into a gallop, and, on passing the 
mark, sunk as if by magic, and before he could utter a single 
warning cry, into the depths of the morass. His disappearance 
was so instantaneous, that the next in order, though he heard 
the sullen plunge, was unable to draw in the rein, and was like- 
wise ingulfed. A third followed ; and a fourth, in his efforts 
to avoid their fate, backed his steed ovc"" the slippery edge of the 
path. Only one now remained. It Vvas the pursuivant, who, 
with the prudence that characterized all his proceedings, had fol- 
lowed in the rear. He was so dreadfully frightened, that, adding 
his shrieks to those of his attendants, he shouted to the fugitives, 
imploring assistance in the most piteous terms, and promising 
never again to molest them, if they would guide him to a place 
of safety. But his cries were wholly unheeded ; and he perhaps 



CHAT MOSS. 47 

endured in those few minutes of agony as much suffering as he 
had intiicted on the numerous victims of his barbarity. It was 
indeed an appalling moment. Three of the wretched men had 
not yet sunk, but were floundering about in the swamp, and 
shrieking for help. The horses, as much terrified as their riders, 
added their piercing cries to the iialf-suffocated yells. And, as 
if to make the scene more ghastly, myriads of dancing lights 
flitted towards them, and throwing an unearthly glimmer over 
this part of the morass, fully revealed their struggling figures. 
Moved by compassion for the poor wretches, Viviana implored 
Humphrey Chetham to assist them, and, finding him immovable, 
she appealed to Guy Fawkes. 

'' They are beyond all human aid," the latter replied. 

" Heaven have mercy on their souls !" ejaculated the priest. 
"Pray for them, dear daughter. Pray heartily, as I am about 
to do," And he recited in an audible voice the Romish formula 
of supplication for those in extremis. 

Averting her gaze from the spectacle, Viviana joined fervently 
in the prayer. 

By this time two of the strugglers had disappeared. The third, 
having freed himself from his horse, contrived for some moments, 
during which he uttered the most frightful cries, to keep his 
head above the swamp. His efforts were tremendous, but un- 
availing, and served only to accelerate his fate. Makitig a last 
desperate plunge towards the bank where the fugitives were 
standing, he sank above the chin. The expression of his face, 
shown by the ghastly glimmer of the fen-fires, as he was gradually 
swallowed up, was horrible. 

" Requiem aternam dona eis, Domine,^'' exclaimed the priest. 

"All is over," cried Humphrey Chetham, taking the bridle of 
Viviana's steed, and leading her onwards. " We are free from 
our pursuers." 

*' There is one left," she rejoined, casting a look backwards. 

*' It is the pursuivant," returned Guy Fawkes, sternly. *' He 
is within shot," he added, drawing his petronel. 

"Oh, no — no! — in pity spare him!" cried Viviana. "Too 
many lives have been sacrificed already." 

" He is the cause of all the mischief," answered Guy Fawkes, 
unwillingly replacing the petronel in his belt, " and may live to 
injure you and your father." 

"Twill hope not," rejoined Viviana ; "but, spare him I — oh, 
spare him !" 

" Be it as you please," replied Guy Fawkes. "The marsh, I 
trust, will not be so merciful." 

. With this, they slowly resumed their progress. On hearing 
their departure, the pursuivant renewed his cries in a more 
piteous tone than ever ; but, in spite of the entreaties of Viviana, 
nothing could induce her companions to lend him assistance. 



43 GUY FAVVKES. 

For some time they proceeded in silence, and without acci- 
dent. As they advanced, the difliculties of the path increased, 
and it was fortunate that the moon, emerging from the clouds in 
which, up to tliis moment, siie had been shrouded, enabled them 
to steer their course in safety. At length, after a tedious and toil- 
some march for nearly half a mile, the footing became more 
secure, the road widened, and they were able to quicken their 
pace. Another half mile landed them upon the western bank of 
the morass. Viviana's first impulse was to give thanks to Heaven 
for their deliverance, nor did she omit in her prayer a supplica- 
tion for the unfortunate beings who had perished. 

Arrived at the point now known as Rawson Nook, they 
entered a lane, and proceeded towards Astley Green, where per- 
ceiving a cluster of thatched cottages among the trees, they 
knocked at the door of the first, and speedily obtained admittance 
from its inmates, a turf-cutter and his wife. The man conveyed 
their steeds to a neighbouring barn, while the good dame offered 
Viviana such accommodation and refreshment as her humble 
dwelling afforded. Here they tarried till the following evening, 
;as mucli to recruit Miss Radcliffe's strength, as for security. 

At the young merchant's request, the turf-cutter went in the 
■course of the day to see what had become of the pursuivant. 
He was nowhere to be found. But he accidentally learned from 
another hind, who followed the same occupation as himself, that 
a person answering to the officer's description had been seen to 
emerge from the moss near Baysnape at daybi'eak, and take the 
road towards Manchester. Of the unfortunate soldiers nothing 
but a steel cap and a pike, which the man brought away with 
him, could be discovered. 

After much debate, it was decided that their safest plan would 
he to proceed to Manchester, where Humphrey Chetham under- 
took to procure them safe lodgings at the Seven Stars, — an ex- 
cellent hostel, kept by a worthy widow, who, he affirmed, would 
do anything to serve him. Accordingly, they set out at night- 
fall, — Viviana taking her place before Guy Fawkes, and relin- 
quishing Zayda to the young merchant and the priest. Shaping 
their course through Worsley, by Monton Green and Pendleton, 
they arrived in about an hour within sight of the town, which 
then, — not a tithe of its present size, and unpolluted by the 
smoky atmosphere in which it is now constantly enveloped, — 
was not without some pretensions to a ]Mcturesque appearance. 
Crossing Salford Bridge, they mounted Smithy Bank, as it was 
then termed, and pi'occeding along Cateaton-strcet and Hanging 
Ditch, struck into Whithing (now Withy) Grove, at the right of 
which, just where a few houses were beginning to straggle up 
Shude Hill, stood, and siill stands, the comfortable hostel of the 
Seven Stars. Here they stopped, and were warmly welcomed 
'by its buxom mistress. Dame Sutcliffe. Muffled in Guy Fawkes's 



THE DISINTERMENT. 49 

cloak, the priest gained the chamber to which he was ushered 
unobserved. And Dame SutcHffe, though her i^rotestant notions 
were a little scandalized at her dwelling being made the sanc- 
tuary of a Popish priest, promised, at the instance of Master 
Chetham, whom she knew to be no favourer of idolatry in a 
general way, to be answerable for his safety. 



CHAPTER Vr. 

THE DISINTERMENT. 



Having seen every attention shown to Viviana by the hostess, — 
who, as soon as she discovered that she had the daughter of Sir 
William Radcliffe of Ordsall, under her roof, bestirred herself in 
right earnest for her accommodation, — Humphrey Chetham, 
notwithstanding the lateness of the hour, — it was past midnight, 
— expressed his determination to walk to his residence at Crump- 
sail, to put an end to any apprehension which might be enter- 
tained by the household at his prolonged absence. 

With this view, he set forth ; and Guy Favvkes, who seemed 
to be meditating some project which he was unwilling to disclose 
to the others, quitted the hostel with him, bidding the chamber- 
lain sit up for him, as he should speedily return. They had not 
gone far when he inquired the nearest way to the Collegiate 
Church, and was answered tliat they were then proceeding 
towards it, and in a few moments should arrive at its walls. He next 
asked the young merchant whether he could inform him which 
part of the churchyard was allotted to criminals. Humphrey 
Chetham, somewhat surprised by the question, replied, "At the 
north-west, near the charnel," adding, " I shall pass within a 
short distance of the spot, and will point it out to you." 

Entering Fennel Street, at the end of which stood an ancieni. 
cross, they soon came in sigiit of the church. The moon was 
shining brightly, and silvered the massive square tower of the 
fane, the battlements, pinnacles, buttresses, and noble eastern 
window, with its gorgeous tracery. While Guy Fawkes paused 
for a moment to contemplate this reverend and beautiful structure, 
two venerable personages, having long snowy beards, and 
wrapped in flowing mantles edged with sable fur, passed the end 
of the street. One of them carried a lantern, though it was 
wholly needless, as it was bright as day; and as they glided 
stealthily along, there was something so mysterious in their 
manner, that it greatly excited the curiosity of Guy Fawkes, 
who inquired from his companion if he knew who ihcy were. 

** The foremost is the warden of Manchester, llie famoui 

£ 



fiO GUY FAWKE3. 

Doctor Dec," replied Humphrey Chetham, "divine, mathc' 
matician, astiokgcr, — and if report spe?ks truly, conjuror." 

" Is that Doctor Dee ?" cried Guy Fawkes, in astonishment 

" It is," replied the young merchant : '*■ and the other in the 
Polish cap is the no-less celebrated Edward Kelley, the doctor's 
assistant, or, as he is ordinarily termed, his seer." 

" Thev have entered the churchyard," remarked Guy Fawkes. 
« I will toUow them." 

" I would not advise you to do so," rejoined the other. 
" Strange tales are told of them. You may witness that it ia 
not safe to look upon." 

The caution, however, was unheeded. Gu}'^ Fawkes had 
already disappeared, and the young merchant, shrugging his 
shoulders, proceeded on his way towards Hunt's Bank. 

On gaining the churchyard, Guy Fawkes perceived the 
warden and his companion creeping stealthily beneath the 
shadow of a wall in the direction of a low fabric, which appeared 
to be a bone-house, or charnel, situated at the north-western 
extremit}'^ of the church. Before this building grew a black 
and stunted yew-tree. Arrived at it, they paused, and looked 
round to see whether they were observed. They did not, how- 
ever, notice Guy Fawkes, who had concealed himself behind a 
buttress. Kelley then unlocked the door of the charnel, and 
brought out a pickaxe and mattock. Having divested himself 
of his cloak, he proceeded to shovel out the mould from a new- 
made grave at a little distance from the building. Doctor Dee 
stood by, and held the lantern for his assistant. 

Determined to watch their proceedings, Guy Fawkes crept 
towards the yew-tree, behind which he ensconced himself. 
Kelley, meanwhile, continued to ply his spade with a vigour 
that seemed almost incomprehensible in one so far stricken in 
years, and of such infirm appearance. At length he paused, 
and kneeling within the shallow grave, endeavoured to drag 
something from it. Doctor Dee knelt to assist him. After some 
exertion, they drew forth the corpse of a female, which had 
been interred without coffin, and apparently in the habiliments 
worn during life. A horrible suspicion crossed Guy Fawkes. 
Resolving to satisfy his doubts at once, he rushed forward, and 
beheld in the ghastly lineaments of the dead the features of the 
unfortunate prophetess, Elizabeth Orton. 



CHAPTER VII. 

DOCTOR DEE. 



" How now, ye Impious violators of the tomb I ye worse than 
fimiine-stricken wolves, that rake up the dead in church3'ards 1* 




UvmS-rUikstiflflnt: 



J^ 






DOCTOR DEE. 51 

cried Guy Fawkes, in a voice of thunder, to Doctor Dee and hh 
companion ; who, startled by his sudden appearance, dropped the 
body, and retreated to a short distance, " What devilish rites 
are ye about to enact, that ye thus profane the sanctity of the 
grave ?" 

*' And who art thou that darest thus to interrupt us ?" de- 
manded Dee, sternly. 

" It matters not," rejoined Fawkes, stridino; towards them, 
** Suffice it you are both known to me. You, John Dee, warden 
of Manchester, who deserve to be burnt at the stake for your 
damnable practices, rather than hold the sacred office you fill ; 
and you, Edward Kelley, his associate, who boast of familiar 
intercourse with demons, and, unless fame belies you, have 
purchased the intimacy at the price of your soul's salvation. I 
know you both. I know, also, whose body you have disinterred 
—it is that of the ill-fated prophetess, Elizabeth Orton. And 
if you do not instantly restore it to the grave whence you have 
snatched it, I will denounce you to the authorities of the town." 

" Knowing thus much, you should know still more," retorted 
Doctor Dee, " namely, that I am not to be lightly provoked. 
You have no power to quit the churchyard — nay, not so much 
as to move a limb without my permission." 

As he spoke, he drew from beneath his cloak a small phial, 
the contents of which he sprinkled over the intruder. Its effect 
was wonderful and instantaneous. The limbs of Guy Fawkes 
stiffened where he stood. His hand remained immovably fixed 
upon the pommel of his sword, and he seemed transformed into 
a marble statue. 

" You will henceforth acknowledge and respect my power," 
he continued. " Were it my pleasure, I could bury you twenty 
fathoms deep in the earth beneath our feet ; or, by invoking 
certain spirits, convey you to the summit of yon lofty tower," 
pointing to the church, " and hurl you from it headlong. But I 
content myself with depriving you of motion, and leave you in 
possession of sight and speech, that you may endure the torture 
of witnessing what you cannot prevent," 

So saying, he was about to return to the corpse with Kelley, 
when Guy Fawkes exclaimed, in a hollow voice, 

" Set me free, and I will instantly depart." 

" Will you swear never to divulge what you have seen ?" 
demanded Dee, pausing, 

" Solemnly," he replied. 

" I will trust you, then," rejoined the Doctor ; — " the rather 
that your presence interferes with my purpose." 

Taking a handful of loose earth from an adjoining grave, and 
muttering a few words, that sounded like a charm, he scattered 
it over Fawkes. The spell was instantly broken. A leaden 
weight seemed to be removed from his limbs. His joints re- 






52 GUY FAWKES. 

•rained their suppleness, and with a convulsive start, like that by 
which a dreamer casts oft' a nijrhtmare, he was liberated from his 
preternatural thraldom. 

" And now, begone I" cried Doctor Dee, authoritatively. 

" Suffer me to tarry with you a few moments," said Guy 
Fawkes, in a deferential tone. " Heretofore, I will freely admit, 
I regarded you as an impostor ; but now I am convinced you arc 
deeply skilled in the occult sciences, and would fain consult you 
on the future." 

** I have already said that your presence troubles me," re- 
plied Doctor Dee. " But if you will call upon me at the 
College to-mori'ow, it may be I will give you further proofs of 
my skill." 

" Why not now, reverend sir?" urged Fawkes. "The ques- 
tion I would ask is better suited to this dismal spot and witching 
hour, than to daylight and the walls of your study." 

*' Indeed I" exclaimed Dee. " Your name ?" 
Guy Fawkes," replied the other. 

Guy Fawkes !" echoed the Doctor, starting. "Nay, then, 
I guess the nature of the question you would ask." 

"Am I then known to you, reverend sir?" inquired Fawkes, 
uneasily. 

" As well as to yourself — nay, better," answered the Doctor. 
" Bring the lantern hither, Kelley," he continued, addressing his 
companion. " Look I" he added, elevating the light so as to 
throw it upon the countenance of Fawkes: *' it is the very face, — 
the bronzed and strongly-marked features, — the fierce black 
eye, — the iron frame, and foreign garb of the figure we beheld 
in the show-stone." 

"It is," replied Kelley. *'I could have singled him out amid 
a thousand. He looked thus as we tracked his perilous course, 
with his three companions, the priest, Chetham, and Viviana 
Radcliffe, across Chat Moss." 

" How have you learned this ?" cried Guy Fawkes, in amaze- 
ment. 

" By the art that reveals all things," answered Kelley. 

"In proof that your thoughts are known to me," observed 
Dee, "I will tell you the inquiry you would make before it is 
uttered. You would learn whether the enterprise on which you 
are engaged will succeed." 

" I would," replied Fawkes. 

" Yet more," continued Dee. " I am aware of the nature of 
the plot, and could name to you all connected with it." 

" Your power is, indeed, wonderful," rejoined Fawkes in an 
altered tone. " But will you give me the information I require ?"■ 

" Hum I" muttered Dee. 

"I am too poor to ])urchase it," proceeded Fawkes, "unless a 
rehc I have brought from Spain has any value in your eyes." 







4d^^!^, ^5:2>^^%^J^- 5^/ //, 





DOCTOR DEE. 53 

"Tush 1" exclaimed Dee, angrily. "Do you suppose I am a 
common juggler, and practise my art for gain ?" 

*' By no means, reverend sir," said Favvkes. " But I would 
not willingly put you to trouble without evincing my gratitude." 

'* Well, then," replied Dee, " I will not refuse your request. 
And yet I would caution you to beware how you pry into the 
future. You may repent your rashness when it is too late." 

" I have no fear," rejoined Fawkes. " Let me know the 
worst." 

*' Enough," answered Dee. " And now listen to me. That 
carcass having been placed in the ground without the holy rites 
of burial being duly performed, I have power over it. And, as 
the witch of Endor called up Samuel, as is recorded in Holy 
Writ, — as Erichtho raised up a corpse to reveal to Sextus Pom- 
peius the event of the Pharsalian war, — as Elisha breathed life 
into the nostrils of the Shunamite's son, — as Alcestis was invoked 
()y Hercules, — and as the dead maid was brought back to life by 
Apollonius Thyaneus, — so I, by certain powerful incantations, 
will allure the soul of the prophetess, for a short space, to its 
former tenement, and compel it to answer my questions. Dare 
you be present at this ceremony?" 

" I dare," replied Fawkes. 

"Follow me, then," said Dee. "You will need all your 
courage." 

Muttering a hasty prayer, and secretly crossing himself, Guy 
Fawkes strode after him towards the grave. By the Doctor's 
directions, he, with some reluctance, assisted Kelley to raise the 
corpse, and convey it to the charnel. Dee followed, bearing the 
lantern, and, on entering the building, closed and fastened the 
door. 

The chamber in which Guy Fawkes found himself was in 
perfect keeping with the horrible ceremonial about to be per- 
formed. In one corner lay a mouldering heap of skulls, bones, 
and other fragments of mortality; in the other a pile of broken 
coffins, emptied of their tenants, and reared on end. But what 
chiefly attracted his attention, was a ghastly collection of human 
iiiubs, blackened with pitch, girded round with iron hoops, and 
hung, like meat in a shambles, against the wall. There were 
two iicads, and, though the features were scarcely distinguishable, 
owing to the liquid in which they had been immersed, they still 
retained a terrific expression of agony. Seeing his attention 
directed to these revolting objects, Kelley informed him they 
were the quarters of the two priests who had recently been put 
to death, which had been left there previously to being placed 
on the church-gates. The implements, and some part of the 
attire used by the executioner in his butcherly office, were scat- 
tered about, and mixed with the tools of the sexton ; while in 
the centre of the room stood a large wooden frame supported by 



54- GUY FAWKES. 

trestles. On this frame, stained with blood and smeared with 
pitch, showing the pnrpose to which it had been recently put, 
tlie body was placed. This done, Doctor Dec set down the 
lantern beside it; and, as the light fell upon its livid features, 
sullied with earth, and exhibiting traces of decay, Guy Fawkes 
was so appalled by the sight that he half repented of what be 
had undertaken. 

Noticing his irresolution. Doctor Dee said, "You may yet 
retire if you think proper." 

"No," replied Fawkes, rousing himself; *' I will go through 
with it." 

"It is well," replied Dee. And he extinguished the light. 

An awful silence now ensued, broken only by a low murmur 
from Doctor Dee, who appeared to be reciting an incantation. 
As he proceeded, his tones became louder, and his accents those 
of command. Suddenly, he paused, and seemed to await a 
response. But, as none was made, greatly to the disappointment 
of Guy Fawkes, whose curiosity, notwithstanding his fears, was 
raised to the highest pitch, he cried, " Blood is wanting to com- 
plete the charm." 

" If that is all, I will speedily supply the deficiency," replied 
Guy Fawkes; and, drawing his rapier, he bared liis left arm, 
and pricked it deeply with the point of the weapon. 

" I bleed now," he cried. 

" Sprinkle the corpse with the ruddy current," rejoined 
Doctor Dee. 

" Your commands are obeyed," replied Fawkes. " I have 
placed my hand on its breast, and the blood is flowing upon it." 

Upon this tlie Doctor began to mutter an incantation in a 
louder and more authoritative tone than before. Presently, Kelley 
added his voice, and they both joined in a sort of chorus, but in 
a jargon wholly unintelligible to Gu}' Fawkes. 

All at once a blue flame appeared above their head?;, and, 
slowly descending, settled upon the brow of the corpse, lighting 
up the sunken cavities of the eyes, and the discoloured and 
distorted features. 

" 'J'he charm works," shouted Doctor Dee. 

" She moves I she moves I" exclaimed Guy Fawkes. " She is 
alive I" 

"Take off your hand," cried the Doctor, "or mischief may 
ensue." And he again continued his incantation. 

" Down on your knees I" he exclaimed, at length, in a terrible 
voice. " The spirit is at hand." 

There was a rushino; sound, and a stream of dazzlino; lio:htnin^ 
shot down upon the corpse, which emitted a hollow groan. In 
obedience to the Doctor's commands, Guy Fawkes had prostrated 
himself on the ground : but he kept his gaze steadily fixed on 
the body, whicli, to his infinite astonishment, slowly arose, until 



DOCTOR DEE. 55 

it Stood erect upon the frame. There it remained perfectly 
motionless, widi the arms close to the sides, and the liabilin)onts 
torn and dishevelled. The blue light still retained its position 
upon the brow, and communicated a horrible glimmer to the 
features. The spectacle \\ as so dreadful that Gu}' Fawkes would 
fain have averted his eyes, but he was unable to do so. Doctor 
Dee and his companion, meanwhUe, continued their invocations, 
until, as it seemed to Fawkes, the lips of the corpse moved, and 
an awful voice exclaimed, "Why have you called me?" 

" Daughter I" replied Doctor Dee, rising, " in life thou wert 
endowed with the gift of prophecy. In the grave, that which 
is to come must be revealed to thee. We would question thee." 

*' Speak, and I will answer," replied the corpse. 

*' Interrogate her, my son," said Dee, addressing Fawkes, 
•' and be brief, for the time is short. So long only as that flame 
burns have I power over her." 

" Spirit of Elizabeth Orton," cried Guy Fawkes, "if indeed 
thou standest before me, and some demon hath not entered thy 
frame to delude me, — by all that is holy, and by every blessed saint,. 
I adjure thee to tell me whether the scheme on which I am now 
engaged for the advantage of the Catholic Church will prosper?" 

" Thou art mistaken, Guy Fawkes," returned the corpse. 
" Thy scheme is not for the advantage of the Catholic Church." 

" I will not pause to inquire wherefore," continued Fawkes. 
"But, grant that the means are violent and wrongful, will the.- 
end be successful ?" 

" The end will be death," replied the corpse. 

" To the tyrant — to the oppressors ?" demanded Fawkes. 
, " To the conspirators," was the answer. 

" Hal" ejaculated Fawkes. 

"Proceed, if you have aught more to ask," cried Dr. Dee; 
" The flame is expiring." 

" Sliall we restore the fallen religion?" demanded Fawkes. 

But beft)re the words could be pronounced the light vanished, 
and a heavy sound was heard, as of the body falling on the frame. 

" It is over," said Doctor Dee. 

" Can you not summon her again ?" asked Fawkes, in a tone 
of deep disappointment. "I had other quesiions to ask." 

" Impossible," re])lied the Doctor. " The spirit is fled, and 
will not be recalled. We must now commit the body to the 
earth. And this time it shall be more decently interred." 

"My curiosity is excited, — not satisfied," said Guy Fawkes. 
*' Would it were to occur again 1" 

" It is ever thus," replied Doctor Dee. '* We seek io know 
that which is interdicted. — and quench our thirst at a fountain 
that only inflames our curiosity the more. Be warned, my son. 
You are embarked on a perilous enterprise, and if you pursue it, 
it will lead you to certain destruction." 



56 GUY FAWKES. 



*' I cannot retreat," rejoined Faukes, "and would not, if I 
could. I am bound by an oath too terrible to be broken." 

" I will absolve you of your oath, my son," said Dr. Dee, 
eajzerlv. 

" You cannot, reverend sir," replied Fawkes. " By no so- 
phistry could I clear my conscience of the ties imposed upon 
it. I have sworn never to desist from the execution of this 
scheme, unless those enfjaged in it shall give me leave. Nay, 
so resolved am I, that if I stood alone I would u;o on." 

As he spoke, a deep groan issued from the corpse. 

*' You are ao;;ain warned, my son," said Dee. 

" Come forth," said Guy Fawkes, rushing towards the door, 
and throwing it open. " This place stifles me." 

The night has already been described as bright and beautiful. 
Before him stood the Collegiate Churcli bathed in moonlight. 
He gazed abstractedly at this venerable structure for a few 
moments, and then returned to the charnel, where he found 
Doctor Dee and Kelley employed in placing the body of the pro- 
phetess in a coffin, which they had taken from a pile in the 
corner. He immediately proffered his assistance, and in a short 
space the task was completed. The coffin was then borne 
towards the grave, at the edge of which it was laid while the 
burial-service was recited by Doctor Dee. This ended, it was 
lowered into its shallow resting-place, and speedily covered with 
earth. 

When all was ready for their departure, the Doctor turned to 
Fawkes, and, bidding him farewell, observed, 

" If you are wise, my son, you will profit by the awful warn- 
ing you have this night received." 

" Before we part, reverend sir," replied Fawkes, " I would ask 
if you know of other means whereby an insight may be obtained 
into the future ?" 

" Many, my son," replied Dee. " I have a magic glass, in 
which, with due preparation, you may behold exact representa- 
tions of coming events. I am now returning to the College, and 
if you will accompany me, I will show it to you." 

The offer was eagerly accepted, and the party quitted the 
churchyard. 



CHAPTER VHI. 

THE MAGIC GLASS. 



The old College of Manchester occupied, as is well known, the 
Site of the existing structure, called after the benevolent indivi- 
dual by whom that admirable charity was founded, and whom we 
have ventured to introduce in this history, — the Chetham Hos- 



THE MAGIC GLASS. 57 

pital. Much, indeed, of the ancient building remains; for 
though it AA'as considerably repaired and enlarged, being " very 
ruinous and in great decay," at the time of its purchase in 1654, 
by the feoffees under Humphrey Chetham's will, from the seques- 
trators of the Earl of Derby's estates, still the general character of 
the fabric has been preserved, and several of its chambers 
retained. Originally built on the foundation of a manor-house 
denominated The Baron's Hall, — the abode of the Grelleys and 
the De la Warrs, lords of Manchester, — the College continued 
to be used as the residence of the warden and fellows of the Col- 
legiate Church until the reign of Edward the First, when that 
body was dissolved. On the accession, however, of Mary, the 
College was re-established ; but the residence of the ecclesiastical 
body being removed to a house in Ueansgate, the building was 
allowed to become extremely dilapidated, and was used partly as 
a prison for recusants and other offenders, and partly as a maga- 
zine for powder. In this state Dr. Dee found it when he suc- 
ceeded to the wardenship in 1595, and preferring it, notwith- 
standing its ruinous condition, to the house appointed for him 
elsewhere, took up his aoode within it. 

Situated on a high rock, overhanging the river Irk — at that 
time a clear stream, remarkable for the excellence of its fish, — 
and constructed entirely of stone, the old College had then, and 
still has to a certain extent, a venerable and monastic appear- 
ance. During Dee's occupation of it, it became a sort of weird 
abode in the eves of the vulvar, and manv a timorous look was 
cast at it by those who walked at eventide on the opposite bank 
of the Irk. Sometimes the curiosity of the watchers was re- 
warded by beholding a few sparks issue from the chimney, and 
now and then, the red reflection of a fire might be discerned 
through the window. But generally nothing could be perceived, 
and the building seemed as dark and mysterious as its occupant. 

One night, however, a loud explosion took place, — so loud, 
indeed, that it shook the whole pile to its foundation, dislodged 
one or two of the chimneys, and overthrew an old wall, the 
stones of which rolled into the river beneath. Alarmed by the 
concussion, the inhabitants of Hunt's Bank rushed forth, and 
saw, to their great alarm, that the wing of the college occupied 
by Doctor Dee was in flames. Though many of them attri- 
buted the circumstance to supernatural agency, and were fully 
persuaded that the enemy of mankind was at that instant 
bearing off the conjuror and his assistant, and refused to inter- 
fere to stop the conflagration, others, more humane and less 
superstitious, hastened to lend their aid to extinguish the flames. 
On reaching the College, they could scarcely credit their senses 
on findins: that there was no aj)pearance of fire ; and they were 
met by the Doctor and his companion at the gates, who in- 
formed them that their presence was unnecessary, as all danger 



58 GUY FAWKE<. 

way over. From that night Doctor Dee'b reputation as a wizard 
was firmly established. 

At the period of this historv, Doctor Dee was fast verging 
on eii^htv, haviiifi; passed a long life in severe and abstruse study, 
lie had travelled much, had visited most of the foreign courts, 
where he was generally well received, and was profoundly versed 
in mathematics, astronomy, the then popular science of judicial 
astrology, and other occult learning. So accurate were his 
calculations esteemed, that he was universally consulted as an 
oracle. For some time, he resided in Germany, where he was 
invited by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and retained by his 
brother and successor, Fcrdinando. He next went to Louvain, 
where his reputation had preceded him ; and from thence to 
Paris, where he lectured at the schools on geometry, and was 
offered a professorship of the university, but declined it. On 
his return to England in 1551, he was appointed one of the in- 
structors of the youthful monarch, Edward the Sixth, who 
presented him with an annual pension of a hundred marks. 
This he was permitted to commute for the rectory of Upton- 
upon-Severn, which he retained until the accession of Mary, 
when being charged with devising her Majesty's destruction by 
enchantments, — certain waxen in)ages of the Queen having been 
found within his abode, — he was thrown into prison, rigorously 
treated, and kept in durance for a long period. At length, 
from want of sufficient proof against him, he was liberated. 

Dee shared the connnon fate of all astrologers: he was 
alternately honoured and disgraced. His next patron was Lord 
Robert Dudley (afterwards the celebrated Earl of Leicester), 
who, it is well-known, was a firm believer in the superstitious 
<4rts to which Dee was addicted, and by whom he was employed, 
on the accession of Elizabeth, to erect a scheme to ascertain the 
best day for her coronation. His prediction was so fortunate 
that it procured him the favour of the Queen, from whom he re- 
ceived many marks of regard. As it is not needful to follow him 
through his various wanderings, it may be sufficient to mention, 
that in 1564 he proceeded to Germany on a visit to the Emperor 
Maximilian, to whom he dedicated his " 3Ionas HieroghjpJdca f* 
that in 1571 he fell grievously sick in Lorrain, whither two 
physicians were despatched to his aid by Elizabeth ; and that on 
his recovery he returned to his own country, and retired to 
Mortlake, where he gathered together a vast library, comprising 
the rarest and most curious works on all sciences, together with 
a large collection of manuscripts. 

Willie thus living in retirement, he was sought out by Edward 
Kelley, a native of Worcestershire, who represented himself as 
in poiisession of an old book of magic, containing forms of invo- 
cation, by which spirits might be summoned and controlled, as 
well as a ball of ivory, found in the tomb of a bishop who hac* 



THE MAGIC GLASS. i'^ 

made great progress in hermetic philosophy, which was filled 
with the powder of projection. These treasures Kclley offered 
to place in the liands of the Doctor on certain conditions, which 
were immediately acquiesced in, and thenceforth Kelle}' became 
a constant inmate in his house, and an assistant in all his practices. 
Shortly afterwards, they were joined by a Polish nobleman^, 
Albert de Laski, Palatine of Suabia, whom they accompanied to 
Prague, at the instance of the Emperor Rodolph the Second, 
who desired to be initiated into their mysteries. Their reception 
at this court was not such as to induce a long sojourn at it ; and 
Dee having been warned by his familiar spirits to sell his effects 
and depart, complied with the intimation, and removed to Poland. 
The same fate attended him here. The nuncio of the Pope de- 
nounced him as a sorcerer, and demanded that he should be 
delivered up to the Inquisition. This was refused by the 
monarch ; but Dee and his companion were banished from his 
dominions, and compelled to fly to Bohemia, where they took 
refuse in the castle of Trebona, belonging to Count llosenben:- 
Shortly afterwards, Dee and Kelley separated, the magical instru- 
ments being delivered to the former, who bent his course home- 
wards; and on his arrival in London was warmly welcomed bv 
the Queen. During his absence, his house at Moitlake had 
been broken open by the populace, under the pretence of its 
being the abode of a wizard, and rifled of its valuable library 
and manuscripts, — a loss severely felt by its owner. Some years 
were now passed by Dee in great destitution, during whicli he 
prosecuted his studies with the same ardour as before, until at 
length in 1595, when he was turned seventy, fortune again 
smiled upon him, and he was appointed to the wardenship of 
the College at Manchester, whither he repaired, and was 
installed in great pomp. 

But his residence in this place was not destined to be a 
tranquil one. His reputation as a dealer in the black art had 
preceded him, and rendered him obnoxious to the clergy, with 
whom he had constant disputes, and a feud subsisted between 
him and the fellows of his church. It has already been 
mentioned that he refused to occupy the house allotted him, 
but preferred taking iip his quarters in the old dilapidated 
College. Various reasons were assigned by his enemies for this 
singular choice of abode. They affirmed — and with some rea- 
son — that he selected it because he desired to elude observation, 
— and that his mode of life, sufficiently improper in a layman, 
was altogether indecorous in an ecclesiastic. By the common 
people he was universally regarded as a conjuror — and many at 
first came to consult him ; but he peremptorily dismissed all 
such applicants ; and, when seven females, sup))osed to be 
possessed, were brought to him that he might exercise his power 
over the evil spirits, he refused to interfere. He also publicly 



^0 GUY FAWKES. 

examined and rebuked a juggler, named Hartley, who pr?:- 
tended to magical knowledge. But these things did not blind 
his enemies, who continued to harass him to such a degree, 
that he addressed a petition to James the First, entreating to be 
brought to trial, when the accusations preferred against him 
misjht be fully investigated, and his character cleared. The 
application, and another to the like effect addressed to parlia- 
ment, were disregarded. Dee had not been long established in 
Manchester when he was secretly joined by Kelley, and they 
recommenced their search after the grand secret, — passing the 
nights in making various alchymical experiments, or in fancied 
-conferences with invisible beings. 

Among other magical articles possessed by Doctor Dee was a 
large globe of crystal, which he termed the Holy Stone, because 
he believed it had been brought him by " angelical ministry ;" 
^nd " in which," according to Meric Casaubon, " and out of 
which, by persons qualified for it, and admitted to the sight of 
it, all shapes and figures mentioned in every action were seen, 
and voices heard." The same writer informs us it was " round- 
■shaped, of a pretty bigness, and most like unto crystal.'' Dee 
himself declared to the Emperor Rodolph, " tliat the spirits had 
brought him a stone of that value that no earthly kingdom was 
of such worthiness as to be compared to the virtue and dignity 
thereof.'* He was in the habit of daily consulting this marvel- 
lous stone, and recording the visions he saw therein, and the 
conferences he held through it with the invisible world. 

Followed by Guy Fawkes and Kelley, the Doctor took his 
way down Long Mill Gate, and stopping at an arched gateway 
on the left, near which, on the site of the modern structure, 
stood the public school, founded a century bclbre by Hugh Old- 
ham, Bishop of Exeter, — he unlocked a small wicket, and entered 
a. spacious court, surrounded on one side by high stone walls, and 
on the other by a wing of the College. 

Conducting his guest to tiie principal entrance of the building, 
which lay at the farther end of the court, Doctor Dee ushered 
him into a large chamber, panelled with oak, and having a 
-curiously-moulded ceiling, ornamented with grotesque sculpture. 
This room, still in existence, and now occupied by the master of 
the school, formed Doctor Dee's library. Offering Fawkes a 
■chair, the Doctor informed him that when all was read}', Kelley 
should summon him, and, accompanied by his assistant, he with- 
drew. Half an hour elapsed before Kelley returned. Motion- 
ing Guy Fawkes to follow him, he led the way through several 
intricate passages to a chamber which was evidently the magi- 
-cian's sacred retreat. In a recess on one side stood a table, 
•covered with cabalistic characters and figures, referring to the 
celestial influences. On it was placed the holy stone, diffusing 
such a glistening radiance as is emitted by the pebble called 



THE MAGIC GLASS. 61 

cat's-eye. On the floor a wide circle was described, in the ring3 
of which magical characters, resembUng those on the table, were 
traced. In i'ront stood a brasier, filled with flaming coals ; and 
before it hung a heavy black curtain, appearing to shroud some 
mystery from view. 

Desiring Fawkes to place himself in the centre of the circle. 
Doctor Dee took several ingredients from a basket handed him 
by Kelley, and cast them into the brasier. As each herb or 
gum was ignited, the flame changed its colour ; now becoming 
crimson, now green, now blue, while fragrant or noxious odours 
loaded the atmosphere. These suffumigations ended. Dee 
seated himself on a chair near the table, whither he was 
followed by Kelley, and commanding Fawkes not to move a 
footstep, as he valued his safet}', he waved his wand, and began 
in a solemn tone to utter an invocation. As he continued, a 
hollow noise was heard overhead, which gradually increased in 
loudness, until it appeared as if the walls were tumbling about 
their ears. 

" The spirits are at hand !" cried Dee. "Do not look behind 
you, or they will tear you in pieces." 

As he spoke, a horrible din was heard, as of mingled howling,, 
shrieking, and laughter. It was succeeded by a low faint strain 
of music, which gradually died away, and then all was silent. 

" All is prepared," cried Dee. " Now, what would you 
behold ?" 

"The progress of the great enterprise," replied Fawkes. 

Doctor Dee waved his wand. The curtains slowly unfolded,, 
and Guy Fawkes perceived as in a glass a group of dark figures ; 
amongst which he noticed one in all respects resembling himself 
A priest was apparently proposing an oath, which the others 
were uttering. 

" Do you recognise them ?" said Doctor Dee. 

*' Perfectly," replied Fawkes. 

*'Look again," said Dee. 

As he spoke the figures melted away, and a new scene was 
presented on the glass. It was a gloomy vault, filled with barrels, 
partly covered with fagots and billets of wood. 

" Have you seen enough ?" demanded Dee. 

" No," replied Fawkes, firmly. " I have seen what is past. I 
would behold that which is to come." 

" Look again, then," rejoined the Doctor, waving his wand. 

For an instant the glass was darkened, and nothing could be 
discerned except the lurid flame and thick smoke arising from 
the brasier. The next moment, an icy chill shot through the 
ft-ame of Guy Fawkes as he beheld a throng of skeletons 
arranged before him. The bony fingers of the foremost of the 
grisly assemblage were pointed towards an indistinct object at 
its feet. As this object gradually became more defined, Guy 



^Z GUY FAWKES. 

Fav.kes perceived that it was a figure resembling himself, 
sin^tched upon the wheel, and writhing in the agonies ot 
tor >i ire. 

He uttered an exclamation of terror, and the curtains were 
insrantly closed. 

Half an hour afterwards, Guy Fawkes quitted the College, 
and returned to the Seven Stars. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE PRISON" ON" SALFORD BRIDGE, 

On the following morning, Gu}' Fawkes had a long and private 
conference with Father Oldcorne. The priest appeared greatlv 
troubled by the communication made to him, but he said 
nothing, and was for some time lost in reflection, and evidently 
weighing within himself what course it would be best to ])ursue. 
His uneasiness was not without effect on Viviana Radcliffe, and 
she ventured at last to inquire whether he apprehended any new 
danger. 

" I scarcely know what I apprehend, dear daughter," lie 
answered. " But circumstances have occurred which render it 
impossible we can remain longer in our present asylum with 
safety. We must quit it at nightfall." 

" Is our retreat then discovered?" inquired Viviana, in alarm. 

"Not as yet, I trust," replied Oldcorne; "but I have just 
ascertained from a messenger that the pursuivant, who, we 
thought, had departed for Chester, is still lingering within the 
town. He has offered a large reward for my a{)prehension, and 
having traced us to Manchester, declares he will leave no house 
unsearched till he finds us. He has got together a fresh band 
of soldiers, and is now visiting every place he thinks likely to 
aflbrd us shelter." 

" If this is the case," rejoined Viviana, " why remain here a 
single moment ? Let us fly at once." 

"Tliat would avail nothing, — or rather, it would expose us to 
fresh risk, dear daughter," replied Oldcorne. " Every approach 
to the town is guarded, and soldiers are posted at the corners of 
the streets, who stop and examine each suspected person." 

" Heaven protect us 1" exclaimed Viviana. 

" But this is not all," continued the priest. " By some inex- 
plicable and mysterious means, the designs of certain of the most 
assured friends of the catholic cause have come to the knowledge 
of our enemies, and the lives and safeties of many worthy men 
will be endangered : amongst others, that of your father." 

"You terrify me!" cried Viviana. 



THE PRISON ON SALFORD BRIDGE. *53 

" The rack shall force nothing from me, father," said Fawkes, 
^ernly. 

" Nor from me, my son," rejoined Oldcorne. " I have that 
within me which will enable me to sustain the bitterest agonies 
that the persecutors of our Church can inflict." 

*' Nor shall it force aught from me," added Viviana. '* For, 
though you have trusted me with nothing that can implicate 
others, I plainly perceive some plot is in agitation for the restora- 
tion of our religion, and I more than suspect Mr. Catesby is 
its chief contriver." 

"Daughter I" exclaimed Oldcorne, uneasily. 

" Fear nothing, father," she rejoined. " As I have said, the 
rack shall not force mo to betray you. Neither should it keep 
me silent w^hen I feel that my counsel — such as it is — may 
avail you. The course you are pursuing is a dangerous and 
fatal one ; dangerous to yourselves, and fatal to the cause you 
would serve. Do not deceive yourselves. You are struggling 
hopelessly and unrighteously, and Heaven will never assist an 
undertaking which has its aim in the terrible waste of life you 
meditate." 

Father Oldcorne made no reply, but walked apart with Guy 
Fawkes ; and Viviana abandoned herself to sorrowful reflection. 

Shortly after this, the door was suddenly thrown open, atid 
Humphrey Chetham rushed into the room. His looks were full 
of apprehension, £md Viviana was at no loss to perceive that 
some calauiity was at hand. 

" What is the matter ?" she cried, rising. 

"The pursuivant and his men are below," he replied. " They 
are interrogating the hostess, and are about to search the house. 
I managed to pass them unperceived." 

" We will resist them to the last," said Guy Fawkes, drawing 
a petronel. 

" Resistance will be in vain," rejoined Humphrey Chetham. 
*' They more than treble our number. 

" Is there no means of escape ?" asked Viviana. 

" None whatever," replied Chetham. " I hear them on the 
stairs. The terrified hostess has not dared to deny you, and is 
conducting them hither." 

" Stand back 1" cried Guy Fawkes, striding towards the door, 
** and let me alone confront them. That accursed pursuivant 
has escaped me once. But he shall not do so a second time." 

" My son," said Oldcorne, advancing towards him ; " preserve 
yourself, if possible. Your life is of consequence to the great 
cause. Think not of us — think not of revenging yourself upoa 
this caitiff. But think of the high destiny for which you are 
reserved. That window offers a means of retreat. Avail your- 
self of it. Fly!— Fly I" 

"Ay, fly !" repeated Viviana. " And you, Humphrey Chet- 



6i GITY FAWKES. 

ham, — 3'our presence here can do no good. Quick I — tLejr 
come I" 

** Nothing should induce me to quit you at such a moment, 
Viviana," re])lied Chetham, " but the conviction that 1 may be 
able to liberate you, should these miscreants convey you to 
prison.'* 

" Fly I — fly, my son," cried Oldcorne. " They are at the 
door." 

Thus urged, Guy Fawkes reluctantly yielded to Oldcorne's 
entreaties and sprang through the window. He was followed by 
Chetham. Viviana darted to the casement, and saw that they 
had alighted in safety on the ground, and were flying swiftly up 
Shude Hill. Meanwhile, the pursuivant had reached the door, 
which Chetham had taken the precaution to fasten, and was 
trying to burst it open. The bolts offered but a feeble resist- 
ance to his fury, and the next moment he dashed into the room, 
at the head of a band of soldiers. 

" Seize them I" he cried. " Ha I" he added, glancing round 
the room with a look of disappointment, " where are the others ? 
Where is the soldier in the Spanish garb ? Where is Humphrey 
(vhetham ? Confess at once, dog !" he continued, seizing the 
priest by the throat, " or I will pluck the secret from your 
breast." 

" Do not harm him," interposed Viviana. " I will answer the 
question. They are fled." 

" Fled I" echoed the pursuivant in consternation. *' How?" 

" Through that window," replied Viviana. 

"After them I" cried the pursuivant to some of his attendants, 
" Take the soldier, dead or alive I And now," he continued, as 
his orders were obeyed, " you, Father Oldcorne, Jesuit and 
traitor; and you, Viviana Radcliff'e, his shelterer and abettor, I 
shall convey you both to the prison on Salford Bridge. Seize 
them, and bring them along." 

" Touch me not," rejoined Viviana, pushing the men aside, 
who rudely advanced to obey their leader's command. " You 
have no warrant for this brutality. I am ready to attend you. 
Take my arm, father." 

Abashed at this reproof, the pursuivant stalked out of the 
room. Surrounded by the soldiers, Viviana and the priest 
followed. The sad procession was attended by crowds to the 
very door of the prison, where, by the pursuivant's commands, 
they were locked in separate cells. 

The cell in wiiich Viviana was confined was a small chamber 
at the back of the prison, and on the upper story. It had a 
small grated window overlooking the river. It has already been 
mentioned that this prison was originally a chapel built in the 
reign of Edward the Third, and had only recently been con- 
verted into a place of security for recusants. The chamber allotted 



THE PRISON ON SALFORD BRIDGE. 65 

to Viviana was contrived in the roof, and was so low that she 
could scarcely stand upright in it. It was furnished with u chair, 
a small table, and a straw pallet. 

The hours passed wearily with Viviana as they were marked 
by the deep-toned clock of the Colleiiiate Church, the tall tower 
of which fronted her window. Oppressed by the most melan- 
choly reflections, she was for some time a prey almost to despair. 
On whatever side she looked, the prospect was equally cheerless, 
and her sole desire was that she might find a refuge from her 
cares in the seclusion of a convent. For this she prayed, — and 
she prayed also that Heaven would soften the hearts of her 
oppressors, and enabled those who suffered to endure their yoke 
with patience. In the evening provisions were brought her, and 
placed upon the table, together with a lamp, by a surly- looking 
gaoler. But Viviana had no inclination to eat, and left them 
untouched. Neither could she prevail upon herself to lie down 
on the wretched pallet, and she therefore determined to pass the 
night in the chair. 

After some hours of watchfulness, her eyelids closed, and she 
continued to slumber until she was aroused by a slight noise at 
the window. Starting at the sound, she flew towards it, and per- 
ceived in the gloom the face of a man. She would have uttered 
a loud cry, when the circumstances of her situation rushed to 
her mind, and the possibility that it might be a friend checked 
her. The next moment satisfied her that she had acted rightly. 
A voice, which she recognised as that of Humphrey Chetham, 
called to her by name in a low tone, bidding her fear nothing, as 
he was come to set her free. 

"How have you managed to reach this window?" asked 
Viviana. 

" By a rope ladder," he answered. " I contrived in the dark- 
ness to clamber upon the roof of the prison from the parapets of 
the bridge, and, after securing the ladder to a projection, dropped 
the other end into a boat, rowed by Guy Fawkes, and concealed 
beneath the arches of the bridge. If I can remove this bar so 
as to allow you to pass through the window, dare you descend 
the ladder ?" 

" No," replied Viviana, shuddering. " My brain reels at the 
■mere idea." 

"Think of the fate you will escape," urged Chetham. 

*' And what will become of Father Oldcorne ?" asked Viviana. 
■** Where is he ?" 

*'In the cell immediately beneath you," replied Chetham. 

" Can you not liberate him ?" she continued. 
■ " Assuredly, if he will risk the descent," answered Chetham, 
jeluctanll}'. 

" Free him first," rejoined Viviana, " and at all hazards I will 
accompany you." 

F 



Tgg .:: GUY FAWKBS. 

The yoiiii}? merchant made no reply, but disappeared from the 
window. Viviana strained her gaze downwards ; but it was too 
dark to allow her to see anything. She, however, heard a noise 
like that oeeasioned by a file ; and shortly afterwards a few 
muttered words informed her that the priest was passing through 
the window. The cords of the ladder shook against the bars of 
iier window, — and she held her breath for fear. From this state 
of suspense she was relieved in a few minutes by Humphrey 
Chetham, who informed hor that Oldcorne had descended in 
safety, and was in the boat with Guy Fawkes. 

"I will fulfil my promise/' replied Viviana, trembling; *'but 
I fear my strength will fail me." 

*' You had better find death below than tarry here," replied 
Humphrey Chetham, who as he spoke was rapidly filing through 
the iron bar. " In a few minutes this impediment will be re- 
moved." 

The 3'oung merchant worked hard, and in a short time the 
stout bar yielded to his efforts. 

" Now, then," he cried, springing into the room, " you are free." 

" I dare not make the attempt," said Viviana ; " my strength 
utterly fails me." 

" Na}', then," he replied ; " I will take the risk upon myself. 
You must not remain here." 

So saying, he caught her in his arms, and bore her through 
the window. 

With some difficulty, and no little risk, he succeeded in gaining 
a footing on the ladder. This accomplished, he began slowly to 
descend. When half way down, he found he had overrated his 
strength, and he feared he should be compelled to quit his hold ; 
but, nerved by his passion, he held on, and making a desperate 
effort, completed the descent in safety. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE FATE OF THE PUKSUIVANT. 

Assisted by the stream, and plying his oars with great rapidity, 
Guy Fawkes soon left the town far behind him ; nor did he 
relax his exertions until checked by Humphrey Chetham. He 
then ceased rowing, and directed the boats towards the left bank 
of the river. 

" Here we propose to land," observed the young merchant to 
Viviana. " We are not more than a hundred yards from Ordsall 
Cave, where you can take refuge for a short time, while I pro- 
ceed to the Hall, and ascertain whether you can return to it 
with safety.** 







/..CC i^ cccc 



THE PURSUIVANT. 67 

*' I place myself entirely in your hands," she replied ; " but I 
fear such a course will be to rush into the very face of danger. 
Oh ! that I could join my father at Holywell I With him I 
should feel secure." 

"Means may be found to effect your wishes," returned 
Humphrey Chetham ; *' but, after the suffering you have re- 
cently endured, it will scared}' be prudent to undei'take so long 
a journey without a few hours' repose. To-morrow, — or the 
next day, — you may set out." 

" I am fully equal to it now," rejoined Viviana, eagerly ; 
" and any fatigue I may undergo will not equal my present 
anxiety. You have already done so much for me, that I venture 
to presume still further upon your kindness. Provide some 
means of conveyance for me and for Father Oldcorne to Chester, 
and I shall for ever be beholden to vou." 

" I will not only do what you desire, Viviana, if it be 
possible," answered Chetham; "but, if you will allow me, 
I will serve as your escort." 

" And I, also," added Guy Fawkes. 

*' All I fear is, that your strength may fail you," continued the 
young merchant, in a tone of uneasiness. 

" Fear nothing then," replied Viviana. " I am made of 
firmer material than you imagine. Think only of what //om can 
do, and doubt not my ability to do it, also." 

"I ever deemed you of a courageous nature, daughter," 
observed Oldcorne ; " but your resolution surpasses my belief" 

B3' this time the boat had approached the shore. Leaping 
upon the rocky bank, the young merchant assisted Viviana to 
land, and then performed the same service for the priest. Guy 
Fawkes was the last to disembark ; and, having pulled the skiff 
aground, be followed the others, who waited for him at a short 
distance. The night was profoundly dark, and the path they 
had taken, being shaded by large trees, was scarcely discernible. 
Carefully guiding Viviana, who leaned on him for support, the 
young merchant proceeded at a slow pace, and with the utmost 
caution. Suddenly, they were surprised and alarmed by a vivid 
blaze of light bursting through the trees on the left. 

" Some building must be on fire !" exclaimed Viviana, 

"It is Ordsall Hall, — it is your father's residence," cried 
Humphrey Chetham. 

" It is the work of that accursed pursuivant, I will be sworn," 
said Guy Fawkes. 

"If it be so, may Heaven's fire consume him 1" rejoined 
Oldcorne. 

"Alas! alas!" cried Viviana, bursting into tears, "1 thought 
myself equal to every calamity ; but this new stroke of fate is 
more than I can bear." 

4.S she spoke, the conflagration evidently increased. The 



68 GUY FAWKES. 

sky was illumined by the red reflection oftheflanieo; and as 
the party hurried forward to a rising ground, whence a better 
view could be obtained of the spectacle, they saw the dark walls 
of the ancient mansion apparently wrapped in the devouring 
element. 

" Let us hasten thither," cried Viviana, distractedly. 

" I and Guy Fawkes will fly there," replied the young mer- 
chant, " and render all the assistance in our power. But, first, 
let me convey you to the cave." 

More dead tlian alive, Viviana suffered herself to be borne in 
that direction. Making his way over every impediment, Chetham 
soon readied the excavation ; and depositing his lovely burthen 
upon the stone couch, and leaving her in charge of the priest, he 
hurried with Guy Fawkes towards the Hall. 

On arriving at the termination of the avenue, they found, to 
their great relief, that it was not the main structure, but an out- 
building which was in flames, and from its situation the young 
merchant conceived it to be the stables. As soon as they made 
this discovery, they slackened their pace, being apprehensive, 
from the shouts and other sounds that reached them, that some 
hostile party might be among the assemblage. Crossing the 
drawbridge — which was fortunately lowered, — they were about 
to shape their course towards the stables, which lay at the 
further side of the Hall, when they perceived the old steward, 
Heydocke, standing at the doorway and wringing his hands in 
distraction. Humphrey Chetham immediately called to him. 

" I should know that voice I" cried the old man, stepping 
forward. " Ah ! Mr. Chetham, is it you ? You are arrived at 
a sad time, sir — a sad time — to see the old house, where I have 
dwelt, man and boy, sixty years and more, in flames. But one 
calamity has trodden upon the heels of another. Ever since Sir 
William departed for Holywell nothing has gone right — nothing 
whatever. First, the house was searched by the pursuivant and 
his gang; then, my young mistress disappeared ; then it was 
rifled by these plunderers ; and now, to crown all, it is on fire, 
and will speedily be burnt to the ground." 

" Say not so," replied the young nierchant. " The flames have 
not yet reached the Hall ; and, if exertion is used, they may be 
extinguished without further mischief." 

" Let those who have kindled them extinguish them," replied 
Heydocke, sullenly. " I will not raise hand more." 

" Who are the incendiaries ?" demanded Fawkes. 

" The pursuivant and his myrmidons," replied Heydocke. 
** They came here to-night; and after ransacking the house 
under pretence of procuring further evidence against my master, 
and carrying off everything valuable they could collect, — plate, 
jewels, ornaments, money, and even wearing-apparel, — they 
ended by locking up all the servants, — except myself, who 



THE PURSUIVANT. 69, 

managed to elude their vigilance, — in the cellar, and setting fire 
to the stables." 

" Wretches I" exclaimed Humphrey Chetham. 

** Wretches, indeed !" repeated the steward. " But this is 
not all the villany they contemplate. I had concealed myself in 
the store-room, under a heap of lumber, and in searching for me 
the}' chanced upon a barrel of gunpowder — " 

'* Well 1" interrupted Guy Fawkes. 

** Well, sir," pursued Heydocke, "I heard the pursuivant re- 
mark to one of his comrades, ' This is a lucky discovery. If we 
can't find the steward, we'll blow him and the old house to the 
devil.' Just then, some one came to tell him I was hidden in the 
stables, and the whole troop adjourned thither. But being 
baulked of their prey, I suppose, they wreaked their vengeance 
in the way you perceive." 

" No doubt," rejoined Humphrey Chetham. " But they shall 
bitterly rue it. I will myself represent the affair to the Com- 
missioners." 

" It will be useless," groaned Heydocke. " There is no law 
to protect the property of a Catholic." 

'* Where is the barrel of gunpowder you spoke of?" asked 
Guy Fawkes, as if struck by a sudden idea. 

" The villains took it with them when they quitted the store- 
room," replied the steward. "I suppose they have got it in the 
7ard." 

" They have lighted a fire which shall be quenched with their 
blood," rejoined Fawkes, fiercely. " Follow me. I may need 
jou both." 

So saying, he darted off, and turning the corner, came in 
front of the blazing pile. Occupying one side of a large 
quadrangular court, the stables were wholly disconnected with 
the Hall, and though the fire burnt furiously, yet as the wind 
carried the flames and sparks in a contrary direction, it was 
possible the latter building might escape if due precaution 
were taken. So far, however, from this being the case, it 
seemed the object of the bystanders to assist the progress of 
the cotjflcigration. Several horses, saddled and bridled, had 
been removed from the stable, and placed within an open 
cowhouse. To these Guy Fawkes called Chetham's attention, 
and desired him and the old steward to secure some of them. 
Hastily giving directions to Heydocke, the young merchant 
obeyed, — sprang on the back of the nearest courser, and 
seizing the bridles of two others, rode off with them. His 
example was followed by Heydocke, and one steed only was 
left. Such was the confusion and clamour prevailing around, 
that the above proceeding passed unnoticed. 

Guy Fawkes, meanwhile, ensconcing himself behind the 
court-gate, looked about for the barrel of gunpowder. F**r some 



70^ .GUY FAWKES. r 

time he could discover no trace of it. At Icnnrtli, beneath a 
shed, not far from him, he perceived a soldier seated upon a 
small cask, which he had no doubt v^ras the object he vi^as in 
search of So intent was the man upon the spectacle before him, 
that he was wholly imaware of the approach of an enemy ; and 
creeping noiselessly up to him, Guy Fawkes felled him to the 
ground with a blow from the heavy butt-end of his petronel. 
The action was not perceived by the others ; and carrying the 
cask out of the yard, Fawkes burst in the lid, and ascertained 
that the contents were what they had been represented. He then 
glanced around, to see how he could best execute his purpose. 

On the top of the wall adjoining the stables he beheld the 
pursuivant, with three or four soldiers, giving directions and 
issuing orders. Another and lower wall, forming the opposite 
side of the quadrangle, and built on the edge of the moat, ap- 
proached the scene of the fire, and on this, Guy Fawkes, with 
the barrel of gunpowder on his shoulder, mounted. Concealing 
himself behind a tree which overshadowed it, he watched a 
favourable moment for his enterprise. 

He had not to wait long. Prompted by some undefinable 
feeling, which caused him to rush upon his destruction, the pur- 
suivant ventured upon the roof of the stables, and was followed 
by his companions. No sooner did this occur, than Guy Fawkes 
dashed forward, and hurled the barrel with all his force into the 
midst of the flames, throwing himself at the same moment into 
the moat. The cx])losion was instantaneous and tremendous; — 
so loud as to be audible even under the water. Its effects were 
terrible. The bodies of the pursuivant and his companions were 
blown into the air, and carried to the further side of the moat. 
Of those standing before the building, several were destro}'ed, 
and all more or less injured. The walls were thrown down by 
the concussion, and the roof and its fiery fragments projected 
into the moat. An effectual stop was put to the conflagration ; 
and, when Guy Fawkes rose to the boiling and agitated surface 
of the water, the flames were entirely extinguished. Hearing 
groans on the opposite bank of the moat, he forced his way 
through the blazing beams, which were hissing near him ; and 
snatching up a still burning fragment, hastened in the direction 
of the sound. In the blackened and mutilated object that met 
his gaze, he recognised the pursuivant. The dying wretch also 
recognised him, and attempted to speak; but in vain — his 
tongue refused its office, and with a horrible attempt at ai^ticula- 
tion, he expired. 

Alarmed by the explosion, the domestics, — who it has already 
been mentioned were confined in the cellar, — were rendered so 
desperate by their fears, that they contrived to break out of their 
prison, and now hastened to the stables to ascertain the cauSe of 
the report. Leaving them to assist the sufferers, whose dreadful 



THE PILGRIMAGE. 71 

groans awakened sbmt feelinp;s of compunction in his iron breast* 
Guy Fawlces caught the steed, — which had broken its bridle and 
rushed off, and now stood shivering, shaking, and drenched in 
moisture near the drawbridge, — and, mounting it, galloped 
towards the cave. 

At its entrance, he was met by Humphrey Chetham and Old- 
corne, who eagerly inquired what had happened. 

Guy Favvkes briefly explained. 
' " It is the hand of Heaven manifested by your arm, my son," 
observed the priest. " Would that it had stricken the tyrant and 
apostate prince by w^hom our church is persecuted I But his turn 
will speedily arrive." 

" Peace, father !" cried Guy Fawkes, sternly. 

" I do not lament the fate of the pursuivant," observed Hum* 
phrey Chetham. '* But this is a frightful waste of human life—* 
and in such a cause !" 

" It is the cause of Heaven, young sir," rejoined the priest, 
angrily. 

" I do not think so," returned Chetham ; " and, but for my 
devotion to Viviana, I would have no further share in it." 

" You are at liberty to leave us, if you think proper," retorted 
the priest, coldly. 

" Nay, say not so, father," interposed Viviana, who had been 
an unobserved listener to the foregoing discourse. " You owe 
your life — your liberty, to Mr. Chetham." 

" IVue, daughter," replied the priest. " I have been too hasty, 
and entreat his forgiveness." 

"' You have it, reverend sir," rejoined the 3'oung merchant. 
"And now. Master Heydocke," he added, turning to the steward, 
*' you may return to the Hall with safety. No one will molest 
you more, and your presence may be needed." 

" But my young mistress — " said Heydocke. 

" I am setting out for Holywell to join my father," replied 
Viviana. " You will receive our instructions from that place." 

"It is well," returned the old man, bowing respectfully. 
*' Heaven shield us from further misfortune !" 

Humphrey Chetham having assisted Viviana into the saddle, 
and the rest of the party having mounted, they took the road to 
Chester, while Heydocke returned to the Hall. 



CHAPTER XL 

THE PILGRIM/\.GE TO ST. WINIFHED'S WELL. 

Early on the following morning, the party, who had ridden 
hard, and had paused only for a short time at Kiuusford tof est 



72 GUY FAWKES. 

their steeds, approached the ancient and picturesque city of 
Chester. Skirting its high, and then partly fortified walls, above 
which appeared the massive tower of the venerable cathedral, 
they passed through the east-gate, and proceeding along the 
Btreet deriving its name from that entrance, were about to halt 
before the door of a large hostel, called the Saint Werburgh's 
Abbey, when, to their great surprise, they perceived Catesby 
riding towards them. 

" I thought I could not be mistaken," cried the latter, as he 
drew near and saluted Viviana. " I was about to set out for 
Manchester with a despatch to you from your father. Miss Rad- 
cliffe, when this most unexpected and fortunate encounter spares 
me the journey. But may I ask why I see you here, and thus 
attended ?" he added, glancing uneasily at Hiniiphrey Chetham. 

A lew words from Father Oldcorne explained all. Catesby 
affected to bend his brow, and appear concerned at the relation. 
But he could scarcely repress his satisfaction. 

" Sir William Radcliffe must join us now," he whispered to 
the priest. 

" He must — he shally'' replied Oldcorne, in the same tone. 

*' Your father wishes you to join him at Holt, Miss Radcliffe," 
remarked Catesby, turning to her, " whence the pilgrimage 
starts to-morrow for Saint Winfred's Well. There are already 
nearly thirty devout persons assembled." 

" Indeed I" replied Viviana. " May I inquire their names." 

" Sir Everard and Lady Digby," replied Catesby ; " the Lady 
Anne Vauxand her sister, Mrs. Brooksby ; Mr. Ambrose Rook- 
wood and his wife, the two Winters, Tresham, Wright, Fathers 
Garnet and Fisher, and many others, in all probability unknown 
to you. The procession started ten days ago from Gothurst, in 
Buckinghamshire, Sir Everard Digby's residence, and proceeded 
from thence by slow stages to Norbrook and Haddington, at each 
of which houses it halted for some days. Yesterday, it reacheti 
Holt, and starts, as 1 have just told you, to-morrow for Holy- 
■well. If you are so disposed, you will be able to attend it." 

" I will gladly do so," replied Viviana. " And since I find it 
is not necessary to hurry forward, I \\'\\\ rest myself for a short 
time here." 

So saying, she dismounted, and the whole party entered the 
hostel. Viviana withdrew to seek a short repose, and glance 
over her father's letter, while Catesby, Gu^^ Fawkes, and Old- 
corne, were engaged in deep consultation. Humphrey Chetham, 
perceiving that his attendance was no further required, and that 
he was an object of suspicion and dislike to Catesby, — for whom 
he also entertained a similar aversion, — prepared to return. 
And when Viviana made her appearance, lie advanced to bid 
her farewell. 

** I can be of no further service to you, Viviana," he said, is 



THE PILGRIMAGE. 7^ 

a mournful tone; **and as my presence might be as unwelcome 
to your father, as it seems to be to others of your friends, I will 
now take my leave." 

" Farewell, Mr. Chetham," she replied. *' I will not attempt 
to oppose your departure ; for, much as I grieve to lose you — 
and that I do so these tears will testify, — I feel that it is for the 
best. I owe you much— more — far more than I can ever repay. 
It would be unworthy in me, and unfair to you, to say that I do 
not, and shall not ever feel the deepest interest in you ; that, 
next to my father, there is no one whom I regard — nay, whom I 
love so much." 

" Love I Viviana ?" echoed the young merchant, trembling. 

*'Love, Mr. Chetham," she continued, turning very pale;. 
" since you compel me to repeat the word. I avow it boldly, 
because — " and her voice faltered, — " I would not have you; 
suppose me ungrateful, and because I never can be yours." 

*' I will not attempt to dissuade you from the fatal determina- 
tion you have formed of burying your charms in a cloister," re- 
joined Humphrey Chetham. '* But, oh I if you do love me, 
why condenm yourself — why condemn me to hopeless misery ?" 

" I will tell you why," replied Viviana. " Because you are 
not of my faith ; and because I never will wed a heretic." 

" I am answered," replied the young merchant, sadly. 

"Mr. Clietham," interposed Oldcorne, who had approached 
them unperceived ; *' it is in your power to change Viviana's 
determination." 

*' How?" asked the young merchant, starting. 

*' By being reconciled to the Church of Rome." 

*' Then it will remain unaltered," replied Chetham, firmly. 

"And, if Mr. Chetham would consent to this proposal, I 
would not," said Viviana. " Farewell," she added, extending 
her hand to him, which he pressed to his lips. " Do not let us 
prolong an interview so painful to us both. The best wish I 
can desire for you is, that we may never meet again." 

Without another word, and without hazarding a look at the 
object of his affections, Chetham rushed out of the room, and 
mounting his horse, rode off in the direction of Manchester. 

"Daughter," observed Oldcorne, as soon as he was gone, " I 
cannot too highly approve of your conduct, or too warmly 

applaud the mastery you display over your feelings. But '* 

and he hesitated. 

" But what, father?" cried Viviana, eagerly. " Do you think 
I have done wron<i|; in disinissiu"; him ?" 

"By no means, dear daughter," re])lied the priest. "You 
have acted most discreetly. But you will forgive me if I urge 
you— nay, implore you not to take the veil ; but rather to bestow 
your hand upon some Catholic gentleman " 

" Such as Mr. Catesby," interrupted Viviana, glancing in the 



T4 GUY FAWKES. 

<lirection of the individual she mentioned, who was walnhin,^ 
them narrowly from the further end of the room. 

" Ay, Mr. Catesby," repeated Oldcorne, affecting not to 
notice the scornful emphasis laid on the name. " None more 
(ittinn; could be found, nor more worthy of you. Our Cluirch 
lias not a more zealous servant and upholder ; and he avIU be 
at once a father and a hus!)and to you. Such a union would be 
highly profitable to our religion. And, though it is well for 
those whose hearts are burthencd with affliction, and who are 
finable to render any active service to their faith, to retire from 
the world, it behoves every sister of the Romisli Church to 
support it at a juncture like the present, at any sacrifice of 
personal feeling." 

" Urge me no more, father," replied Viviana, firmly. " I will 
make every sacrifice for my religion, consistent with principle 
and feeling. But I will not make this ; neither am I required to 
make it. And I beg you will entreat Mr. Catesbj- to desist from 
further importunit3^" 

Oldcorne bowed and retired. Nor was another syllable 
exchanged between them prior to their departure. 

Crossing the old bridge over the Dee, then defended at eacri 

~ CD ■' 

extremity by a gate and tower, the party took the road to Holt, 
where they arrived in abouc an hour. The recent conversation 
liad thrown a restraint over them, which was not removed during 
the journey. Habitually taciturn, as has already been remarked, 
Guy Fawkes seemed gloomier and more thoughtful than <:^vcr ; 
and tliough he rode by the side of Viviana, he did not volunteer 
a remark, and scarcely appeared conscious of her p^t^sence. 
Catesb}' and Oldcorne kept aloof, and it was not until they came 
in sight of the little town which formed their destination that 
the former galloped forward, and striking into the path on the 
right, begged Viviana to follow him. A turn in the road shortly 
afterwards showed them a large mansion screened by a grove of 
beech-trees. 

" That is the house to which we are going/' observed 
Oatesby. 

And as he spoke, they approached a lodge, the gates of which 
being opened by an attendant, admitted them to tlie avenue. 

Viviana's heart throbbed with delight at the anticipated meet- 
ing with her father; but she could not repress a feeling of 
anxiety at the distressing intelligence she had to impart to him. 
As she drew near the house she perceived him walking beneath 
the shade of the trees with two other persons ; and quickening 
her pace, sprang irom her siccd, and almost before he was aware 
of it was in his arms. 

" Why do I see you here so unexpectedly, my dear child?" 
cried Sir William liadcliffe, as soon as he had recovered from 
the surprise which her sudden appearance occasioned him. 



THE PILGRIMAGiE. 75; 

** Mr- Catesby only left tliis morning, charged with a letter 
ehirejiting you to set out without dela}^, — and now I behold you. 
What has happened ?" 

Viviana then recounted the occurrences of the last few days. 

"It is as I feared," replied Sir William, in a desponding tone. 
*' Our oppressors will never cease till they drive us to des- 
peration !" 

" They will not !" rejoined a voice behind him. " Well may 
we exclaim with the prophet — ' How long, O Lord, shall I cry, 
and thou wilt not hear? Shall I cry out to thee suffering 
violence, and thou wilt not save ? Why hast thou showed me 
iniquity and grievance, to see rapine and injustice before me? 
Why lookest thou upon them that do unjust things, and boldest 
thy peace when the wicked devoureth the man that is more just 
than himself?'" 

Viviana looked in the direction of the speaker and beheld a 
man in a priestly garb, whose countenance struck her forcibly. 
He was rather under the middle height, of a slight spare figure, 
and in age might be about fifty. His features, which in his 
Youth must have been pleasing, if not handsome, and which 
were still regular, were pale and emaciated ; but his eye was 
dark, and of unusual brilliancy. A single glance at this person 
satisfied her it was Father Garnet, the provincial of the English 
Jesuits; nor was she mistaken in her supposition. 

Of this remarkable person, so intimately connected with the 
main events of the history about to be related, it may be proper 
to offer some preliminary account. Born at Nottingham in 1554, 
in the reign of Queen Mary, and of obscure parentage, Henry 
Garnet was originally destined to the Protestant Church, and 
educated, with a view to taking orders, at Winchester school, 
whence it was intended he should be removed in due course to 
Oxford. But this design was never carried into effect. In- 
fluenced by motives, into which it is now scarcely worth while 
inquiring, and which have been contested by writers on both sides 
of the question, Garnet proceeded from Winchester to London, 
where he engaged himself as corrector of the press to a printer 
of law-books, named Tottel, in which capacity he became 
acquainted with Sir Edward Coke and Chief Justice Popham, — 
one of whom was afterwards to be the leading counsel against 
him, and the other his judge. After continuing in this employ- 
ment for two years, during which he had meditated a change in 
his religion, he went abroad, and travelling first to Madrid, and 
then to Rome, saw enough of the Catholic priesthood to confirm 
his resolution, and in 1575 he assumed the habit of a Jesuit. 
Pursuing his studies with the utmost zeal and ardour at the 
Jesuits' College, under the celebrated Bellarmine, and the no 
less celebrated Clavius, he made such progress, that upon the 
indisposition of the latter, he was able to fill the niatlicmatical 



76 GUY FAWKES. 

chair. Nor was he less skilled in philosophy, metaphysics, and 
divinity ; and his knowledge of Hebrew was so profound that 
he taught it publicly in the Roman schools. 

To an enthusiastic zeal in the cause of the religion he had 
espoused, Garnet added great powers of persuasion and 
eloquence, — a combination of qualities well fitting him for the 
office of a missionary priest ; and undismayed by the dangers he 
would have to encounter, and eager to propagate his doctrines, 
he solicited to be sent on this errand to his own country. At 
the instance of Father Persons, he received an appointment to 
the mission in 1586, and he secretly landed in England in the 
same year. Braving every danger, and shrinking from no 
labour, he sought on all hands to make proselytes to the ancient 
faith, and to sustain the wavering courage of its professors. Two 
years afterwards, on the imprisonment of the Superior of the 
Jesuits, being raised to that important post, he was enabled to 
extend liis sphere of action ; and redoubling his exertions in 
consequence, he so well discharged his duties, that it was mainly 
owing to him that the Catholic party was kept together during 
the fierce ])ersecutions of the latter end of Elizabeth's reign. 

(Compelled to personate various characters, as he travelled 
from place to place, Garnet had acquired a remarkable facility 
for disguise ; and such was his address and courage, that he nut 
unfrequcntly imposed upon the very officers sent in pursuit of 
him. Up to the period of Elizabeth's demise, he had escaped 
arrest; and, though involved in the treasonable intrigue with the 
king of Spain, and other conspiracies, he procured a general 
pardon under the great seal. His office and profession naturally 
brought him into contact with the chief Catholic families 
throughout the kingdom ; and he maintained an active corre- 
spondence with many of them, by means of his various agents 
and emissaries. The great object of his life being the restora- 
tion of the fallen religion, to accomplish this, as he conceived, 
great and desirable end, he was prepared to adopt any means, 
however violent or obnoxious. Wlien, under the seal of con- 
fession, Catesby revealed to him his dark designs, so far from 
discouraging him, all he counselled was caution. Having tested 
the disposition of the wealthier Romanists to rise against their 
oppressors, and finding a general insurrection, as has before been 
stated, impracticable, he gave every encouragement and assistance 
to the con.sj)iracy forming among the more desperate and discon- 
tented of the party. At his instigation, the present pilgrimage 
to Saint Winifred's Well was undertaken, in the hope that, when 
so large a body of the Catholics were collected together, some 
additional aid to the project might be obtained. 

One of the most mysterious and inexplicable portions of Garnet's 
history is that relating to Anne Vaux. This lady, the daughter 
of Lord Vaux of Harrowden, a rigid Catholic nobleman, and 



THE PILGRIMAGE. 77 

one of Garnet's earliest patrons and friends, on the death of her 
father, in 1595, attached herself to his fortunes, — accompanied 
him in all his missions, — shared all his privations and dangers, — 
and, regardless of cahininy or reproach, devoted herself entirely 
to his service. Wliat is not less singular, her sister, who had 
married a Catholic gentleman named Brooksby, became his 
equally zealous attendant. Their enthusiasm produced a similar 
effect on Mr. Brooksby ; and wherever Garnet went, all three 
accompanied him. 

By his side, on the present occasion, stood Sir Everavd Digby. 
Accounted one of the liandsomest, most accomplished, and best- 
informed men of his time, Sir Everard, at the period of this 
history only twenty-four, had married, when scarcely sixteen, 
Maria, heiress of the ancient and honourable family of Muishoe, 
with whom he obtained a large fortune, and the magnificent 
estate of Gothurst, or Gaythurst, in Buckinghamshire. Knighted 
by James the First at Belvoir Castle, on his way from Scotland 
to London, Digby, who had once formed one of the most 
brilliant ornaments of the court, had of late in a great degree 
retired from it. " Notwithstanding," writes Father Greenway, 
*' that he had dwelt much in the Queen's court, and was in the 
way of obtaining honours and distinction by his graceful manners 
and rare parts, he chose rather to bear the cross with the per- 
secuted Catholics, et vivere ahjectus in domo Domini, than to sail 
through the pleasures of a palace and the prosperities of the 
world, to the shipwreck of his conscience and the destruction of 
his soul." Having only when he completed his minority pro- 
fessed the Catholic religion, he became deeply concerned at its 
fallen state, and his whole thoughts were bent upon its restora- 
tion. This change in feeling was occasioned chiefly, if not 
altogether, by Garnet, by whom his conversion had been 
accomplished. 

Sir Everard Digby was richly attired in a black velvet doublet, 
with sleeves slashed with white satin, and wore a short mantle 
of the same material, similarly lined. He had the enormous 
trunk hose, heretofore mentioned as the distinguishing peculiarity 
of the costume of the period, and wore black velvet shoes, orna- 
mented with white roses. An ample ruff encircled his throat 
His hat was steeple-crowned, and somewhat broader in the leaf 
than was ordinarily worn, and shaded with a plume of black 
feathers. His hair was raven black, and he wore a pointed 
beard, and moustaches. His figure was tall and stately, and his 
features grave and finely formed. 

By this time the group had been joined by the others, and a 
friendly greeting took place. Guy Fawkes was presented by 
Catesby to Sir William Radcliffe and Sir Everard Digby. To 
Garnet he required no introduction, and Father Oldcorne 
was known to all. After a little further conversation, the 



73 GUY FAWKES 

party adjourned to the house, which belonged to a Welsh 
Catholic gentleman, named Griffiths, who, though absent at the 
tiiiie, had surrendered it to the use of" Sir Everard Dighy and 
his friends. 

On their entrance, Viviana was introduced by her father to 
Lady Digby, who presided as hostess, and welcomed her with 
great cordiality. She was then conducted to her own room, 
where she was speedily' joined by Sir William ; and they 
remained closeted together till summoned to the principal meal 
of the da}'. At the table, which was most hospitably served, 
Viviana found, in addition to her former companions, a large 
assemblage, to most of wiioin she was a stranger, consisting of 
Anne Vaux, Mr. Brooksby and his wife, Ambrose Rookwood, 
two brothers named Winter, two Wrights, Francis Tresham, — 
persons of whom it will be necessary to make particular mention 
hereafter, — and several others, in all amounting to thirty. 

The meal over, the company dispersed, and Viviana and her 
father, passing through an open window, wandered forth upon a 
beautiful and spreading lawn, and thence under the shade of 
the beech-trees. They had not been long here, anxiously con- 
ferring on recent events, when they perceived Garnet and 
Catesby approaching. 

" Father, dear father !" cried Viviana, hastily, " I was about 
to warn you ; but I have not time to do so now. Some dark 
and dangerous plot is in agitation to restore our religion. Mr. 
Catesby is anxious to league you with it. Do not — do not yield 
to his solicitations I" 

" Fear nothing on that score, Viviana," replied Sir William, 
** I have already perplexities enow, without adding to them." 

" 1 will leave you, then," she replied. And, as soon as the 
others came up, she made some excuse for withdrawing, and 
returned to the house. The window of her chamber com- 
manded the avenue, and from it she watched the group. They 
remained for a long time pacing up and down, in earnest con- 
versation. By and by, they were joined by Oldcorne and 
Fawkcs. Then came a third party, consisting of the Winters 
and Wrights; and, lastly. Sir Everard Digby and Tresham 
swelled the list. 

The assemblage was then harangued by Catesby, and the 
most profound attention paid to his address. Viviana kept her 
eye fixed upon her father's countenance, and from its changing 
e.xpi'ession inferred what effect the speech ])roduced upon him. 
At its conclusion, the assemblage separated in little groups ; and 
she perceived, with great uneasiness, that Father Garnet passed 
his arm through that of her father, and led him away. Some 
time elapsed, and neither of them re-appeared. 

" My warning was in vain ; he has joined them I" she 
exclaimed. 



riiE PILGRIMAGE. r»« 

*' No, Viviana I" cried her father's voice behind her. *' I have 
no^ joined thcni. Nor shall I do so." 

"Heaven be praised!" she exclaimed, flinging her arms 
around his neck. 

Neither of them were aware tlint they wore overheard bv 
Garnet, who had noiselessly followed Sir WiUiam into the i-oom, 
and muttered to himself, " For all this, he skull join the plot, 
and she shall wed Catesby." 

He then coughed slightly, to announce his presence ; and, 
apologizing to Viviana for the intrusion, told her he came to 
confess her previously to the celebration of mass, which would 
take place that evening, in a small chapel in the house. 
Wholly obedient to the command of her spiritual advisers, 
Viviana instantly signified her assent; and, her father having 
withdrawn, she laid open the inmost secrets of her heart to the 
Jesuit. Severely reprobating her love for a heretic, before he 
would give her absolution, Garnet enjoined her, as a penance, to 
walk barefoot to the holy well on the morrow, and to make 
a costly offering at the shrine of the saint. Compliance being 
promised to his injunction, he pronounced the absolution, and 
departed. 

Soon after this, mass was celebrated by Garnet, and the sacra- 
ment administered to the assemblage. 

An hour before daybreak, the party again assembled in the 
chapel, where matins were performed ; after which, the female 
devotees, who were clothed in snow-white woollen robes, with 
wide sleeves and hoods, and having large black crosses woven in 
front, retired for a short time, and re-appeared, with their feet 
bared, and hair unbound. Each had a large rosary attached to 
the cord that bound her waisr. 

Catesby thought Viviana had never appeared so lovely as in 
this costume ; and as he gazed at her white and delicately 
formed feet, her small rounded ankles, her dark and abundant 
tresses falling in showers almost to the ground, he became more 
deeply enamoured than before. His passionate gaze was, how- 
ever, unnoticed, as the object of it kept her eyes steadily fixed 
on the ground. Lady Digby, who was a most beautiful woman, 
scarcely appeared to less advantage ; and, as she walked side by 
side with Viviana In the procession, the pair attracted universal 
admiration from all who beheld them. 

Everything being at last in readiness, and the order of march 
fully arranged, two youthful choristers, in surplices, chanting a 
hyum to Saint Winifred, set forth. They were followed by two 
men bearing silken banners, on one of which was displayed the 
martyrdom of the saint whose shrine they were about to visit, 
and on the other a lamb carrying a cross; next came Fathers 
Oklcorne and Fisher, each sustaining a large silver crucifix ; next. 
Garnet alone, in the full habit of his order ; next, the femaies. 



IMS GUY FAWKES. 

in tne attire before described, and walkinj^ two and two; next. 
Sir Everard Digby and Sir William lladcliffc ; and lastly, the 
rest of the pilgrims, to the number of fourteen. These were all 
on foot. But at the distance of fifty paces behind them rode 
Guy Fawkcs and Catesby, at the head of twenty well-armed 
and well-mounted attendants, intended to serve as a guard in 
case of need. 

In such order, this singular procession moved forward at a 
slow pace, taking its course along a secluded road leading 
to the ridge of hills extending from the neighbourhood of 
Wrexham to Mold, and from thence, in an almost unbroken 
chain, to Holywell. 

Along these heights, whence magnificent views were obtained 
of the broad estuary of the Dee and the more distant ocean, the 
train proceeded without interruption; and though the road 
selected was one seldom traversed, and through a country thinly 
peopled, still, the rumour of the pilgrimage having gone abroad, 
hundreds were stationed at different points to behold it. Some 
expressions of disapprobation were occasionally manifested by 
the spectators; but the presence of the large armed force effec- 
tually prevented any interference. 

Whenever such a course could be pursued, the procession 
took its way over the sward. Still the sufferings of the females 
7.vere severe in the extreme ; and before Viviana had proceeded 
a mile, her white, tender feet were cut and bruised by the sharp 
llints over which she walked; every step she took leaving a 
bloody print behind it. Lady Digby was in little better condi- 
tion. But such was the zeal by which they, in common with 
all the other devotees following them, were animated, that not a 
sinnrle murmur was uttered. 

Proceeding in this way, they reached at mid-day a small 
stone chapel on the summit of the hill overlooking Plas- 
Newydd, where they halted, and devotions being performed, 
the females bathed their lacerated limbs in a neighbouring 
brook, after which they were rubbed with a cooling and 
odorous ointment. Thus refreshed, they again set forward, and 
halting a second time at Plas-Isaf, where similar religious 
ceremonies were observed, they rested for the day at a lodging 
prepared for their recej)tion in the vicinity of Mold. 

The night being passed in prayer, early in the morning they 
commenced their march in the same order as before. When 
Viviana first set her feet to the ground, she felt as if she were 
treading on hot iron, and the pain was so excruciating, that she 
could not repress a cry. 

" Heed not your sufferings, dear daughter," observed Garnet, 
compassionately ; " the waters of the holy fountain will heal tho 
wounds both of soul and body." 

Overcoming her agony by a powerful eflfort, she contrived to 



THE PILGRIMAGE. $\ 

limp forward ; and the whole party was soon after In motion. 
Halting for two hours at Pentre-Terfyn, and again at Skeviog, 
the train, towards evening, reached the summit of the hill over- 
looking Holywell, at the foot of which could be seen the ruins 
of Basingwerk Abbey, and the roof of the ancient chapel erected 
over the sacred spring. At this sight, those who were foremost 
in the procession fell on their knees ; and the horsemen dis- 
mounting, imitated their example. An earnest supplication to 
Saint Winifred was then poured forth by Father Garnet, in 
which all the others joined, and a hymn in her honour chanted 
by the choristers. 

Their devotions ended, the whole train arose, and walked 
slowly down the steep descent. As they entered the little town, 
which owes its name and celebrity to the miraculous spring 
rising within it, they were met by a large concourse of people, 
who had flocked from Flint and the other neighbouring places to 
witness the ceremonial. Most of the inhabitants of Holywell, 
holding their saintly patroness in the deepest veneration, viewed 
this pilgrimage to her shrine as a proper tribute of respect, while 
those of the opposite faith were greatly impressed by it. As the 
procession advanced, the crowd divided into two lines to allow 
it passage, and many fell on their knees imploring a blessing 
from Garnet, which he in no instance refused. When within a 
hundred yards of the sacred well, they were met by a priest, 
tbllowed by another small train of pilgrims. A Latin oration 
having been pronounced by this priest, and re|)lied to in the 
same language by Garnet, the train was once more put in 
motion, and presently reached the ancient fabric built over the 
sacred fountain. 

The legend of Saint Winifred is so well known, that it is 
scarcely necessary to repeat it. For the benefit of the unin- 
formed, however, it may be stated that she flourished about the 
middle of the seventh century, and was the daughter of Thewith, 
one of the chief lords of Wales. Devoutly educated by a monk 
named Beuno, who afterwards received canonization, she took 
the veil, and retired to a small monastery (the ruins of which 
still exist), built by her father near the scene of her subsequent 
martyrdom. Persecuted by the addresses of Caradoc, son of Alan, 
Prince of Wales, she fled from him to avoid his violence, tie 
followed, and inflamed by fui'y at her resistance, struck off" her 
head. For this atrocity, the earth instantly opened and swal- 
lowed him alive, while from the spot where the head had fillen 
gushed forth a fountain of unequalled force and purity, pro- 
ducing more than a hundred tons a minute. The bottom of this 
miraculous well is strewn with pebbles streaked with rca v«.nns, 
in memory of the virgin saint from whose blood it sprung. On 
its margin grows an odorous moss, while its gelid and tranelr.ccnt 
waters are esteemed a remedy for many disorders, Winifred's 

G 



62 GUY FAWKES. 

career did not terminate with her decapitation. Resuscitated 
by the prayers of Saint Beuno, she lived many years a life of the 
utmost sanctity, bearing, as a mark of th.c miracle performed in 
her behalf, a narrow crimson circle round her throat. 

Passing the chapel adjoining the well, built in the reign of 
Henry the Seventh by his mother, the pious Countess of Rich- 
mond, the pilgrims came to the swift clear stream rushing from 
the well. Instead of ascending the steps leading to the edifice 
built over the spring, they ])lunged into the stream, and crossing 
it entered the structure by a doorway on the furth.er side. 
Erected by the Countess of Richmond at the same period as the 
chapel, this structure, quadrangular in form, and of great beaut}", 
consists of light clustered pillars and mouldings, supporting the 
most gorgeous tracery and groining, the whole being ornamented 
with sculptured bosses, pendent capitals, fretwork, niches, and 
tabernacles. In the midst is a large stone basin, to receive the 
water of the fountain, around which the procession now grouped, 
and as soon as all were assembled, at the command of Father 
Garnet they fell on their knees. 

It was a solemn and striking sight to see this large group 
prostrated around that beautiful fountain, and covered by that 
ancient structure, — a touching thing to hear the voice of prayer 
mingling with the sound of the rushing water. After this, ihcy 
all arose. A hymn was then chanted, and votive offerings inade 
at the shrine of the saint. The male portion of the assemblage 
then followed Garnet to the chapel, where further religious rites 
were performed, while the female devotees, remaining near the 
fountain, resigned themselves to the care of several attendants 
of their own sex, who, having bathed their feet in the water, 
applied some of the fragrant moss above described to the 
wounds ; and, such was the faith of the patients, or the virtue 
of the application, that in a short time they all felt perfectly 
restored, and able to join their companions in the chapel. In 
this way the evening was spent ; and it was not until late that 
they finished their devotions, and departed to the lodgings pi'o- 
vided for them in the town. 

Impressed with a strange superstitious feeling, which he could 
scarcely acknowledge to himself, Guy Fawkes determined to 
pass the night near the well. Accordingly, without communi- 
cating his intention to his companions, he threw a small knap- 
sack over his shoulder, containing a change of linen, and a few 
articles of attire, and proceeded thither. 

It was a brilliant moonlight night, and, as the radiance, 
streaming through the thin clustered columns of the structure, 
lighted up its fairy architecture, and fell upon the clear cold 
waves of the fountain, revealing the blood-streaked pebbles 
beneath, the effect was inexpressiblx h^-nvxifiii. So charmed was 
Ouy Fawkes by the sight, that ho remained for some time 



THE VISION. 83 

Standing near the edge of the basin, as if fascinated by the 
marvellous spring that boiled up and sparkled at his feet. 
Resolved to try the efficacy of the bath, he threw off his clothes 
and plunged into it. The water was cold as ice ; but on emerg- 
ing from it he felt wonderfully refreshed. Having dressed him- 
self, he wrapped his cloak around him, and, throwing himself on 
the stone floor, placed the knapsack under his head, and 
grasping a petronel in his right hand, to be ready in case of 
a surprise, disposed himself to slumber. 

Accustomed to a soldier's couch, he soon fell asleep. He had 
not long closed his eyes when he dreamed that from out of the 
well a female figure, slight and unsubstantial as the element 
from which it sprang, arose. It was robed in what resembled a 
nun's garb ; but so thin and vapoury, that the very moonlight 
shone through it. From the garments of the figure, as well as 
from the crimson circle round its throat, he knew that it must be 
the patroness of the place, the sainted Winifred, that he beheld. 
He ielt no horror, but the deepest awe. The arm of the figure 
was raised, — its benignani regards fixed upon him, — and, as soon 
as it gained the level of the basin, it glided towards him. 



CHAPTER XH. 

THE VISION. 



Before daybreak on the following morning. Garnet, who had 
been engaged in earnest conference with Catesby during the 
whole of the night, repaired to the sacred spring for the purpose 
of bathing within it, and performing his solitary devotions at 
the shrine of the saint. On ascending the steps of the structure, 
he perceived Guy Fawkes kneeling beside the fountain, appa- 
rently occupied in prayer ; and, being unwilling to disturb him, 
he paused. Finding, however, after the lapse of a few minutes, 
that he did not move, he advanced towards him, and was about 
to lay his hand upon his shoulder, when he was arrested by the 
very extraordinary expression of his countenance. His lips were 
partly open, but perfectly motionless, and his eyes, almost start- 
ing from their sockets, were fixed upon the boiling waters of 
the spring. His hands were clasped, and his look altogether 
was that of one whose faculties were benumbed by awe or 
terror. 

Aware of the fanatical and enthusiastical character of Faw^kes, 
Garnet had little doubt that, by keeping long vigil at the foun- 
tain, he had worked himself into such a state of over-excitement 
as to imagine he beheld some preternatural appearance ; and it 
was with some curiosity that ho awaited the result. Glancing in 



84 GUY FAWKES 

the same direction, his eye rested upon the bottom of the well, 
but he could discern nothino; except the glittering and blood- 
gtreaked pebbles, and the reflection of the early sunbeams that 
quivered on its steaming surface. At length, a convulsion 
passed over the frame of the kneeler, and heaving a deep sigh 
he arose. Turning to quit the spring, he confronted Garnet, 
and demanded, in a low voice — 

*' Have you likewise seen the vision, father?" 

Garnet made no reply, but regarded him steadfast!}'. 

" Has the blessed VViuifred appeared to you, I say?" continued 
Fawkes. 

"No," answered Garnet; "I am but just come hither. It is 
for you, my son, — the favoured of Heaven, — for whom such 
glorious visions are reserved. I have seen nothing. How did 
the saint manifest herself to you?" 

" In her earthly form," replied Fawkes; "or rather, I should 
say, in the semblance of the form she bore on earth. Listen to 
me, father. I came hither last night to make my couch beside 
the fountain. After plunging into it, I felt marvellously re- 
freshed, and disposed myself to rest on that stone. Scarcely 
had my eyes closed when the saintly virgin appeared to mc. 
Oh ! father, it was a vision of seraphic beauty, such as the eye 
of man hath seldom seen !" 

"And such only as it is permitted the elect of Heaven to 
see," observed Garnet. 

"Alas I father," rejoined Guy Fawkes, "I can lay little 
claim to such an epithet. Nay, I begin to fear that I have 
incurred the displeasure of Heaven," 

" Think not so, my son," replied Garnet, uneasily. " Relate 
your vision, and I will interpret it to you." 

" Thus then it was, father," returned Fawkes. " The figure 
of the saint arose from out the well, and gliding towards me laid 
its finger u{)on my brow. My eyes opened, but I was as one 
oppressed with a nightmare, unable to move. I then thouf>;ht I 
heard my name pronounced by a voice so wondrously sweet that 
my senses were quite ravished. Fain would I have prostrated 
myself, but my limbs refused their office. Neither could i speak, 
for my tongue was also enchained." 

" Proceed, my son," observed Garnet ; " I am curious to know 
what ensued." 

" Father," replied Guy Fawkes, " if the form I beheld was 
that of Saint Winifred, — and that it was so, I cannot doubt, — the 
enterprise on which we are engaged will fail. It is not approved 
by Heaven. The vision warned me to desist." 

" You cannot desist, my son," rejoined Garnet, sternly. ** Your 
oath binds you to the project." 

" True," replied Fawkes ; " and I have no thought of aban- 
doning it. But I am well assured it will not be successful." 




f<^e^ 



cy/y...... ^ ^: . 4f^ ^/^-:-Wy 



/y-fjY.^?^^ /^ '^'9^/// 



THE VISION. 85 

" Your thinking so, my son, will be the most certain means of 
reahzing your apprehensions," repHed Garnet, gravely. ** But 
let me hear the exact words of the spirit. You may have mis- 
understood them." 

"I cannot repeat them precisely, father," replied Fawkes; 
•* but I could not misapprehend their import, which was the 
deepest commiseration for our forlorn and fallen church, but a 
positive interdiction against any attempt to restore it by blood- 
shed. 'Suffer on,' said the spirit; 'bear the yoke patiently, 
and in due season God will avenge your wrongs, and free you 
from oppression. You are thus afflicted that your faith may be 
purified. But if you resort to violence, you v/ill breed confusion, 
and injure, not serve, the holy cause on which you are embarked.* 
Such, father, was the language of the saint. It was uttered in a 
tone so tender and sympathizing, that every word found an echo 
in my heart, and I repented having pledged myself to the under- 
taking. But, when I tell you that she added that all concerned 
in the conspiracy should perish, perhaps you may be deterred 
from proceeding further." 

"Never!" returned Garnet. "Nor will I suffer any one 
engaged in it to retreat. What matter if a few perish, if the 
many survive? Our blood will not be shed in vain, it' the true 
religion of God is restored. Nay, as strongly as the blessed 
Winifred herself resisted the impious ravisher, Caradoc, will I 
resist all inducements to turn aside from my purpose. It may 
be that the enterprise icill fail. It may be that we sliall perish. 
But if we die thus, we shall die as martyrs, and our deaths will 
be highly profitable to the Catholic religion." 

" I doubt it," observed Fawkes, 

" My son," said Garnet, solemnly, " I have ever looked upon 
you as one destined to be the chief agent in the great work of 
redemption. I have thought that, like Judith, you were chosen 
to destroy the Ilolofernes who oppresses us. Having noted in 
you a religious fervour, and resolution admirably fitting you for 
the task, I thought, and still think you expressly chosen by 
Heaven for it. But, if you have any misgiving, I beseech you 
to withdraw from it. I will absolve you from your oath ; and, 
enjoining you only to strictest secrecy, will pray you to depart at 
once, lest your irresolution should be communicated to the 
others." 

"Fear nothing from me, father," rejoined Fawkes. *'Ihave 
no irresolution, no wavering, nor shall any engaged with us be 
shaken by my apprehension. You have asked me what I saw and 
heard, and I have told you truly. But I will speak of it no more.'* 

" It will be well to observe silence, my son," answered Garnet; 
'* for though you, like myself, are unnerved, its effect on others 
might be injurious. But you have n(;t yet brought your relatioQ 
to an end. How did the figure disapjx^ar ?" 



66 GUY FAVVKES. 

" As it arose, father," replied Fawkcs. *' Uttering; in a sweet 
but solemn voiec, which yet rings in my ears, the words, 'Be 
warned I' it glided back to the fountain, whose waves as it ap- 
proached grew still, and gradually melted from my view." 

" But when I came hither, you appeared to be gazing at the 
spring," said Garnet. " What did you then behold?" 

" M}' first impulse on awakening about an hour ago," replied 
Fawkes, " was to prostrate myself before the fountain, and to 
entreat the intercession of the saint, who had tlius marvellously 
revealed herself to me. As I prayed, methought its clear lucid 
waters became turbid, and turned to the colour of blood." 

" It is a type of the blood of slaughtered brethren of our faith, 
which has been shed by our oppressors," rejoined Garnet. 

" Rather of our own, which shall be poured forth in this 
cause," retorted Fawkes. " No matter. I am prepared to lose 
the last drop of mine." 

" And I," said Garnet ; " and, I doubt not, like those holy 
men who have suffered for their faith, that we shall both win a 
crown of martyrdom." 

" Amen 1" exclaimed Fawkes. " And you think the sacrifice 
we are about to offer will prove acceptable to God ?" 

"I am convinced of it, my son," answered Garnet. "And I 
take the sainted virgin, from whose blood this marvellous spring 
was ])i()dii('ed, to witness that I devote myself unhesitatingly to 
the project, and that I firmly believe it will profit our church." 

As he spoke, a singlar circumstance occurred, which did not 
fail to produce an impression on both jiarties, — especially Guy 
Fawkes. A violent gust of wind, ap[)arently suddenly aroused, 
whistled through the slender columns of the structure, and catch- 
ing the surface of the water dashed it in tiny waves against their 
feet. 

" The saint is offended," observed Fawkes. 

" It would ahnost seem so," replied Garnet, after a pause. 
" Let us proceed to the chapel, and pray at her shrine. We will 
confer on this matter hereafter. Meantime, swear to me that 
you will observe })rofound secrecy respecting this vision." 

"I swear," replied Guy Fawkes. 

At this moment, another and more violent gust agitated the 
fountain. 

" We will tarry here no longer," said Garnet, " I am not proof 
against these portents of ill." 

So saying, he led the way to the chapel. Here they were 
presently joined by several of the female devotees, including 
V iviana, Anne Vaux, and Lady Digby. Matins were tiieii said, 
after which various offerings were made at the shrine of the 
saint. Lady Digby presented a small tablet set in polil, repre- 
sentino; on one side the martvrdom of Saint Winifred, and on 
the other the Salutation of our Lady. Anne Vaux gave a small 



THE CONSPIRATORS. 87 

enamelled cross of gold ; Viviana a girdle of the same metal, 
with a pendant sustaining a small Saint John's head surrounded 
with pearls. 

" Mine will be a poor soldier's offering," said Guy Fawke*, 
approaching the shrine, which was hung around with the crutches, 
staves, and bandages of those cured by the healing waters of the 
miraculous spring. " This small silver scallop-shell, given me by 
<a pilgrim, who died in my arms near the chapel of Saint James 
of Compostella, in Spain, is the sole valuable I possess.' 

*• It will be as acceptable as a more costly gift, my son," 
replied Garnet, placing it on the shrine. 

Of all the offerings then made, that silver scallop-shell Is the 
only one preserved. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE CONSPIRATORS. 



On Vlviana's return from her devotions, she found her father in 
the greatest perturbation and alarm. The old steward, Hey- 
docke, who had ridden express from Ordsall Ilall, had just 
arrived, bringing word that the miserable fate of the pursuivant 
and his crew had aroused the whole country; that officers, 
attended bv a strona; force, and brcathlnfr venGjeance, wei'c in 
pursuit of Sir WIlHani Radcliffe and his daughter; that large 
sums were offered for the capture of Guy Fawkes and Fatlier 
Oldcorne; that most of the servants were imprisoned; that he 
himself had escaped vvith great difficulty; and that, to sum up 
this long catalogue of calamities, Master Humphrey Chetham was 
arrested, and placed in the New Fleet. '* In short, my dear 
young mistress," concluded the old man, " as I have just observed 
to Sir William, all Is over with us, and there is nothing left but 
the grave." 

" What course have you resolved upon, dear father," inquired 
Viviana, turning anxiously to him. 

" I shall surrender myself," he answered. " I am guilty of no 
crime, and can easily clear myself from all imputation." 

" You are mistaken," she replied. " Do not hope for justice 
from those who know it not. But, while the means of escape 
are allowed you, avail yourself of them." 

" No, Viviana," replied Sir William Radcliffe, firndy; "my 
part Is taken. I shall abide the arrival of the officers. For you, 
X shall intrust you to the care of Mr. Catesby." 

"You cannot mean this, dear father," she cried, with a look of 
distress. '•' And, if you do, I will never consent to such an 
arrangement." 



88 GUY FAWKES. 

" Mr. Catcsby is stronojly attached to you, child," replied Sir 
William, " and will watch over your safety as carefully as 1 could 
do myself." 

" He may bo attached to me," rejoined Viviana, " though I 
doubt the disinterestedness of his love. But nothintr can rcuiove 
my repugnance to him. Forgive me, therefore, if, in this one 
instance, I decline to obey your commands. I dare not trust 
myself with Mr. Catesby." 

" How am I to understand 3'ou?" inquired Sir William. 

" Do not ask me to explain, dear father," she answered, " but 
imagine I must have good reason for what I say. Since you 
are resolved upon surrendering yourself, I will go into captivity 
with you. The alternative is less dreadful than that you have 
proposed." 

" You distract me, child," cried the knight, rising and pacing 
the chamber in great agitation. " I cannot bear the thought of 
your imprisonment. Yet if I fly, 1 appear to confess myself 
guilty." 

" If your worship will intrust Mistress Viviana with me," 
interposed the old steward, " I will convey her whithersoever 
you direct, — will watch over her day and night, — and, if need 
be, die in her defence." 

" Thou wert ever a faithful servant, good Heydocke," rejoined 
Sir William, extending his hand kindly to him, "and art as true 
in adversity as in prosperity." 

" Shame to me if I were not," replied Heydockc, pressing 
the knight's fingers to his lips and bathing them in his tears. 
*' Shame to me if I hesitated to lay down my life for a master to 
whom I owe so much." 

"If it is your pleasure, dear father," observed Viviana, "I 
will accompany Master Heydockc ; but I would far rather be 
permitted to remain with you." 

" It would avail nothing," replied Sir William, " we should 
be separated by the officers. Retire to your chamber, and pre- 
pare for instant departure ; and, in the mean while, I will consider 
what is best to be done." 

*' Your worship's decision must be speedy," observed Hey- 
dockc ; " I had onl}-^ a few hours' start of the officers. They 
will be here ere long." 

" Take this purse," replied Sir William, " and hire three 
of the fleetest horses you can ])rocure, and station yourself at 
the outskirts of the town, on the road to Saint Asaph. You 
understand." 

"Perfectly," replied Heydockc. And he departed to execute his 
master's commands, while Viviana withdrew to her own chamber. 

Left alone, the knight was perplexing himself as to where he 
should shape his course, when he was interrupted by the suddea 
entrance of Catesby and Garnet. 



THE CONSPIRATORS. 89 

" We have just met your servant. Sir William,'* said the 
former, " and have learnt the alarming intelligence he has 
brought." 

" What is your counsel in this emergency, father ?" said 
Radclifle, appealing to Garnet. 

" Flight, — instant flight, my son,*' was the answer. 

" My counsel is resistance," said Catesby. " We are here as- 
sembled in large numbers, and are well armed. Let us await 
the arrival of the officers, and see whether they will venture to 
arrest you." 

" Tliey will arrest us all, if they have force sufficient to do 
so," replied Garnet ; "and there are many reasons, as you well 
know, why it is desirable to avoid any disturbance at present." 

" True," replied Catesby. " What say you then," he con- 
tinued, addressing Radcliffc, " to our immediate return to Holt, 
where means may be found to screen you till this storm is blown 
ever ?" 

Sir William having assented to the proposal, Catesby instantly 
departed to acquaint the others, and, as soon as preparations 
could be made, ana horses procured, the whole party composing 
the pilgrimage quitted Holywell, and, ascending the hill at the 
back of the town, took the direction of Mold, where they arrived, 
having ridden at a swift pace, in about half an hour. From 
thence they proceeded, without accident or interruption, to the 
mansion they had recently occupied near Holt. On reaching 
it, all the domestics were armed, and certain of their number 
stationed at the different approaches to the house to give the 
alarm in case of the enemy's appearance. But as nothing 
occurred during the night, the fears of Sir William and his 
friends began in some degree to subside. 

About noon, on the following day, as Guy Fawkes, who ever 
since tlie vision at Saint Winifred's Well had shunned all com- 
panionship, walked forth beneath the avenue alone, he heard a 
light step behind him, and, turning, beheld Viviana. Gravely 
bowing, he was about to pursue his course, when quickening her 
pace she was instantly by his side. 

" I have a favour to solicit," she said. 

" There is none I would refuse you," answered Fawkes, 
halting; "but, though I have the will, I may not have the 
power to grant your request." 

" Hear me, then," she replied, hurriedly. " Of all my father's 
friends — of all who are here assembled, you are the only one I 
dare trust, — the only one from whom I can hope for assistance." 

" I am at once flattered and perplexed by your words, Viviana," 
he rejoined; "nor can I guess wdiither they tend. But speak 
freely. If I cannot render you aid, I can at least give you 
counsel." 

" I must premise, then," said Viviana, " that I am aware from 



90 GUY FAVVKEa 

certain obscure hints let fall by Father Oldcorne, that you, Mr. 
Catesby, auc]^ others are engaged in a dark and dangerous con- 
spiracy." 

" Viviana Radcliffe," returned Guy Fawkcs, sternly, "you 
have once before avowed your knowledge of this plot. I will 
not attempt disguise with you. A project is in agitation for the 
deUverance of our fallen church; and, since you have become 
ar<|uainted with its existence — no matter how — you must be 
bound l)y an oath of secrecy, or," and his look grew darker, and 
his voice sterner, " I will not answer for your life." 

" I will willingly take the oath, on certain conditions," said 
Viviana. 

" You nmst take it unconditionally,*' rejoined Fawkes. 

" Hear me out," said Viviana. '•' Knowing that Mr. Catesby 
and Father Garnet are anxious to induce my father to join this 
conspiracy, I came hither to implore you to prevent him from 
doine: so." 

" Were I even willing to do this, — which I am not," replied 
Fawkcs, " I have not the power. Sir William Radcliffe would 
be justly indignant at any interference on my part." 

" Heed not that," replied Viviana. " You, I fear, are linked 
to this fearful project beyond the possibility of being set free. 
But he is not. Save him ! save him !" 

" I will take no part in urging him to join it," replied Fawkes. 
** But I can promise nothing further." 

*'Then mark me," she returned; "if further attempts are 
made by any of your confederates to league him with tlieir plot, 
I myself will disclose all I know of it." 

" Viviana," rejoined Fawkes, in a threatening tone, " I again 
warn you that you endanger your life." 

*' I care not," she rejoined ; " I would risk twenty lives, if I 
possessed them, to preserve my father." 

"You are a noble-hearted lady," replied Fawkes, unable to repress 
the admiration inspired by her conduct ; " and if I can accomplish 
what you desire, I will. But 1 see not how it can be done." 

" Everything is possible to one of your resolution," replied 
Viviana. 

" Well, well," replied Fawkes, a slight smile crossing his rugged 
features; "the effort at least shall be made." 

"Thanks! thanks!" ejaculated Viviana; and, overcome by 
her emotion, she sank half-fainting into his arms. 

While he held her thus, debating within himself whether he 
should convey her to the house. Garnet and Catesby appeared 
at the other end of the avenue. Their surprise at the sight v/as 
extreme ; nor was it less when Viviana, opening her eyes as they 
drew near, uttered a slight cry, and disappeared. 

" This requires an explanation," said Catesby, glancing fiercely 
At Fawkess. 




€-rwi.(^j4vAV l<r 






/^?%-^^<%^^' v!?^'' y 



THE CONSPIRATORS. 91 

"You must seek it, then, of the lady," rejoined tbo latter, 
moodily. 

" It will be easily explained, I have no doubt," interposed 
Garnet. " Miss Radcliffe was seized with a momentary weak- 
ness, and her companion offered her support." 

" That will scarcely suffice for me," cried Catesby. 

" Let the subject be dropped for the present," rejoined Garnet, 
authoritatively. " More important matter claims our attention. 
We came to seek 3'ou, my son," he continued, addressing Fawkes.. 
" All those engao;ed in the great enterprise are about to meet in 
a summer-house in the garden." 

" I am ready to attend you," replied Fawkes. *' Will Sir 
William Radcliffe be there ?" 

" No," replied Garnet ; " he has not yet joined us. None 
will be present at this meeting but the sworn conspirators." 

With this, the trio took their way towards the garden, and 
proceeding along a walk edged with clipped yew-trees, came to 
the summer-house, — a small circular building overrun with ivy 
and creepers, and ornamented in front by two stone statues on 
pedestals. Here they found Sir Everard Digby, Ambrose Rook- 
wood, Francis Tresham, Thomas and Robert Winter, John and 
Cliristopher Wright, awaiting their arrival. 

The door being closed and bolted. Garnet, placing himself in 
the midst of the assemblage, said, "Before we proceed further, 
I will again administer the oath to all present." Drawing from 
his vest a primer, and addressing Sir Everard Digby, he desired 
him to kneel, and continued thus in a solemn tone, " You shall 
swear by the Blessed Trinity, and by the sacrimeni you propose 
to receive, never to disclose directly nor indirectly, by word or 
circumstance, the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep 
secret, nor desist from the execution thereof, until the rest shall 
give you leave." 

" I swear," replied Digby, kissing the primer. 

The oath was then taken in like manner by the others. Tliis 
done, Catesby was about to address the meeting, when Tresham, 
glancing uneasily at the door, remarked, " Are you assured we 
have no eavesdroppers?" 

" I will keep watch without," rejoined Fawkes, " if you have 
any fears." 

" It were better," replied Robert Winter, " We cannot be too 
cautious. But if you go forth, you will not be able to take part 
in the discussion." 

" My part is to act, not talk," rejoined Fawkes, marching 
towards the door. And shutting it alter him, he took uj) his 
position outside. 

Upon this Catesby commenced a long and inflammatory ha- 
rangue, in which he expatiated with great eloquence and fervour 
on the wrongs of the Catholic party, and the deplorable conditiou 



92 GUY FAWKES. 

of their chxircli. " It were easy to sla}'^ the tyrant by whom we are 
oppressed," he said, in conchjsion ; "but his destrnction would 
be small gain to us. We must strike deeper, to hew down the 
baneful stock of heres}'. All our adversaries must perish with 
him, and in such a manner as shall best attest the vengeance of 
Heaven. Placed beneath the Parliament-house, a mine of pow- 
der shall hurl its heretical occupants into the air, — nor shall any 
one survive the terrible explosion. Are we all agreed to this plan?" 

All the conspirators expressed their assent, except Sir Everard 
Digby. 

" Before I give my concurrence to the measure," observed the 
latter, "I would fain be resolved by Father Garnet whether it 
is lawful to destroy some few of our own faith with so many 
heretics." 

" Unquestionably, my son," replied Garnet. " As in besieging 
ti city we have a right to kill all within it, whether friends or 
enemies, so in this case we are justified in destroying the inno- 
cent with the guilty, because their destruction will be advan- 
tageous to the Catholic cause." 

" I am satisfied," replied Digby. 

" As to the tyrant and apostate James," continupd Garnet, 
" he is excomuumicated, and his subjects released from their 
allegiance. I have two breves sent over by his holiness Pope 
'Clement VIII. three years ago, one directed to the clergy, and 
the other to the nobility of this realm, wherein, alluding to 
Queen Elizabeth, it is expressly declared that, ' so soon as that 
miserable woman should depart out of this life, none shall be 
permitted to ascend the throne, how near soever in proximity of 
blood, unless they are such as will not only tolerate the Catholic 
faith, but in every way support it.' By this bi'ief, James is 
expressly excluded. He has betrayed, not supported the church 
of Rome. Having broken his word with us, and oppressed our 
brethren more risjorously even than his predecessor, the remorse- 
less Elizabeth, he is unworthy longer to I'cign, and must be 
removed." 

" He must," reiterated the conspirators. 

"The Parliament-house being the place where all the mischief 
done us has been contrived by our adversaries, it is fitting that 
it should be the place of their chastisement," remarked Catesby. 

"Doubtless," rejoined Ambrose Rookwood. 

" Yet if the blow we meditate should miscarry," observed 
Thomas Winter, "the injury to the Catholic religion will be so 
great, that not only our enemies, but our ver}' friends will con- 
<lemn us." 

" There is no chance of miscarriajie, if we are true to each 
other," returned Catesby, confidently. "And if I suspected any 
one of treachery, I would plunge my sword into his bosom, were 
be my brother." 



THE CONSPIRATORS. 93 

" You would do wrong; to act thus on mere suspicion," remarked 
Treshani, who stood near him. 

" In a case Hke this, he who gives the sHghtest ground for 
doubt would merit death," replied Catesby, sternly ; " and I 
would slay him." 

*' Hum !" exclaimed Tresham, uneasily. 

" Mr. Catesby will now perhaps inform us what has been done 
to carry the project into effect?" inquired Sir Everard Digby. 

*•' A small habitation has been taken by one of our confederates, 
Mr. Thomas Percy, immediately adjoining the Parliament-house," 
replied Catesby, " from the cellar of which it is proposed to dig 
a mine through the wall of the devoted building, and to deposit 
within it a sufficient quantity of gunpowder and other combus- 
tibles to accomplish our purpose. This mine must be digged by 
ourselves, as we can employ no assistants, and will be a laborious 
and dangerous task. But I for one will cheerfully undertake it." 
" And I," said the elder Wright. 
" And I," cried several others. 

" Supposing the mine digged, and the powder deposited," ob- 
served Ambrose Rookwood, " whose hand will fire the train ?" 

" Mine !" cried Guy Fawkes, throwing open the door. As 
soon as he had spoken, he retired and closed it after him. 

" He will keep his word," remarked Garnet. " He is of a 
nature so resolute that he would destroy himself with the victims 
rather than fail. Catiline was not a bolder conspirator than Guy 
Fawkes." 

"Well, gentlemen," observed Catesby, "we are now at the 
latter end of July. All must be ready against the meeting of 
Parliament in November." 

" There is some likelihood, I hear, that the meeting of the 
house will be prorogued till February," remarked Tresham. 

" So much the better," rejoined Catesby, "it will give us more 
time for preparation." 

" So much the worse, I think," cried Ambrose Rookwood. 
" Delays are ever dangerous, and doubly dangerous in a case 
like ours." 

"I am far from desiring to throw any impediment in the way 
of our design," observed Sir Everard Digby, " but I would re- 
commend, before we proceed to this terrible extremity, that one 
last effort should be made to move the King in our behalf" 

" It is useless," replied Catesby. " So far from toleration, he 
meditates severer measures against us; and, I am well assured, 
if Parliament is allowed to meet, such laws will be passed as will 
bring all of us within premunire. No, no. We have no hope 
from James, nor bis ministers." 

" Nor yet from France or Spain," observed Thomas Winter. 
" In my conference with the Constable Vclasco at Bergen, I 
received assurances of the good-will of Philip towards us, but no 



4j4, GUY FAWKES. 

distinct j)ron)ise of interference in our behalf. The Archduke 
Albert is well disposed, but he can render no assistance. We 
nuist depend upon ourselves." 

" Ay, marry, must we," replied Catcsby, " and fortiniate is it 
that \vc have devised a plan by which we can accomplish our 
purpose unaided. We only require funds to follow up with effect 
the blow we shall strike." 

" My whole fortune shall be placed at your disposal," replied 
Sir Everard Digby. 

*' Part of mine has already been given," said Tresham, "and 
the rest shall follow." 

" Would I had aught to peril in the matter except my 
life," said Catesby. '^ I would throw everything upon the 
stake." 

" You do enough in venturing thus much, my son," rejoined 
Garnet. " To you the whole conduct of the enterprise is com- 
mitted." 

" I live for nothing else," replied Catesby, *' and if I see it 
successful, I shall have lived long enough." 

" Cannot Sir William Radcliffe be induced to join us ?" asked 
Rookwood. '' He would be an important acquisition, and his 
wealth would prove highly serviceable." 

"I have sounded him," answered Catesby. "But he appears 
reluctant." 

"Be not satisfied with one attempt," urged Christopher Wright. 
*' The jeopardy in which he now stands may make him change 
his mind." 

"I am loth to interrupt the discussion," returned Garnet, "but 
I think we have tarried here long enough. We will meet again 
at midnight, when I hope to introduce Sir William Radcliffe to 
you as a confederate." 

The party then separated, and Garnet went in search of the 
knight. 

Ascertaining that he was in his own chamber, he proceeded 
thither, and found him alone. Entering at once upon the subject 
in hand. Garnet pleaded his cause with so much zeal that he at 
last wrung a reluctant consent from the listener. Scarcely able 
to conceal his exultation, he then pro{)osed to Sir William to 
adjourn with him to the private chapel in the house, where, 
having taken the oath, and received the sacrament upon it, he 
should forthwith be introduced to the conspirators, and the whole 
particulars of the plot revealed to him. To this the knight, with 
some hesitation, agreed. As they traversed a gallery leading to 
the chapel, they met Viviana. For the first time in his life 
Radcliffe 's gaze sank before his daughter, and he would have 
passed her without speaking had she not stopped him. 

"Father I dear father!" she cried, "I know whither you are 
going — and for what purpose. Do not — do i-jt join them." 



THE CONSPIRATORS. 05 

Sir William RadcllfFe made no reply, but endeavoured gently 
to push her aside. 

She would not, however, be repulsed, but prostrating herself 
before him, clasped his knees, and besought him not to proceed. 

Making a significant gesture to Sir William, Garnet walked 
forward. 

" Viviana," cried the knight, sternly, " my resolution is taken. 
I command you to retire to your chamber." 

So saying, he broke from her, and followed Garnet. Clasping 
her hands to her brow, Viviana gazed for a moment with a 
frenzied look after him, and then rushed from the gallery. 

On reaching the chapel, Sir William, who had been much 
shaken by this meeting, was some minutes in recovering his 
composure. Garnet employed the time in renewing his argu- 
ments, and with so much address that he succeeded in quieting 
the scruples of conscience which had been awakened in the 
knight's breast by his daughter's warning. 

" And now, my son," he said, "since you have determined to 
enrol your name in the list of those sworn to deliver their church 
from oppression, take this primer in your hand, and kneel down 
before the altar, while I administer the oath which is to unite 
you to us." 

Garnet then advanced towards the altar, and Sir William was 
about to prostrate himself upon a cushion beside it, when the 
door was suddenly thrown open, and Guy Fawkes strode into 
the chapeL 

" Plold !" he exclaimed, grasping Radcliffe's right arm, and 
fixinjr his dark glance upon him ; " you shall not take that oath." 

" What mean you ?" cried Garnet, who, as well as the knight, 
was paralyzed with astonishment at this intrusion. *' Sir William 
Radcliffe is about to join us." 

" I know it," replied Fawkes ; " but it may not be. He has 
no heart in the business, and will lend it no efficient assistance. 
We are better without him, than with him." 

As he spoke, he took the primer from the knight's hand, and 
laid it upon the altar. 

" This conduct is inexplicable," cried Garnet, angrily. " You 
will answer for it to others, as well as to me." 

" I will answer for it to all," replied Guy Fawkes. "Let Sir 
William Radcliffe declare before me, and before Heaven, that 
he approves the measure, and I am content he should take 
the oath." 

" I cannot belie my conscience by saying so," replied the 
knight, who appeared agitated by conflicting emotions. 
■ *'Yet you have promised to join us," cried Garnet, reproach 
fully. 

" Better break that promise than a solemn oath," rejoined 
Guy Fawkes, sternly. " Sir William Radcliffe, there are reasons 



96 GUY FAWKES. 

why you should not join this conspirac}'. Examine your inmost 
heart, and it will tell you what they arc." 

" I understand you," replied the knight. 

" Get hence," cried Garnet, unable to control his indijjnation, 
" or I will pronounce our Church's most terrible malediction 
a£;ainst you." 

"I shall not shrink from it, father," rejoined Fawkes, humbly, 
but firmly, " seeing I am acting rightly." 

" Undeceive yourself, then, at once," returned Garnet, " and 
learn that you are thwarting our great and holy purpose." 

"On the contrary," replied Fawkes, "I am promoting it> 
by preventing one from joining it who will endanger its success." 

" You are a traitor !" cried Garnet, furiously. 

" A traitor 1" exclaimed Guy Fawkes, his eye blazing with 
fierce lustre, though his voice and demeanour were unaltered, — 
*' I, who have been warned thrice, — twice by the dead, — and 
lastly by a vision from heaven, yet still remain firm to my pur- 
pose, — I, who have voluntarily embraced the most dangerous 
and difficult part of the enterprise, — I, who would suffer the 
utmost extremity of torture, rather than utter a word that should 
reveal it, — a traitor! No, father, I am none. If you think so, 
take this sword and at once put an end to your doubts." 

There was something so irresistible in the manner of Guy 
Fawkes, that Garnet remained silent. 

*'D() with me what you please," continued Fawkes ; "but do 
not compel Sir William Radcliffe to join the conspiracy. He 
will be fatal to it." 

*' No one shall compel me to join it," replied the knight. 

" Perhaps it is better thus," returned Garnet, after a pause, 
during which he was buried in reflection. " I will urge you no 
further, my son. But before you depart you must swear not to 
divulge what you have just learnt." 

" Willingly," replied the knight. 

" There is another person who must also take that oath," said 
Guy Fawkes, *' having accidentally become acquainted with as 
much as yourself." 

And stepping out of the chapel, he immediately afterwards 
returned with Viviana. 

" You will now understand why I would not allow Sir William 
to join the conspiracy," he observed to Garnet. 

" I do," replied the latter, gloomily. 

The oath administered, the knight and his daughter quitted 
the chapel, accompanied by Guy Fawkes. Viviana was profuse 
in her expressions of gratitude, nor was her father less earnest 
in his acknowledgments. 

A few hours after this, Sir William Radcliffe informed Sir 
Evcrard Digby that it was his intention to depart ininiediatoly, 
and, though the latter attempted to dissuade him by representing 



THE CONSPIRATORS. 97 

the danger to which he would be exposed, he continued inUexihle. 
The announcement surprised both Catesby and Garnet, wlio 
were present when it was made, and added their entreaties to 
those of Digby — but without effect. Catesby's proposal to serve 
as an escort was likewise refused by Sir William, who said he 
liad no fears, and when questioned as to his destination, he re- 
turned an evasive answer. This sudden resolution of the kniy-ht. 
coupled with his refusal to join the plot, alarmed the conspira- 
tors, and more than one expressed fears of treachery. Sir 
Everard Digby, however, was not of the number, but asserted 
that Radcliffe was a man of the highest honour, and he would 
answer for his secrecy with his life. 

" Will you answer for that of his daughter ?" demanded 
Tresham. 

" / will,'" replied Fawkes. 

" To put the matter beyond a doubt," observed Catesby, '' I 
will set out shortly after him, and follow him unobserved till he 
halts for the night, and ascertain whether he stops at any sus- 
picious quarter." 

" Do so, my son," replied Garnet. 

*' It is needless/' observed Sir Everard Digby ; ** but do as 
you please." 

By this time, Radcliffe's horses being brought round by Hey- 
docke, he and his daughter took a hasty leave of their friends. 
When they had been gone a few minutes, Catesby called for his 
steed ; and, after exchanging a word or two with Garnet, rode 
after them. He had proceeded about a couple of miles along a 
cross-road leading to Nantwich, which he learnt from some 
cottagers was the route taken by the party before him, when he 
heard the tramp of a horse in the rear, and, turning at the sound, 
beheld Guy Fawkes. Drawing in the bridle, he halted till the 
latter came up, and angrily demanded on what errand he was 
bent. 

" My errand is the same as your own," replied Fawkes. *' I 
intend to follow Sir William Radcliffe, and, if need be, defend 
him." 

Whatever Catesby's objections might be to this companionship, 
he did not think fit to declare them, and, though evidently much 
displeased, suffered Guy Fawkes to ride by his side without 
opposition. 

Having gained the summit of the mountainous range extending 
from Malpas to Tottenhall, whence they beheld the party whose 
course they were tracking enter a narrow lane at the foot of the 
hill, Catesby, fearful of losing sight of them, set spurs to his 
steed. Guy Fawkes kept close beside him, and they did not 
slacken their pace until they reached the lane. 

Having proceeded along it for a quarter of a mile, they wore 
alarmed by the sudden report of fire-arms, followed by a loud 



98 GUY FAWKES. 

slirielc, whicli neither of them doubted was uttered by Viviana. 
Arrain dashing forward, on turning a corner of the road, they 
behold the party surrounded by half-a-dozen troopers. Sir 
\\'illiam Radclilfc liad shot one of his assailants, and, assisted by 
llcvdocke, was defending himself bravely against the others. 
With loud shouts, Catcsby and Guy Fawkes galloped to\Yards 
the scene of strife. But they were too late. A bullet pierced 
ihe kni2;ht's brain; and he no sooner fell, than, regardless of 
himself, the old steward flung away his sword, and threw himseltj 
with the most piteous lamentations, on the bod}^ 

Viviana, meanwhile, had been compelled to dismount, and 
was in the hands of the troopers. On seeing her father's fate, 
licr shrieks were so heart-piercing, that even her captors were 
moved to compassion. Fighting his way towards her, Catesby 
cut down one of the troopers, and snatching her from the grasp 
of the other, who was terrified by the furious assault, placed her 
on the saddle beside him, and striking spurs into his charger at 
the same moment, leapt the hedge, and made good his retreat. 

This daring action, however, could not have been accomjilished 
without the assistance of Guy Fawkes, who warded off with his 
rapier all the blows aimed at him and his lovely charge. While 
thus engaged, he received a severe cut on the head, which 
fitrctched him senseless and bleeding beneath his horse's feet. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



THE PACKET. 



Ox recovering from the effects of the wound he had received 
bom the trooper, Guy Fawkes found himself stretched upon a 
small bed in a cottage, with Viviana and Catesbv watching; beside 
hnn. A thick fold of linen was bandaged round his head, and 
he was so faint from the great effusion of blood he had sustained, 
that, after gazing vacantly around him for a few minutes, and 
but imperfectly comprehending what he beheld, his eyes closed, 
and he relapsed into insensibility, llestoratives being applied, 
lie revived in a short time, and, in answer to his inquiries how 
he came thither, was informed by Catesby that he had been left 
for deafl by his assailants, who, contenting themselves with 
making the old steward prisoner, had ridden off in the direction 
of Chester. 

"What has become of Sir William Radcliffe?" asked the 
wounded man in a feeble voice. 

Catesby raised his finger to his lijis, and Fawkes learnt the 
distressing nature of the (piestion he had askel by the agonizing 
cry that burst from Viviana. Unable to controf her grief, she 



THE PACKET. 05 

withdrew, and Catcsby then told him that the body of Sir 
William Kadcliffc was lying in an adjoining cottage, whither it 
. had been transported from the scene of the conflict ; adding that 
it was Viviana's earnest desire that it should be conveyed to 
Manchester to the family vault in the Collegiate Church; but 
that he feared her wish could not be safely complied with. A 
messenger, however, had been despatched to Holt ; and Sir 
Evcrard Digby, and Fathers Garnet and Oldcorne, were mo- 
mentarily expected, when some course would be decided upon 
for the disposal of the unfortunate knight's remains. 

"' Poor Viviana !" groaned Fawkes. " She has now no pro- 
tector." 

" Rest easy on that score," rejoined Catesby. " She shall 
never want one while I live." 

The wounded man fixed his e^^es, now blazing with red and 
unnatural light, inquiring'y upon him, but he said nothing. 

"I know what you mean," continued Catesby; "you think I 
shall wed her, and you are in the right. I shall. The marriage 
is essential to our enterprise ; and the only obstacle to it is 
removed." 

Fawkes attempted to reply, but his y)arched tongue refused 
its office. Catesby arose, and carefully raising his head, held a 
cup of water to his lips. The sufferer eagerly drained it, and 
would have asked for more ; but seeing that the request would 
be refused, he left it un uttered. 

" Have you examined my wound?" he said, after a pause. 

Catesby answered in the affirmative. 

" And do you judge it mortal?" continued Fawkes. "Not 
that I have any fear of Death. I have looked him in the face 
too often for that. But I have somewhat on my mind which I 
would fain discharge before my earthly pilgrimage is ended." 

" Do not delay it, then," rejoined the other. " Knowing I 
speak to a soldier, and a brave one, I do not hesitate to tell you 
Your hours are numbered." 

" Heaven's will be done I" exclaimed Fawkes, in a tone of 
resignation. " I thought myself destined to be one of the chief 
instruments of the restoration of our holy religion. But I find 
I was mistaken. When Father Garnet arrives, I beseech you 
let me see him instantly. Or, if he should not come speedily, 
entreat Miss Radcliffe to grant me a few moments in private." 

" Why not unburthen yourself to me ?" returned Catcsby, dis- 
trustfully. "In your circumstances I should desire no better 
confessor than a brother soldier, — no other crucifix than a sword- 
hilt." 

"Nor I," rejoined Fawkes. " But this is no confession I am 
about to make. What I have to say relates to others, not to 
myself." 

"Indeed!" exclaimed Catesby. "Then there is the more 



100 CUY FAWKES. 

reason \vhy it should not be deferred. I hold it m}' duty to tell 
you that tlie fever of your wound will, in all probability, produce 
delirium. Make 3'our communication while your senses remain 
to you. And whatever you enjoin shall be rigorously fulfilled." 

" Will you swear this?" cried Fawkes, eagerly. But before an 
answer could be returned, he added, in an altered tone, "No, — 
no, — it cannot be." 

" This is no time for anger," rejoined Catesby, sternly, " or I 
shoukl ask whether you doubt the assurance I have given you?" 

" I doubt nothing but your compliance with my request," re- 
turned Fawkes. "And oh I if you hope to be succoured at your 
hour of need, tell Miss Kadclifle I desire to speak with her." 

" The message will not need to be conveyed," said Viviana, 
who had noiselessly entered the room ; " she is here." 

Guy Fawkes turned his gaze in the direction of the voice j 
and, notwithstanding his own deplorable condition, he was filled 
with concern at the change wrought in her appearance by the 
terrible shock she had undergone. Her countenance was as pale 
as death, — her eyes, from which no tears would flow, as is ever 
the case with the deepest distress, were glassy and lustreless, — • 
her luxuriant hair hung in dishevelled masses over her shoulders, 
— and her attire was soiled and disordered. 

" You desire to speak with me," she continued, advancing 
towards the couch of the wounded man. 

" It must be alone," he replied. 

Viviana glanced at Catesby, who reluctantly arose, and closed 
the door after him. " We are alone now," she said. 

"Water! water I" gasped the sufferer, "or I perisli." Ills 
request being complied with, he continued in a low solemn voice, 
*' Viviana, you have lost the dearest friend you had on earth, and 
you will soon lose one who, if he had been spared, would have 
endeavoured, as far as he could, to repair the loss. I say not 
this to aggravate your distress, but to prove the sincerity of my 
regard. Let me conjure you, with my dying breath, not to wed 
Mr. Catesby." 

" Fear it not," replied Viviana. " I would rather endure doath 
than consent to do so." 

"Be upon your guard against him, then," continued Fawkes. 
*' When an object is to be gained, he suffers few scruples to stand 
in his way." 

" I am well aware of it," replied Viviana ; " and on the arrival 
of Sir Everard Digby, 1 shall place myself under his protection." 

" Should you be driven to extremity," said Fawkes, taking a 
small packet from the folds of his doublet, " break open this ; it 
will inform you what to do. Only promise me you will r»oi, 
have recourse to it till all other means have failed," 

Viviana took the packet, and gave the required promise. 

** Conceal it about your person, and guard it carefully," con- 



THE PACKET. 101 

tinned Fawkes; "for yon know not when you may require it. 
And now, having cleared my conscience, I can die easily. Let 
me have your prayers." 

Viviana knelt down by the bedside, and poured forth the 
most earnest supplications in his behalf. 

" Perhaps," she said, as she arose, " and it is some consolation 
to think so, — ^you may be saved by death from the commission 
of a great crime, which would for ever have excluded you from 
the joys of heaven." 

" Say rather," cried Guy Fawkes, whose brain began to wan- 
der, " which would have secured them to me. Others will 
achieve it; but I shall have no share in their glory, or their 
reward." 

" Their reward will be perdition in this world and in the 
next," rejoined Viviana. " I repeat, that though I deeply deplore 
your condition, I rejoice in your delivery from this sin. It is 
better— far better — to die thus, than by the hands of the com- 
mon executioner." 

"What do I see?" cried Guy Fawkes, trying to raise himself, 
and sinking back again instantly upon the pillow. " Elizabeth 
Orton rises before me. She beckons me after her — I come ! — 
I come 1" 

" Heaven pity him !" cried Viviana. " His senses have left 

Liin!' 

" She leads me into a gloomy cavern," continued Fawkes, more 
wildly ; " but my eyes are like the wolf's, and can penetrate the 
darkness. It is filled with barrels of gunpowder. I see them 
ranged in tiers, one above another. Ah ! I know where I am 
now. It is the vault beneath the Parliament-house. The King 
and his nobles are assembled in the hall above. Lend me a 
torch, that I may fire the train, and blow them into the air. 
Quick ! quick I I have sworn their destruction, and will keep 
my oath. What matter if I perish with them ? Give me the 
torch, I say, or it will be too late. Is the powder damp that i* 
will not kindle ? And see ! the torch is expiring — it is gone 
cut ! Distrr.ction ! — to be baffled thus ! Why do you stand and 
glare at me with your stony eyes? Who are those with you? 
Fiends ! — no ! they are armed men. They seize me — they "drag 
mo before a grave assemblage. What is that hideous engine ? 
The rack ! — Bind me on it — break every limb — ye shall not 
force mc to confess — ha ! ha ! I laugh at your threats — ha I ha I" 

"Mother of mercy I release him from this torture I" cried 
Viviana. 

. " So! ye have condemned me," continued Fawkes, **and will 
drag me to execution. Well, well, I am prepared. But what a 
host is assembled to see me I Ten thousand faces are turned 
towards me, and all with one abhorrent bloodthirsty expression. 
And what a scaffold ! Get it done (piickly, thou butcherly 



IQ'-y GUY FAWKE^. 

villain. The rope is twisted round my throat in serpent folds. 
It strangles me — ah !" 

''Horror!" exclaimed Viviana. "I can listen to this no 
longer. Help, Mr. Catesby, help !" 

*' The knife is at my breast — it pierces my flesh— my heart is 
torn forth — I die ! I die !" And he uttered a dreadful groan. 

" What has happened ?" cried Catesby, rushing into the room. 
« Is he dead ?" 

" I fear so," replied Viviana ; " and his end has been a fearful 

one." 

if jS^o— no," said Catesby ; " his pulse still beats — but fiercely 
and feverishly. You had' better not remain here longer, Miss 
Radcliffe. I will v^^atch over him. All will soon be over." 

Aware that she could be of no further use, Viviana cast a look 
of the deepest commiseration at the sufferer, and retired. The 
occuj)ant of the cottage, an elderly female, had surrendered all 
the apartments of her tenement, except one small room, to her 
guests, and she was therefore undisturbed. The terrible event 
which had recently occurred, and the harrowing scene she had 
just witnessed, were too much for Viviana, and her anguish was 
so intense, that she began to fear her reason was deserting her. 
She stood still, — gazed fearfully round, as if some secret danger 
environed her, — clasped her hands to her temples, and found 
them burning like hot iron, — and, then, alarmed at her own 
state, knelt down, prayed, and wept. Yes! she wept, for thc- 
first time, since her father's destruction, and the relief afforded 
by those scalding tears was inexpressible. 

From this ]Mteous state she was aroused by the tramp of 
horses at the door of the cottage, and the next moment Father 
Garnet presented himself. 

" How uncertain are human affairs I" he said, after a sorrow- 
ful greeting had passed between them. " I little thought, when 
we parted yesterday, we should meet again so soon, and under 
such afflicting circumstances." 

" It is the will of Heaven, father," replied Viviana, " and we 
must not murmur at its decrees, but bear our chastening as we 
best may." 

" I am happy to find you in such a comfortable frame of mind, 
dear daughter. I feared the effect of the shock upon your 
feelings. J5ut I am glad to find you bear up against it so well," 

" I am surprised at my own firmness, father," replied Viviana. 
" But I have been schooled in affliction. I have no tie left to 
bind me to the world, and shall retire from it, not only without 
regret, but with eagerness." 

" iSay not so, dear daughter," replied Garnet. "You have, I 
trust, nmch happiness in store for you; and when the sharp- 
ness of your affliction is worn oft", you will view your con- 
dition in a more cheering light." 



THE PACKET. 101 

*' Impossible !" she cried, mournfully. "Hope is wholly 
extinct in my breast. But I will not contest the point. Is 
not Sir Everard Dif^hy with you?" 

" He is not, daughter," replied Garnet, "and I will explain to 
you wherefore. Soon after your departure yesterday, the 
mansion we occupied at Holt was attacked by a band of 
soldiers, headed by Miles Topcliffe, one of the most imre- 
lenting of our persecutors ; and though they were driven off 
with some loss, yet, as there was every reason to apprehend 
they would return with fresh force. Sir Everard judged it 
prudent to retreat; and accordingly he and his friends, with 
all their attendants, except those he has sent with me, have 
departed for Buckinghamshire." 

" Where, then, is Father Oldcorne ?" inquired Vivian?, 

" Alas ! daughter," rejoined Garnet, " I grieve to say he is a 
prisoner. Imprudently exposing himself during the attack, he 
w^as seized and carried off by Topcliffe and his myrmidons." 

" How true is the saying that misfortunes never come single!' 
sighed Viviana, " I seem bereft of all I hold dear." 

" Sir Everard has sent four of his trustiest servants with 
me," remarked Garnet, " They are well armed, and will attend 
you wherever you choose to lead them. He has also furnished 
me with a sum of money for your use." 

" He is most kind and considerate," replied Viviana. " And 
now, father," she faltered, " there is one subject which it is^ 
necessary to speak upon ; and, though I shrink from it, it must 
not be postponed." 

" I guess what you mean, daughter," said Garnet, sympa- 
thizingly ; " you allude to the interment of Sir William Radcliffe.. 
Is the body here ?" 

*' It is in an adjoining cottage," replied Viviana in a broken 
voice. " I have already expressed my wish to Mr. Catesby to 
have it conveyed to Manchester, to our family vault." 

"I see not how that can be accomplished, dear daughter,"' 
replied Garnet ; " but I will confer with Mr. Catesby on the- 
subject. Where is he?" 

" In the next room, by the couch of Guy Fawkes, who is 
dying," said Viviana. 

" Dying !" echoed Garnet, starting. " I heard he was dan 
gerously hurt, but did not suppose the wound would prove 
fatal. Here is another grievous blow to the o-ood cause," 

At this moment the door was opened by Catesby. 

" How is the sufferer?" asked Garnet. 

*' A slight change for the better appears to have taken ])lace,'' 
answered Catesby. " His fever has in some degree abated, 
and he has sunk into a gentle sluml)er." 

"Can he be removed with safety?" inquired Garnet; "for, 
I fear, if he remains here, he will fall into the hands of Top- 



104 GUY FAWKES. 

cliiTc and his crew, who arc scourinfr the country in every 
(lircclion." And he recapitulated all he had just stated to 
Viviana. 

Catesby was for some time lost in reflection. 

" I atn fairly perplexed as to what course it will be best to 
pursue," he said. " Dangers and difficulties beset us on every 
side. I am inclined to yield to Viviana's request, and proceed 
to Manchester." 

" That will be rushing into the very f;icc of danger," ob- 
served Garnet. 

" And, therefore, may be the safest plan," replied Catesby. 
" Our adversaries will scarcely suspect us of so desperate a 
step." 

" Perhaps you are in the right, my son," returned Garnet, 
after a moment's reflection. " At all events, I bow to your 
judgment." 

" The plan is too much in accordance with my own wishes 
to meet with any opposition on my part," observed Viviana. 

"Will you accompany us, father?" asked Catesby; "or do 
you ])roeeed to Gothurst ?" 

" I will go with you, my son. Viviana will need a protector. 
And, till I have seen her in some place of safety, I will not 
leave her." 

" Since we have come to this determination," rejoined Catesby, 
" as soon as the needful preparations can be made, and Guy 
Fav.kes has had some liours' repose, we will set out. Under 
cover of night we can travel with security; and, by using some 
exertion, may reach Ordsall Hall, whither, I presume, Viviana 
would choose to proceed, in the first instance, before daybreak." 

"I am well mounted, and so are my attendants," replied 
Garnet ; " and, by the provident care of Sir Everard Digby, 
each of them lias a led horse with him." 

" That is well," said Catesby. " And now, Viviana, may I 
entreat you to take my place for a short time by the couch of 
the sufferer. In a few liours everything shall be in readiness." 

IJc then retired with Garnet, while Viviana proc*^eded to the 
adjoining chamber, where she found Guy Fawkes still slumbering 
tran(|uilly. 

As the evening advanced, he awoke, and appeared much re- 
frcsheil. While he was speaking, Garnet and Catesby approached 
his bedside, and he seemed overjoyed at the sight of the former. 
The subject of the journey being mentioned to him, he at once 
expressed his ready comi)liance witli the arrangement, and only 
desired that the last rites of his church might be performed for 
him before he set out. 

Garnet informed him that he had come for that very purpose; 
and a • ; oun as they were left alone, he proceeded to the dis' 
charge of his priestly duties, confessed and absolved him, giving 



THE ELIXIR. 105 

him the viaticum and the extreme unction. And, lastly, he 
judged it expedient to administer a powerfid opiate, to lull the 
pain of his wound on the journey. 

This done, he summoned Catesb}', who, with two of the 
attendants, raised the couch on which the wounded man was 
stretched, and conveyed him to the litter. So well was this 
managed, that Fawkes sustained no injury, and little incon- 
venience, from the movement. Two strong country vehicles 
had been procured; the one containing the wounded man's 
litter, the other the shell, which had been hastily put together, 
to hold the remains of the unfortunate Sir William RadcliflPe. 
Viviana being placed in the saddle, and Catesby having 
liberally rewarded the cottagers who had aflPorded them 
shelter, the little cavalcade was put in motion. In this way 
they journeyed through the night ; and shaping their course 
through Tarporley, Northwich, and Altringham, arrived at day- 
break in the neighbourhood of Ordsall Hall. 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE ELIXIR. 



On beholding the well-remembered roof and gables of the old 
mansion peeping h'om out the grove of trees in which it was 
embosomed, Viviana's heart died away within her. The thought 
that her father, who had so recently quitted it in the full en- 
joyment of health, and of every worldly blessing, should be so 
soon brought back a corpse, was almost too agonizing for 
endurance. Reflecting, however, that this was no season for the 
indulgence of giicf, but that she was called upon to act with 
firmness, she bore up resolutely against her emotion. 

Arrived within a short distance of the Hall, Catesby caused 
the little train to halt under the shelter of the trees, while he 
rode forward to ascertain that they could safely approach it. 
As he drew near, everything proclaimed that the hand of the 
spoiler had been there. Crossing the drawbridge, he entered 
the court, which bore abundant marks of the devastation re- 
cently committed. Various articles of furniture, broken, burnt, 
or otherwise destroyed, were lying scattered about. The glass 
in the windows was shivered ; the doors forced from their hinges ; 
the stone-copings of the walls pushed off; the flower-beds 
trampled upon ; the moat itself was in some places choked up 
with rubbish, while in others its surface was covered with floating 
pieces of timber. 

Led by curiosity Catesby proceeded to the spot where the 
stables had stood. Nothing but a heap of blackened ruins met 



30G GUY FAWKES. 

his c:;--o. Scarcely one stone was standlntr on another. The 
a]ipoar;uice of the place was so dcsohxte and dishearten niir, thai 
lie trivncd away instantly. Leaving his horse in a shed, he 
entered the house. Here, again, he encountered fresh ravages. 
The oak-panels and skirting-hoards were torn from the walls ; 
the ccilinn;;) pulled down ; and the floor lay inch-deep in broken 
phister and dust. On ascending to the upper rooms, he found 
the same disorder. The banisters of the stairs were broken ; the 
bedsteads destroyed ; the roof partially untiled. Every rooui 
was thickly strewn with leaves torn from valuable books, with 
fragments of apparel, and other articles, which the searchers not 
beintr able to carry off had wantonly destroyed. 

Having contemplated this scene of havoc for some time, with 
feelings of the bitterest indignation, Catesby descended to the 
lowest stor}'; and, after searching ineffectually for the domestics, 
was about to depart, when, turning suddenly, he perceived a 
man watching him from an adjoining room. Catesby instantly 
called to him ; but, seeing that the fellow disregarded his assur- 
ances, and was about to take to his heels, he drew his sword, 
and threatened him with severe punishment if he attempted to 
11 V. Thus exhorted, the man — who was no other than the 
younger Heydocke — advanced towards him; and throwing him- 
self at his feet, begged him in the most piteous terms to do hini 
no injury. 

" 1 have already told you I am a friend," replied Catesby, 
sheathing his sword. 

" Ah ! Mr. Catesby, is it you I behold ?" cried Martin Hev- 
docke, whose fears had hitherto prevented him from noticing the 
features of the intruder. " What brings your worship to this 
ill-fated house?" 

" First let me know if there is any enemy about ?" replied 
Catcsbv. 

" !Nune that I am aware of," rejoined Martin. " Having ran- 
sacked the premises, and done all the mischief they could, as 
you ])erceive, the miscreants departed the day before yesterday, 
and I have seen nothing of them since, though I have been 
constantly on the watch. The only alarm I have had was that 
occasioned by your worship just now." 

" Are you alone here ?" demanded Catesby. 

" No, your worship," answered Martin. " There are several 
of the servants concealeil in a secret passage under the house. 
But they are so terrified by what has lately happened, that they 
never dare show themselves, except during the night-time." 

" I do not wonder at it," replied Catesby. 

"And now may I inquire whether your worship brings any 
tidings of Sir William Radcliffe and Mistress Viviana ?" rejoined 
Martin. "I hope no ill has befallen them. My father, old 



THE ELIXIR. 107 

Jerome Ileydocke, set out to Holywell a lew days ago, to apprise 
them of tlieir danger, and I have not heard of them since." 

" Sir William Radcliffe is dead," replied Catesby. " The vil- 
lains have murdered him. Your father is a prisoner." 

" Alas ! alas!" cried the young man, bursting into tears; "these 
arc fearful times to live in. What will become of us all ?" 

" We must rise against the oppressor," replied Catesby, sternly. 
" Bite the heel that tramples upon us." 

" We must," rejoined Martin. " And if my poor arm could 
avail, it should not be slow to strike." 

"Manfully resolved !" cried Catesby, who never lost an oppor- 
tunity of gaining a proselyte. "I will point out to you a way 
by which you may accomplish what you desire. But we will 
talk of this hereafter. Hoard up your vengeance till the fitting 
moment for action arrives." 

He then proceeded to explain to the young man, who was 
greatly surprised by the intelligence, that Viviana was at hand, 
and that the body of Sir William had been brought thither for 
interment in the familv vault at the Colleo;iate Church. Havin"- 
ascertained that there was a chamber, which, having suffered less, 
than the others, might serve for Viviana's accommodation, Catesby 
returned to the party. 

A more melancholy cavalcade has been seldom seen than now 
approached the gates of Ordsall Hall. First rode Viviana, in an 
agony of tears, for her grief had by this time become absolutely 
uncontrollable, with Catesby on foot, leading her horse. Next 
came Garnet, greatly exhausted and depressed ; his eyes cast 
dejectedly on the ground. Then came the litter, containing 
Guy Fawkes ; and, lastly, the vehicle with the body of Sir Wil- 
liam Radcliffe. On arriving at the gate, Viviana was met by 
two female servants, whom Martin Heydocke had summoned 
from their hiding-places ; and, as soon as she had dismounted, 
she was supported, for she was scarcely able to walk unaided, to 
the chamber destined for her reception. This done, Catesby 
proceeded, with some anxiety, to superintend the removal of 
Fawkes, who was perfectly insensible. His wound had bled 
considerably during the journey ; but the effusion had stopped 
when the faintness supervened. He was placed in one of tlie 
lower rooms till a sleeping-chamber could be prepared for him. 
The last task was to attend to tlie remains of the late unfortunate 
possessor of the mansion. By Catesby's directions a large oak 
table, once occupying the great hall, was removed to the Star 
Chamber, already described as the principal room of the house ; 
ajidj being securely propped up, — for, like the rest of the furni- 
ture, it had been much damaged by the spoilers, though, being 
of substantial material, it offered greater resistance to their 
efforts, — the shell containing the body was placed upon it. 



IQS GUY FAWKES. 

*' Better lie should lie thus," exchiimed Cateshy, when the 
incUincholy otiiee was cotujileted, " than Hve to witness the wreck 
around him. Fatal as arc these occurrences," he added, pur- 
suing the train of" thought sugizested by the scene, "they are yet 
i'avoin-able to my purjiosc. TIic only ])erson who could have 
])rcventcd my union with Viviana liadcliffc — her father — lies 
there. Wiio would have thought when she rejected my projiosal 
a few days ago, in this very room, how fortune would conspire — 
and by what dai'k and inscrutable means — to bring it about I 
Fallen as it is, this house is not yet fallen so low, but I can rein- 
state it. Its young mistress mine, her estates mine, — for she is 
now inheritress of all her father's ])ossessions, — the utmost reach of 
my ainl)iiion were gained, and all but one object of ni}' life — for 
which I have dared so much, and struggled so long — achieved !" 

" Wliat are you thinking of, my son ?" asked Garnet, who had 
v.'atchcd the changing expression of his sombre countenance, — 
•** w hat are you thinking of?" he said, tapping him on the 
■shoulder. 

" Of that which is never absent from my thoughts, father — the 
great design," replied Catesby ; "and of the means of its accom- 
j)lishmcnt, which this sad scene suggests." 

" I do not understand you, my son," rejoined the other. 

" Docs not Radcliffe's blood cry aloud for vengeance ?" con- 
tinued Catesby ; " and think you his child will be deaf to the 
•cry ? No, father, she will no longer tamely submit to wrongs 
that would steel the gentlest bosom, and make firm the feeblest 
arm, but will go hand and heart with us in our project. Viviana 
must be mine," he added, altering his tone, ''ours, I should say, 
— for, if she is mine, all the vast possessions that have accrued to 
her by her father's death shall be devoted to the furtherance of 
the mighty enterprise." 

" 1 cannot think she will refuse you now, my son," replied 
"Garnet. 

" She shall not refuse me, father," rejoined Catesby. " The 
time is gone by for idle wooing." 

"I will be no party to forcible measures, my son," returned 
•Garnet, gravely. "As far as persuasion goes, 1 will lend you 
every assistance in my power, but nothing further." 

" Persuasion is all that will be required, I am assured, father," 
answered Catesby, hastily, perceiving he had conmiitted himself 
too far. "13ut let us now see what can be done for Guy 
Fawkes." 

" Would there was any hope of his life !" exclaimed Garnet, 
eighinn; deeply. "In losing him, we lose the bravest of out 
band." 

" We do," returned Catesby. " And yet ho has been subject 
to strange fancies of late." 

•' IJe has been appalled, but never shaken," rejoined Garnet. 



THE ELIXIR. }C1^ 

" Of all otir iiumber, you and he were the only two upon whomf 
I could rely. When he is gone, you will stand alone." 

Catesby made no repl}', but led the way to the chamber where 
the wounded man lay. He had regained his consciousness, but 
was too feeble to speak. After such restoratives as were at hand 
had been administered, Catesby was about to order a room to be 
fitted up for him, when Viviana, whose anxiety for the sufferer 
had overcome her affliction, made her appearance. On learning 
Catesby^s intentions, she insisted upon Fawkes being removed to 
the room allotted to her, which had not been dismantled like the 
rest. Seeing it was in vain to oppose her, Catesby assented, and 
the sufferer was accordingly carried thither, and placed within, 
the bed — a large antique piece of furniture, hung with faded 
damask curtains. The room was one of the oldest in the house, 
and at the further end stood a small closet, approached by an 
arched doorway, and fitted up with a hassock and crucifix, which,, 
strange to say, had escaped the ravages of the searchers. 

Placed within the couch, Guy Fawkes began to ramble a& 
before about the conspiracy ; and fearing his ravings might 
awaken the suspicion of the servants, Catesby would not suffer 
any of them to come near him, but arranged with Garnet to keejv 
watch over him by turns. By degrees, he became more com- 
posed ; and, after dozing a little, opened his eyes, and, looking- 
round, inquired anxiously for his sword. At first, Catesby, wluv 
v.as alone with him at the time, hesitated in his answer, but 
seeing he appeared greatly disturbed, he showed him that his- 
liat, gauntlets, and rapier were lying by the bedside. 

" I am content," rephed the wounded man, smiling faintly ;. 
" that sword has never left my side, waking or sleeping, lor 
twenty years. Let me grasp it once more — perhaps for the last 
time." 

Catesby handed him the weapon. He looked at it for a few 
moments, and pressed the blade to his lips. 

*' Farewell, old friend I" he said, a tear gathering in his eye, 
" farewell I Catesby," he added, as he resigned the weapon tO" 
him, " I have one request to make. Let my sword be buried 
with me." 

" It shall," replied Catesby, in a voice suffocated by emotion, 
for the request touched him where his stern nature was most 
accessible : " I will place it by you myself." 

" Thanks !" exclaimed Fawkes. And soon after this, he again, 
fell into a slumber. 

His sleep endured for some hours ; but his breathing grew 
fainter and f\\inter, so that at the last it was scarcely perceptible. 
"A striking change had likewise taken place in his countenance, 
and these signs convinced Catesby he had not long to live. 
While he was watching him with great anxiety, Viviana appeared 
at the door of the chamber, and beckoned him out. No'.selessly 



110 GUY FAWKES. 

obcyinp^ the summons, atul following her along the gallery, he 
entered a room where he found Garnet. 

" I have called you to say that a remedy has been suggested 
to me by Martin' Ileydocke," observed Viviana, " by which I 
trust Guy Fawkes may yet be saved." 

" How ?" asked Catesby, eagerly. 

" Doctor Dee, the warden of Manchester, of whom you must 
have heard," she continued, "is said to possess an elixir of such 
virtue, that a few drops of it will snatch him who drinks them 
from the very jaws of death." 

" I should not have suspected you of so much credulity, 
Viviana," replied Catesby ; " but grant that Doctor Dee pos- 
sesses this marvellous elixir — which for my own part I doubt — 
how are we to obtain it?" 

" If you will repair to the college, and see him, I doubt not he 
uill give it you," rejoined Viviana. 

Catesby smiled incredulously. 

" I have a claim upon Doctor Dee," she persisted, ''wliich I 
have never enforced. I will now use it. Show him this token," 
she continued, detaching a small ornament from her neck ; " tell 
him you bring it from me, and I am sure he will comply with 
your request." 

"Your commands shall be obeyed, Viviana," replied Catesby ; 
■** but I frankly confess I have no faith in the remedy." 

"It is at least worth the trial, my son," observed Garnet. 
■*' Doctor Dee is a wonderful person, and has made many dis- 
•covcries in medicine, as in other sciences, and this niarvellous 
specific may, for aught we know, turn out no imposture." 

" If such is your opinion," replied Catesby, " I will set out at 
once. If it is to be tried at all, it must be without delay. The 
poor sufferer is sinking fast." 

" Go then," cried Viviana, " and heaven speed your mission I 
If you could prevail upon Doctor Dee to visit the wounded man 
in person, I should prefer it. Besides, I have another request to 
make of him — but that will do hereafter. Lose not a moment 
now." 

" I will fly on the wings of the wind," replied Catesby. 
" Heaven grant that when I return the object of our solicitude 
may not be past all human aid I" 

With this, he hurried to an out-building in which the horses 
■were placed, and choosing the strongest and fleetest from out 
their number, mounted, and started at full gallop in the direction 
of Manchester ; nor did he relax his speed imtil he reached the 
gates of the ancient College. Hanging the bridle of his smoking 
steed to a hook in the wall, he crossed the large quadrangular 
court; and finding the principal entrance open, passed the lofty 
room now used as the refectory, ascended the flight of stone 
«tairs that conducts the modern visitor to the library, and was 



THE ELTXm. Ill 

traverslnp; the long; galleries communicating with it, and now 
crowded with the learning of ages, bequeathed by the bene'fo- 
lence of his rival, Humphrey Chetham, when he encountered a 
crave but crafty-looking personage, in a loose brown robe a:u' 
Polish cap, who angrily demanded his business. 

Apologizing for the intrusion, Catesby was about to explain, 
when a small oak door near them was partly opened, and an 
authoritative voice, from within, exclaimed, "Do not hinder him, 
Kelley. I know his business, and will see him." 

The seer made no further remark, but pointing to the door, 
Catesby at once comprehended that it was Dee's voice he had 
heard; and, thongh somewhat startled by the intimation that 
he was expected, entered the room. He found the Doctor sur- 
ronnded by his magical apparatus, and slowly returning to the 
chair he had just quitted. 

Without lookino; behind him to see whom he addressed. Dee 
continued, " I have just consulted ni}^ show-stone, and know why 
Ytni are come hither. You bring a token from Viviana Rad- 
cHffe." 

" I do," replied Catesby, in increased astonishment, " It is 
here." 

" It is needless to produce it," replied Dee, still keeping his 
hack towards him. " I liave seen it already, Kelley," he con- 
tinued, "I am about to set out for Ordsall Hall immediately. 
\'ou must accompany me." 

" Amazement !" cried Catesby. " Is the purpose of my visit 
then really known to your reverence ?" 

"You shall hear," rejoined Dee, facing him. "You have a 
friend who is at the point of death, and having heard that I pos- 
sess an elixir of wonderful efficacy, are come in quest of it." 

" True," replied Catesby, utterly confounded. 

" The name of that friend," pursued Dee, regarding him 
fixedly, " is Guy Fawkes, — your own, Robert Catesby." 

" I need no more to convince me, reverend sir," rejoined 
Catesby, trembling, in spite of himself, " that all I have heard 
of 3'OMr wonderful powers ftills far short of the truth." 

" You are but just in time," replied Dee, bowing gravely, in 
ncltnovvledgment of the compliment. " Another hour, and it 
would have been too late." 

" Then you think he will live !" cried Catesby, eagerly. 

*' I am sure of it," replied Dee, " provided " 

"Provided what?" interrupted Catesby. "Is there auglit I 
can do to ensure his recovery?" 

" No," replied Dec, sternly. *' I am debating within myself 
whether it is worth while reviving him for a more dreadful 
fr.e." 

"•' What mean you, reverend sir ? ' asked Catcsb}', a shade 
pa.ssing over his countenance. 



]'^2 CTJV FAWKES. 

" You unclerstand my meaning, and therefore need no cxpl.ina- 
tion," replied Dee. " Iletnrn to Ordsall Mall, and tell iSilsa 
RadclilTc I will be there in an hour. Bid her have no further 
fear. If the wounded man breathes when I arrive, I will under- 
take to cure him. Add further, that I know the other request 
she desires to make of me, and that it is granted before it is 
asked. Farewell, sir, for a short time." 

On reaching the court, Catesby expanded his cliest, shook his 
limbs, and exclaimed, " At length, I breathe freely. The atmo- 
sphere of that infernal chamber smelt so horribly of sulphur that 
it almost stifled me. Well, if Doctor Dee has not dealings with 
the devil, man never had I However, if he cures Guy Fawkes, 
I care not whence the medicine comes from." 

As he descended Smithy Bank, and was about to cross the old 
bridge over the Irwell, he perceived a man riding before him, 
who seemed anxious to avoid him. Struck by this person's 
manner, he urged his horse into a quicker pace, and being better 
mounted of the two, soon overtook him, when to his surprise he 
found it was Martin Heydocke. 

" What are you doing here, sirrah ?" he demanded. 

*' I have been sent by Mistress Viviana with a message to Mr, 
Humphrey Chetham," replied the young man, in great con- 
fusion. 

" Indeed !" exclaimed Catesby, angrily. " And how dared 
you convey a message to him, without consulting me on the 
subject ?"' 

" I was not aware you were my master," replied Martin, 
sulkily. "If I owe obedience to any one, it is to Mr. Chetham, 
whose servant I am. But if Mistress Viviana gives me a mes- 
sage to deliver, I will execute her commands, whoever may be 
pleased or displeased." 

" I did but jest, thou saucy knave," returned Catesby, who 
did not desire to offend him. " Here is a piece of money for 
thee. Now, if it be no secret, what was Miss RadclifFe's mes- 
sage to thy master?" 

" I know not what her letter contained," replied Martin ; 
" but his answer was, that he would come to the hall at mid- 
night." 

" It is well I ascertained this," thought Catesby, and he added 
aloud, " I understood your master had been arrested and im- 
prisoned." 

" So he was," replied Martin ; " but he had interest enough 
with the Commissioners to procure his liberation." 

"Enough," replied Catesby; and striking spurs into his 
charger, he dashed off, 

A quarter of an hour's hard riding brought him to the haM. 
and, on arriving there, he proceeded at once to the wounded 
man's chamber, where he found Viviana and Garnet. 



THE ELIXIR. 113 

"Have yon succeeded in your errand?" cried the former, 
eagerly. " Will Doctor Dee come, or has he sent the elixir?" 

" He will bring it himself," replied Catesby. 

Viviana uttered an exclamation of joy, and the sound ap- 
peared to reach the ears of the sufferer, for he stirred, and 
groaned faintly. 

^'Doctor Dee desired me to tell you," continued Catesby, 
drawing Viviana aside, and speaking in a low tone, " that your 
other request was granted." 

Viviana looked surprised, and as if she did noi clearly under- 
stand him. 

" Might he not refer to Humphrey Chetham ?" remarked 
Catesby, somewhat maliciously. 

"Ah I you have learnt from Martin Heydocke that I have 
written to him," returned Viviana, blushing deeply. " What I 
was about to ask of Doctor Dee had no reference to Humphrey 
Chetham. It was to request permission to privately inter my 
father's remains in our family vault in the Collegiate Church. 
But how did he know I had any request to make ?" 

" That passes my comprehension," replied Catesby, " unless 
he obtained his information from his familiar spirits." 

Shortly after this. Dr. Dee and Kelley arrived at the halL 
Catesby met them at the gate, and conducted them to the 
wounded man's chamber. Coldly saluting Garnet, whom he 
eyed with suspicion, and bowing respectfully to Viviana, the 
Doctor slowly advanced to the bedside. He gazed for a short 
time at the wounded man, and folded his arms thoughtfully upon 
liis breast. The eyes of the sufferer were closed, and his lips 
slightly apart, but no breath seemed to issue from them. His 
bronzed complexion had assumed the ghastly hue of death, and 
his strongly-marked features had become fixed and rigid. His 
■black hair, stiffened and caked with blood, escaped from the 
bandages around his head, and hung in elf locks on the pillow. 
It was a piteous spectacle ; and Doctor Dee appeared much 
moved by it. 

" The worst is over," he muttered : " why recall the spirit to 
its wretched tenement?" 

"If you can save him, r|;.'erend sir, do not hesitate," implored 
Viviana. 

" I am come hither for that purpose," replied Dee ; " but 1 
■must have no other witness to the experiment except yourself, 
«'nd my attendant Kelley." 

" I do not desire to be present, reverend sir," replied Viviana ; 
** but I will retire into that closet, and pray that your remedy 
may prevail." 

« My prayers for the same end shall be offered in the adjoining 
room," observed Garnet ; and taking Catesby 's arm, who seemed 
spell-bound by curiosity, he dragged him away. 

I 



114 GUY FAWKES. 

The door closed, and Viviana withdrew into the closet, where 
shv knelt down before the crucifix. Doctor Dee seated himself 
oii the bedside ; and taking a gourd-shaped bottle, filled with a 
clear sparkling liquid, from beneath his robe, he raised it to his 
eyes with his left hand, while he placed his right on the wrist of 
tlio wounded man. In this attitude he continued for a few 
fccconds, while Kellcy, with his arms folded, likewise kept his 
gaze fixed on the phial. At the expiration of that time. Dee, 
who had apparently counted the pulsations of the sufferer, took 
out the glass stopper from the bottle, the contents of which 
diffused a pimgent odour around; and wetting a small piece of 
linen with it, applied it to his temples. He then desired Kelley 
to raise his head, and poured a few drops down his throat. 
This done, he waited a few minutes, and repeated the application. 

" Look !"' he cried to Kelley. " The elixir already begins to 
operate. His chest heaves. His limbs shiver. That flush upon 
the cheek, and that dampness npon the brow, denote that the 
animal heat is restored. A third draught will accomplish the cure.'* 

" I can already feel his heart palpitate," observed Kelley, 
placing his hand on the patient's breast. 

" Heaven be praised I" ejaculated Viviana, who had suspended 
her devotions to listen. 

" Hold hiin tightly," cried Dee to his assistant, " while 1 
administer the last draught. He may injure himself by his 
struggles," 

Kelley obeyed, and twined his arms tightly round the wounded 
man. And fortunate it was that the precaution was taken, for 
the elixir was no sooner poured down his throat than his chest 
began to labour violently, his eyes opened, and, raising himself 
bolt-upright, he struggled violently to break from the hold im- 
])ased upon him. This he would have effected, if Dee had not 
likewise lent his aid to prevent him. 

" This is, indeed, a wonderful sight !" cried Viviana, who had 
quitted the closet, and now gazed on, in awe and astonishment. 
"1 can never be sufficiently thankful to you, reverend sir." 

" Give thanks to Him to whom alone they are due," replied 
Dee. " Summon your friends. They may now resume their 
})osts. My task is accomplished." 

Catesby and Garnet being called into the room, could scarcely 
credit their senses when they beheld Guy Fawkes, who by this 
lime had ceased struggling, reclining on Kelley's shoulder, and, 
except a certain wildness in the eye and cadaverousness of liue, 
lookintr as he was wont to do. 



THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH AT MANCHESTER. 1lS> 



CHAPTER XVI. 

THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH AT MANCHESTER. 

Bidding Kelley remain with Gaj Fawkes, Doctor Dee signified 
to Viviana that he had a few words to say to her in private 
before his departure, and leading the way to an adjoining room, 
informed her that he was aware of her desire to have her father's 
remains interred in the Collegiate Church, and that, so far from 
opposing her inclinations, he would willingly accede to them, 
only recommending as a measure of prudence that the cere- 
monial should be performed at night, and with as nuich secrecy 
as possible. Viviana thanked him in a voice of much emotion 
for his kindness, and entirely acquiesced in his suggestion of 
caution. At the same time, she could not help expressing her 
surprise that her thoughts should be known to him. " Though, 
indeed," she added, " after the wonderful exhibition I have just 
witnessed of your power, I can scarcely suppose that any limits 
are to be placed to it." 

" Few things are hidden from me," replied Dee, with a grati- 
fied smile ; " even the lighter matters of the heart, in which I 
might be supposed to take little interest, do not altogether ehul(«^ 
my observation. In reference to this, you will not, I am sure, 
be offended with me, Viviana, if I tell you I have noticed with 
some concern the attachment that has arisen between you and 
Plumphrey Chetham." 

Viviana uttered an exclamation of surprise, and a deep blush 
suffused her pallid cheeks. 

" I am assuming the privilege of an old man with you, Viviana," 
continued Dee, in a graver tone, " and I may add, of an old 
friend, — for 3'^our lamented mother was one of my dearest and 
best friends, as you perchance called to mind, when you sent me 
to-day, by Mr. Catesby, the token I gave her years ago. You 
have done unwisely in inviting Humphrey Chetham to come 
hither to-night." 

" How so ?" she ffiltered. 

" Because, if he keeps his appointment, fatal consequences 
may ensue," answered Dee. "Your message has reached the 
ears of one from whom, — most of all, — ^you should have con- 
cealed it." 

'.^ Mr. Catesby has heard of it, I know," replied Viviana. 
*'But you do not apprehend any danger from him ?" 

" He is Chetham's mortal foe," rejoined Dee, " and will slay 
him, if he finds an opportunity." 

" You alarm me," she cried. " I will speak to Mr. Catesby 



JIG GUY FAAVKES, 

>-'V ■ 

on the subject, and entreat liiin, as he values my regard, to ofTor 
no molestation to his iancicd rival." 

*' Faiicied rival !" echoed Dee^ raising liis brows contemptnonsly. 
" Do you seek to persuade me that you do not love llumphrev 
Chetham?" 

" Assuredly not," replied Viviana. " I freely acknowledge 
my attachment to him. It is as strong as my aversion to jSIr. 
Catesb}^ But the latter is aware that the suit of his rival Ls as 
hopeless as his own." 

" Explain yourself, I pray you?" said Dee. 

" My destiny is the cloister, — and this he well know?," she 
rejoined. " As soon as my worldly affairs can be arranged, I 
shall retire to the English nunnery at Brussels, where 1 shall 
vow myself to Heaven." 

" Such is your present intention," replied Dee. " But you 
will never quit your own country." 

*' What shall hinder me ?" asked Viviana, uneasily. 

*' Many things," returned Dee. " Amongst others, this 
meeting with your lover." 

" Call him not by that name, I beseech you, reverend sir," 
she rejoined. " Humphrey Chetham will never be other to me 
than a friend." 

" It may be," answered Dee. " But your destiny is 7iot the 
'Cloister." 

" For what am I reserved, then ?" demanded Viviana, trembling. 

*' All I dare tell you," he returned, " all it is needful for 3'oa 
to know, is, that your future career is mixed up with that of 
Guy Fawkes. But do not concern yourself about what is to come. 
The present is sufficient to claim your attention." 

" True," replied Viviana ; " and my first object shall be to 
despatch a messenger to Humphrey Chetham to prevent him 
from coming hither." 

" Trouble yourself no further on that score," returned Dee. 
" I will convey the message to him. As regards the funeral, it 
must take place without delay. I will be at the south porch of 
the church with the keys at midnight, and Robert Burnell, the 
sexton, and another assistant on whom I can depend, shall be in 
attendance. Though it is contrary to my religious opinions and 
f^'^!lngs to allow a Romish priest to perform the service, I will 
not interfere with Father Garnet. I owe your mother a deep 
debt of gratitude, and will pay it to her husband and her 
•child." 

" Thanks ! — in Iter name, thanks I" cried Viviana, in a voice 
suffocated by emotion. 

*' And now," continued Dee, *' I would ask you one further 
question. My art has made me acquainted that a plot is hatching 
against the King and his Government by certain of the Catholic 
party. Are you favourable to the design?" 



THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH AT MANCHESTER. 117 

"I am not," replied Viviana, firmly. "Nor can you regard 
it with more horror than myself." 

"I was sure of it," returned Dee. "Nevertheless, I am 
glad to have my supposition confirmed from your own mouth." 

With this, he moved towards the door, but Viviana arrested 
his departure. 

" Stay, reverend sir," she cried, with a look of great uneasiness ; 
*' if you are in possession of this dread secret, the lives of my 
companions are in your power. You will not betray them. 
Or, if you deem it your duty to reveal the plot to those en- 
dangered by it, you will give its contrivers timely warning." 

" Fear nothing," rejoined Dee. " I cannot, were I so dis- 
posed, interfere with the fixed purposes of fate. The things 
revealed by my familiar spirits never pass my lips. They are 
more sacred than the disclosures made to a priest of ^^our fiuth at 
the confessional. The bloody enterprise on which these zealots 
are bent will fail. I have warned Fawkes; but my warning, 
though conveyed by the lips of the dead, and by other means 
equally terrible, was unavailing I would warn Catesby and 
Garnet, but they would heed me not. Viviana Ivadcliffe," he 
continued, in a solemn voice, "you questioned me just now about 
the future. Have you courage to make the same demand from 
your dead father? If so, I will compel his corpse to answer you." 

"Oh! no — no," cried Viviana, horror-stricken; "not for 
worlds would I commit so impious an act. Gladly as I would 
know what fate has in store for me, nothing should induce me to 
purchase the knowledge at so dreadful a price." 

" Farewell, then," rejoined Dee. " At midnight, at the south 
porch of the Collegiate Church, I shall expect you." 

So saying, he took his departure ; and, on entering the gallery, 
he perceived Catesby hastily retreating. 

" Aha !" he muttered. " We have had a listener here. Well, 
no matter. What he has heard may prove serviceal)le to him." 

He then returned to the chamber occupied by Guy Fawkes, 
and finding he had dropped into a deep and tranquil sleep, 
motioned Kelley, who was standing by the bedside watching his 
slumbers with folded arms, to follow him, and bowing gravely to 
Garnet quitted the hall. 

Ashe crossed the court, on his way to the drawbridge, Catesby 
suddenly threw himself in his path, and laying his hand upon 
his sword, cried in a menacing voice, — " Doctor Dee, neither 
you nor your companion shall (juit the hall till you have solemnly 
sworn not to divulge aught pertaining to the plot, of which you 
have so mysteriously obtained information." 

" Is this my recompence for rescuing your comrade from the 
jaws of death, sir?" replied Dee, sternly. 

" The necessity of the case must plead its excuse," rejoined 
Catesby. " My own safety, and the safety of those leagued with 



118 GUY FAWKES. 

nie, require that I should be peremptory in my demand. Did I 
not owe vou a large debt of gratitude for your resuscitation of 
Guy Fawkes, I would have insured your secrecy with your life. 
As it is, I will be content with your oath." 

" Fool !" exclaimed Dee, " stand aside, or I will compel you 
to do so." 

" 'J'hink not to terrify me by idle threats," returned Catcsby. 
" I wiUingly acknowledge your superior skill, — as, indeed, I have 
good reason to do, — in the science of medicine; but I have no 
faith in your magical tricks. A little reflection has shown me 
how the knowledge I at first thought so wonderful was acquired. 
You obtained it by means of Martin Heydocke, who, mounted 
on a swift steed, reached the College before me. He told you 
of the object of my visit, — of Viviana's wish to have her father 
interred in the Collegiate Church, — of her message to Humphrey 
Cbetham, You were, therefore, fully prepared for my arrival, 
imd at first, I must confess, completely imposed upon me. Nay, 
had I not overheard your conversation just now with Viviana, 
I might have remained your dupe still. But your allusion to 
Chetham's visit awakened my suspicions, and, on re-considering 
the nialter, the whole trick flashed upon me.'* 

" What more ?" demanded Dee, his brow lowering, and his 
■eves sparkling with rage. 

"Thus much," returned Catcsby. "I have your secret, and 
you have mine. And though the latter is the more important, 
inasmuch as several lives hang upon it, whereas a conjuror's 
worthless reputation is alone dependent on the other, yet both 
must be kept. Swear, then, not to reveal the ])lot, and in my 
turn I will take any oath you choose to dictate not to disclose 
the jugglery I have detected." 

" 1 will make no terms with you," returned Dee ; " and if I 
do not reveal your damnable plot, it is not from consideration of 
you or your associates, but because the hour for its disclosure is 
not yet arrived. When full proof of your guilt can be obtained, 
then rest assured it will be made known, — though not by me. 
Not one of your number shall escape — not one." 

Catesby again laid his hand upon his sword, and seemed from 
his looks to be meditating the destruction of the Doctor and his 
assistant. But they appeared wholly unconcerned at his glances. 

" What you have said concerning Martin Heydocke is false — 
as false as your own foul and bloody scheme," pursued Dee. " I 
have neither seen, nor spoken with him." 

" But your assistant, Edward Kcliey, has," retorted Catesby, 
"and that amounts to the same thiiiu." 

" For the third and last time 1 command you to stand aside,'* 
cried Dee, in a tone of concentrated anger. 

Catesby laughed aloud. 

'* Wliat if I refuse ?" he said, in a jeering voice. 



THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH AT MANCHESTER. 119 

Doctor Dec made no answer ; but, suddenly drawing a small 
phial from beneath his robe, cast its contents in his opponent's face. 
Blinded by the spirit, Catcsby raised his hand to his eyes, and 
while in this condition a thick cloth was thrown over his head 
from behind, and, despite his resistance, he was borne off, and 
bound with a strong cord to an adjoining tree. 

Half an hour elapsed, during which he exhausted his fury in 
vain outcries for assistance, and execrations and menaces againsr 
Dee and his companion. At the expiration of that time, hearing 
steps approaching, he called loudly to be released, and was 
answered by the voice of Martin Heydocke. 

*' What ! is it your worship I behold ?" cried Martin, in a tone 
of affected commiseration. "Mercy on us ! what has happened? 
Have the rascally searchers been here again?" 

" Hold your peace, knave, and unbind me," rejoined Catesby. 
angrily. " I shrewdly suspect," he added, as his commands were 
obeyed, and the cord twined around his arms unfastened, and 
the cloth removed, — " I shrewdly suspect," he said, fixing a stern 
glance upon Martin, which effectual!}' banished the smile from 
his demure countenance, " that you have bad some share in this 



jusmess." 



" What I, your worship ?" exclaimed Martin. ** Not the slight- 
est, I assure you. It was by mere chance I came this way, and, 
perceiving some one tied to a tree, was about to take to my heels, 
when, fancying I recognised your worship's well-formed legs, I 
ventured forward." 

"You shall become more intimately acquainted with my wor- 
ship's boots, rascal, if I find my suspicions correct," rejoined 
Catesby. " Have you the effrontery to tell me you have never 
seen this rope and this cloth before ?" 

" Certes, I have, your worship," replied Martin. " May the 
first hang me, and the last serve as my winding-sheet, if I speak 
not the truth ! Ah, now I look agam," he added, pretending to 
examine them, "it must be a horse-cloth and halter from the 
stable. Peradventure, I have seen them." 

" That I will be sworn you have, and used them too," rejoinecl 
Catesby. " I am half inclined to tie you to the tree in my place. 
But Avhere is your employer? — where is Doctor Dee ?" 

" Doctor Dee is 7iotmy employer," answered Martin, "neither 
do I serve him. Mr. Humphrey Chetham, as I have already 
told your worship, is my niastor. As to the Doctor, he left the 
hall some time since. Father Garnet thought you had accom- 
panied him on the road. I have seen nothing of him. Of a 
truth I have not." 

Catesby reflected a moment, and then strode towards the hall, 
while Martin, with a secret smile, picked up the halter and cloth, 
and withdrew to the stable. 

Kepairing to the chamber of the wounded man, Catcsby found 



320 GUT FAWKES. 

Garnet seated by his conch, and related what had occurred. The 
Jesuit listened with profound attention to the recital, and on its 
conclusion observed, — 

*' I am sorry you have offended Doctor Dee, my son. He 
mif^ht have proved a good friend. As it is, you have made him a 
dangerous enemy." 

« He was not to be trusted, father," returned Catesby. " But 
if you have any fears of him, or Kelley, I will speedily set them 
at rest." 

"No violence, my son," rejoined Garnet. *'You will only 
increase the mischief you have already occasioned. I do not 
think Dee will betray us. But additional circumspection will be 
requisite. Tarry here while I confer with Viviana on this sub- 
ject. She has apparently some secret influence with the Doctor, 
and may be prevailed upon to exert it in our behalf." 

It was long before Garnet returned. When he reappeared, 
his looks convinced Catesby that the interview had not proved 
satisfactory. 

" Your imprudence has placed us in a perilous position, my 
son," he observed. " Viviana refuses to speak to Doctor Dee on 
the subject, and strongl}^ reprobates your conduct." 

Catesby 's brow lowered. 

" There is but one course to pursue," he muttered, rising ; 
"our lives or his must be sacrificed. I will act at once." 

" Hold !" exclaimed Garnet authoritatively. " Wait till to- 
morrow; -o.id, if aufibt occurs in the interim to confirm your 
suspicions, do as you ihink proper. I will not oppose you." 

" If I forbear so long," returned Catesby, " it will not be safe 
to remain here." 

" I will risk it," said Garnet, " and I counsel you to do the 
same. You will not lea\^ Viviana at this strait." 

" I have no such thoughts," replied Catesby. "If I go, she 
goes too." 

" Then it will be in vain, I am sure, to endeavour to induce 
her to accompany you till her father is interred," observed 
Garnet. 

'• True," replied Catesby ; " I had forgotten that. We shall 
meet the hoary juggler at the church, and an opportunity may 
occur for executing my purpose there. Unless he will swear at 
the altar not to betray us, he shall die by my hand." 

" An oath in such a case would be no security, my son," 
returned Garnet; "and his slaughter and that of his companion 
would be equally inefficacious, and greatly prejudicial to our 
cause. If he means to betray us, he has done so ahead}'. But 
I have little apprehension. I do not think him well affected 
towards the government, and I cannot but think, if you had not 
thus grossly insulted him, he would have favoured rather than 
opposed our design. If he was aware of the plot, and adverse 



THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH AT MANCHESTER. 1 SI 

to it, what need was there to exert his skill in behalf of our dying; 
friend, v/ho, but for him, would have been, ere this, a lump of 
lifeless clay ? No, no, my son. You are far too hasty in your 
judfjm.ent. Nor am I less surprised at your injustice. Over-> 
looking; the great benefit conferred upon us, because some 
trifling scheme has been thwarted, you would requite our bene- 
factor by cutting his throat/' 

"Your rebuke is just, fether," returned Catesby. "I have 
acted heedlessly. But I will endeavour to repair my error." 

" Enough, my son," replied Garnet. " It will be advisable tc- 

fo well armed to the church to-night, for fear of a surprise. But 
shall not absent myself on that account." 

" Nor I," rejoined Catesby. 

The conversation was then carried on, on other topics, whenn 
they were interrupted by the entrance of Viviana, who came to 
consult them about the funeral. It was arranged — since better 
could not be found — that the vehicle used to bring thither the 
body of the unfortunate knight should transport it to its last 
home. No persuasions of Garnet could induce Viviana to relin- 
quish the idea of attending the ceremony; and Catesb}', though 
he affected the contrary, secretly rejoiced at her determination. 

Night came, and all was in readiness. Viviana to the last 
indulged a hope that Humphrey Chetham would arrive in time 
to attend the funeral with her; but, as he did not appear, she 
concluded he had received Doctor Dee's warning. Martin Hey- 
docke was left in charge of Guy Fawkes, who still continued to 
slumber dee[)ly, and, when within half an hour of the appointed 
time, the train set out. 

They were all well mounted, and proceeded at a slow pace 
along the lane skirtino; the west bank of the Irwell. The ni<i;ht 
was profoundly dark ; and, as it was not deemed prudent tO' 
carry torches, some care was requisite to keep in the right road. 
Catesby rode first, and was followed by Garnet and Viviana,, 
after v.hom came the little vehicle containing the bodv. The 
rear was brought up by three of the servants sent b}^ Sir Everard 
Digby ; a fourth acting as driver of the sorry substitute lor a 
hearse. Not a word was uttered by any of the party. In this 
stealthy manner was the once-powerful and wealthy Sir William. 
Radcliffe, the owner of the whole district through which they 
were passing, conveyed to the burial-place of his ancestors ! 

In s^horter time than they had allowed themselves for tlic f 
i(Hirney, the melancholy cavalcade reached Salford Bridge, and ; 
crossing it at a quick pace, as had been previously arranged by 
Cateyby, arrived without molestation or notice (for no one waa 
abroad in the town at that hour) at the southern gate of the 
Collegiate Church, where, it may be remembered, Guy Eawke* 
had witnessed the execution of the two seminary ju'iests, and on' 
the spikes of which their heads and dismembered bodies were 



122 GUY FAWKES. 

now fixed. An old man here presented himself, and, unlocking 
the gate, informed them he was Robert Biirnell, the sexton. 
The shell was then taken out, and borne on the shoulders of the 
servants towards the church, Burnell leading the way. Garnet 
followed ; and as soon as Catesby had committed the horses to 
the care of the driver of the carriage, he tendered his arm to 
Viviana, who could scarcely have reached the sacred structure 
imsuj)portcd. 

])()ctor Dee met them at the church porch, as he had ap- 
pointed, and, as soon as they had passed through it, the door 
was locked. Addressing a few words in an under tone to Vivi- 
ana, but not deigning to notice either of her companions. Dee 
directed the bearers of the body to follow him, and proceeded 
towards the choir. 

The interior of the reverend and beautiful fane was buried in 
profound gloom, and the feeble light diffused by the sexton's 
lantern only made the darkness more palpable. On entering 
the broad and noble nave nothing could be seen of its clustered 
pillars, or of the exquisite pointed arches, enriched with cinque- 
foil and quatrefoil, inclosing blank shields, which they supported. 
Neither could its sculptured cornice ; its clerestory windows ; its 
(ipper range of columns, supporting dcmi-angels jilaying on mu- 
sical instruments; its moulded roof crossed by transverse beams, 
•enriched in the interstices with sculptured ornaments, be distin- 
guished. Most of these architectural glories were invisible; but 
the very gloom in which they were shrouded was imposing. As 
the dim light fell upon pillar after pillar as they passed, revealing 
their mouldings, piercing a few feet into the side aisles, and 
falling upon the grotesque heads, the embattled ornaments and 
grotesque tracery of the arches, the effect was inexpressibly 



airiking. 



Nor were the personages inappropriate to the sombre scene. 
The reverend figure of Dee, with his loose flowing robe and 
long white beard ; the priestly garb and grave aspect of Garnet; 
the soldier-like bearing of Catesby, his armed heel and rapier- 
'j>oint clanking upon the pavement ; the drooping figure of 
Viviana, whose features were buried in her kerchief, and whose 
soljs were distinctly audible ; the strangelj'-fashioned cofiin, and 
the attendants by whom it was borne; — all constituted a singu- 
lar, and, at the same time, deej)ly-interesting picture. 

Approaching the magnificent screen terminating the nave, 
they passed through an arched gateway within it, and entered 
the choir. The west-end of this part of the church was assigned 
<is the burial-place of the ancient and honourable family, the 
head of which was about to be deposited within it, and was de- 
signated from the circumstance, the " Radcliffe chancel." A 
long slab of grey marble, in which a brass plate, displaying the 
armorial bearings of the Radciiffes, was inserted^ had been re- 



THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH AT MANCHESTER. 123 

moved, and the earth thrown out of the cavity beneath it. 
Kelle}', who had assisted in making the excavation, was standing 
beside it, leaning on a spade, with a lantern at his feet. He drew 
aside as the funeral train approached, and the shell was deposited 
at the edge of the grave. 

Picturesque and striking as was the scene in the nave, it fell 
far short of that now exhibited. The choir of the Colleg-iate 
Church at Manchester may challenge comparison with any simi- 
lar structure. Its thirty elaborately-carved stalls, covered with 
canopies of the richest tabernacle work, surmounted by niches, 
mouldings, pinnacles, and perforated tracery, and crowned with 
a richly-sculptured cornice; its side aisles, with their pillars and 
arches ; its moulded ceiling rich in the most delicate and fairy 
tracery ; its gorgeous altar-screen of carved oak ; and its mag- 
nificent eastern window, then filled with stained glass, form a 
coup-d'oeil of almost unequalled splendour and beauty. Few of 
these marvels could now be seen. But such points of the pin- 
nacles and hanging canopies of the stalls, of the facades of the 
side-aisles, and of the fretted roof, as received any portion of the 
light, came in with admirable effect. 

" All is prepared, you perceive," observed Dee to Viviana. 
*' I will retire while the ceremony is performed." And gravely 
inclining his head, he passed through an arched door in the south 
iiisle, and entered the chapter-house. 

Garnet was about to proceed with the service appointed by 
the Romish Church for the burial of the dead, when Viviana, 
uttering a loud cry, would have fallen, if Catesby had not ilown 
to her assistance, and borne her to one of the stalls. Recovering 
her self-possession the next moment, she entreated him to leave 
her ; and while the service proceeded, she knelt down and prayed 
fervently for the soul of the departed. 

Placing himself at the foot of the bod}'. Garnet sprinkled it 
with holy water, which he had brought with him in a small silver 
consecrated vessel. He then recited the De Profundis, the Mi- 
serere^ and other antiphons and prayers; placed incense in a 
burner, which he had likewise brought with him, and having 
lighted it, bowed reverently towards the altar, sprinkled the 
body thrice with holy water, at the sides, at the head, and the 
feet ; and then walking round it with the incense-burner, dis- 
persed its fragrant odour over it. This done, he recited another 
prayer, pronounced a solenm benediction over the place of sepul- 
ture, and the body was lowered into it. 

The noise of the earth falling upon the slicll aroused Viviana 
from her devotions. She looked towards the grave, but could 
see nothing but the gloomy group around it, prominent among 
which appeared the tall figure of Catesby. The sight was too 
much for her, and, unable to control her grief, she fainted. 
Meanwhile, the grave was rapidly filled, all lending their aid to 



12-^ GUY FAWKES. 

tlio rask ; and nothinp: was wantln"; but to restore the slab to its 
(5ri;iinal position. By the united efforts of Catesby, Kelley, and 
the sexton, this was soon aeconiphshed, and the former, unaware 
of what had happened, was about to proceed to Viviana, to tell 
her all was over, when he was arrested by a loud knocking at 
the church door, accompanied by a clamorous demand for ad- 
mittance. 

" We are betrayed !" exclaimed Catesby. "■ It is as I sus- 
pected. Take care of Viviana, father. 1 will after the hoary 
imj)ostor, and cleave his skull ! Extinguish the lights — quick ". 
quick!" 

Garnet hastily complied with these injunctions, and the choir 
was plunged in total darkness. Pie then rushed to the stalls, 
but could nowhere find Viviana. lie called her by name, but 
received no answer, and was continuing his fruitless search, when 
he heard footsteps approaching, and the voice of Catesby ex- 
claimed, 

" Follow me with your charge, father." 

"Alas! my son, she is not here," replied Garnet. "I have 
searched each stall as carefully as I could in the dark. I fear 
f-he has been spirited away." 

" Impossible !" cried Catesby. And he ran his hand along 
the row of sculptured seats, but without success. " She is indeed 
gone !" he exclaimed distractedly. " It was here I left her — 
nay, here I beheld her at the very moment the lights were extin- 
guished. Viviana ! — Viviana !" 

But all was silent. 

"It is that cursed magician's handiwork!" he continued, 
striking his forehead in despair. 

" Did vou find him ?" demanded Garnet. 

" No," replied Catesby. " The door of the chapter-house was 
locked inside. The treacherous villain did well to guard against 
my fury." 

" You provoked his resentment, my son," rejoined Garnet. 
" But this is not a season for reproaches. Something must be 
done. Where is Kelley?" 

At the suggestion, Catesby instantly darted to the spot where 
the seer had stood. lie was not there. He then questioned 
the servants, whose teeth were chattering with fright, but they 
had neitiier heard him depart, nor could tell anything about; 
him ; and perceiving plainly from their trepidation that these 
men would lend no aid, even if they did not join the assailants, 
he returned to communicate his apprehensions to Garnet. 

During all this time the knocking and vociferations at the 
door had continued with increased violence, and reverberated iii 
hollow peals along the roof and aisles of the church. 

The emergency was a fearful one. Catesby, however, had 
been too often placed in situations of peril, and was too constitu- 



THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH AT MANCHESTER. 125 

tionally brave, to experience much uneasiness for himself; but his 
apprehensions lest Garnet should be captured, and the sudden 
and mysterious disappearance of Viviana almost distracted him. 
Persuading himself she might have fallen to the ground, or that 
he had overlooked the precise spot where he had left her, he 
renewed his search, but with no better success than before ; and 
he was almost beginning to believe that some magic might have 
been practised to cause her disappearance, when it occurred to 
him that she had been carried oft" by Kelley. 

" Fool that I was, not to think of that before !" he exclaimed. 
*' I have unintentionally aided their project by extinguishing the 
lights. But now that I am satisfied she is gone, I can devote 
my whole energies to the preservation of Garnet. They shall 
not capture us so easily as they anticipate." 

With this, he approached the priest, and grasping his hand 
drew him noislcssly along. They had scarcely passed through 
the arched doorway in the screen, and set foot within the nave, 
when the clamour without ceased. The next moment a thun- 
dering crash was heard ; the door burst open, and a number of 
armed figures bearing torches, with drawn swords in their hands, 
rushed with loud vociferations into the church. 

" We must surrender, my son," cried Garnet. " It will be 
useless to contend against that force." 

"But we may yet escape them," rejoined Catesby. And 
glancing hastily round he perceived a small open door in the 
wall at the right, and pointing it out to the priest, hurried 
towards it. 

On reaching it, they found it communicated with a flight of 
stone steps, evidently leading to the roof. 

" Saved ! saved I" cried Catesby, triumphantly. " Mount first, 
father. I will defend the passage." 

The pursuers, who saw the course taken by the fugitives, set 
up a loud shout, and ran as swiftly as they could in the same 
direction, and by the time the latter had gained the door they 
Mere within a few yards of it. Garnet darted up the steps ; but 
Catesby lingered to make fast the door, and thus oppose some 
obstacle to the hostile party. His eff"orts, however, were unex 
pectedly checked, and, on examination, he found it was hooked 
to the wall at the back. Undoing the fastening, the door swung 
to, and he instantly bolted it. Overjoyed at his success, and 
leaving his pursuers, who at this moment arrived, to vent their 
disappointment in loud menaces, he hastened after Garnet. 
Calling loudly to him, he was answered from a small dark cham- 
ber on the right, into which the priest had retreated. 

" We have but prolonged our torture," groaned Garnet. " I 
can find no outlet. Our foes will speedily force an entrance, 
and we must then fall into their hands." 

'* There must be some door opening upon the roof, father," 



326 GUY FAWKES. 

reiolncd Catcsby. " Mount as hin;h as you can, and search care- 
fully. I Nvill defend the stairs, and will undertake to maintain 
my post airainst the whole rout." 

Thus urged, Garnet ascended the steps. After the lapse of a 
few minutes, during which the thundering at the door below 
increased, and the iieavy blows of some weighty implement 
directed against it, were distinctly heard, he cried, 

" I have found a door, but the bolts are rusty — I cannot move 
them." 

" Use all your strength, father," shouted Catesby, who havmg 
planted himself with his drawn sword at an advantageous point, 
was listening with intense anxiety to the exertions of the assailing 
party. " Do not relax your efforts for a moment." 

"It is in vain, my son," rejoined Garnet, in accents of despair. 
" My hands are bruised and bleeding, but the bolts stir not." 

" Distraction r cried Catesby, gnashing his teeth with rage. 
« Let me try." 

And he was about to hasten to the priest's assistance, when 
the door below was burst open with a loud crash, and the as- 
sailants rushed up the steps. The passage was so narrow that 
they were compelled to mount singly, and Catesby's was scarcely 
a vain boast when he said he could maintain his ground against 
the whole host. Shouting to Garnet to renew his efforts, he 
prepared for the assault. ^Reserving his petronels to the last, he 
trusted solely to his rapier, and leaning against the newel, or 
circular column round which the stairs twined, he was in a great 
measure defended from the weapons of his adversaries, while 
they were completely exposed to his attack. The darkness, 
moreover, in which he was enveloped offered an additional pro- 
tection, whereas the torches they carried made his mark certain. 
As soon as the foremost of the band came within reach, Catesby 
plunged his sword into his breast, and pushed him back with all 
his force upon his comrades. The man fell heavily backwards, 
dislodging the next in advance, who in his turn upset his suc- 
cessor, and so on, till the whole band was thrown into confusion. 
A discharge of fire-arms followed ; but, sheltered by the newel, 
Catesby sustained no injury. At this moment, he was cheered 
by a cry from Garnet that he had succeeded in forcing back the 
bolts, terror having supplied him with a strength not his own ; 
and, making another sally upon his assailants, amid the disorder 
that ensued, Catesby retreated, and rapidly tracking the steps, 
reached the door, through which the priest had already passed. 
When within a short distance of the outlet, Catesby felt, from 
the current of fresh air that saluted him, that it opened upon 
the roof of the church. Nor was he deceived. A few steps 
))laced him upon the leads, where he found Garnet. 

" It is you, my son," cried the latter, on beholding him ; " I 



THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH AT MANCHESTER. 127 

thought from the shouts you had fallen into the hands of the 



encmv." 



*' No, Heaven be praised ! I am as yet safe, and trust to deHver 
j-ou out of their hands. Come with me to the battlements." 

*' The battlements !" exclaimed Garnet. "A leap from such 
a height as that were certain destruction." 

"It were so," replied Catesby, dragging him along. "But 
trust to me, and you shall yet reach the ground uninjured." 

Arrived at the battlements, Catesby leaned over them, and 
endeavoured to ascertain what was beneath. It was still so dark 
that he could scarcely discern any objects but those close to him, 
but as far as he could trust his vision, he thought he perceived 
a projecting buildiug some twelve or fourteen feet below; and 
calling to mind the form of the church, which he had frequently 
seen and admired, he remembered its chantries, and had no 
doubt but it was the roof of one of them that he beheld. If he 
could reach it, the descent from thence would be easy, and he 
immediately communicated the idea to Garnet, who shrank 
aghast from it. Little time, however, was allowed for considera- 
tion. Their pursuers had already scaled the stairs, and were 
springing; one after another upon the leads, uttering the most 
terrible threats against the destroyer of their comrade. Hastily 
divesting himself of his cloak, Catesby clambered over the battle- 
ments, and, impelled by fear, Garnet threw off his robe, and 
followed his example. Cliuging to the grotesque stone water- 
spouts which projected below the battlements, and placing the 
}>ointsofhis feet upon the arches of the clerestory windows, 
nnd thence upon the mullions and transom bars, Catesby de- 
scended in safety, and then turned to assist his companion, who 
v.-as quickly by his side. 

The most difficult and dangerous part of the descent had yet 
to be accomplished. They were now nearly thirty feet from the 
ground, and the same irregularities in the wmIIs which had 
favoured them in the upper structure did not exist in the lower. 
But their present position, exposed as it was to their pursuers, 
who, having reached the point immediately overhead, were pre- 
paring to fire upon them, was too dangerous to allow of its 
occupation for a moment, and Garnet required no urging to 
make him clamber over the low embattled parapet. Descending- 
a flying buttress that defended an angle of the building, Catesby, 
who was possessed of great strength and activity, was almost 
instantly upon the ground. Garnet was not so fortunate. 
Missing his footing, he fell from a considerable height, and his- 
groans proclaimed that he had received some serious injury. 
Catesby instantly flew to him, and demanded, in a tone of the 
greatest i^nxiety, whether he was much hurt. 

" My right arm is broken," gasped the sufferer, raising himself 



5 



128 GUY FAWKES. 

with difficulty , "What other injuries I have sustained I know 
not ; but every joint seems disU)cated, and my face is covered 
with blood. Heaven have })ity on me !" 

As he spoke, a shout of exultation arose from the hostile party, 
who, havin<i; heard Garnet's fall, and the groans that succeeded 
it, at once divined the cause, and made sure of a capture. A 
doep silence followed, proving that they had quitted the roof, 
and were hastening to secure their ])rey. 

Aware that it would take them some little time to descend 
the winding staircase, and traverse the long aisle of the church, 
Catesby felt certain of distancing them. But he could not 
abandon Garnet, who had become insensible from the agony 
of his fractured limb, and, lifting him carefully in his arms, he 
placed him upon his shoulder, and started at a swift pace 
towards the further extremity of the churchyard. 

At the period of this history, the western boundary of the 
'Collegiate Church was formed by a precipitous sandstone rock 
of great height, the base of which was washed by the waters of 
■the Irwell, while its summit was guarded by a low stone wall. 
In after years, a range of small habitations was built upon this 
pot, but they have been recently removed, and the rock having 
been lowered, a road now occupies their site. Nerved by despe- 
ration, Catesby, who was sufficiently well acquainted with the 
locality to know whither he was shaping his course, determined 
to hazard a descent, which, imder calmer circumstances, he would 
have deemed wholly impracticable. His pursuers, who issued 
from the church porch a few seconds after he had passed it, saw 
him hurry towards the low wall edging the precipice, and, 
encumbered as he was with the priest, vault over it. Not deeming 
it possible he v.'ould dare to spring from such a height, they 
darted after him. But they were deceived, and could scarcely 
credit their senses when they found him gone. By the light of 
their torches they perceived him shooting down the almost 
])crpendicular side of the rock, and the next moment a hollo-;;;' 
])Iunge told that he had reached the water. They stared at each 
other in mute astonishment. 

" Will you follow him, Dick Haughton ?" observed one, as 
soon as he had recovered his speech. 

"Not I," replied the fellow addressed. "I have no fancy 
for a broken neck. Follow him thyself if thou hast a mind 
to try the soundness of thy pate. 1 warrant that rock will 
put it to the ])roof " 

" Yet the feat has just been done, and by one burthened with 
a wounded comrade into the bargain," remarked the first 
speaker. 

'^llc must be the devil, that's certain," rejoined Haughton; 
** and Doctor Dee himself is no match for him." 

" He has the Devil's luck, that's certain," cried a third soldier. 



THE RENCOUNTER. 129 

•'But, hark I he is swimming across the river. We may yet 
catch him on the opposite bank. Come along, comrades." 

With this, they rushed out of the churchyard ; made the best 
of their way to the bridge ; and crossing it, flew to the bank of 
the river, where they dispersed in every direction, in search for 
the fugitive. But they could not discover a trace of him or his 
wounded companion. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

THE RENCOTJNTER. 



Catesby himself could scarcely tell how he accomplished his 
hair-breadth escape. Reckless almost of the result, he slided 
down the rock, catching at occasional irregularities as he de- 
scended. The river was of great depth at this point, and broke 
the force of his fall. On rising, he struck out a few yards, and 
suffered himself to be carried down the stream. He had never 
for one moment relinquished his hold of Garnet, and being an 
admirable swimmer, found little difficulty in sustaining him with 
one arm, while with the other he guided his course in the water. 
In this way he reached the shore in safety, about a hundred 
yards below the bridge, by which means he avoided his 
pursuers, who, as has just been stated, searched for him 
above it. 

After debating with himself for a short time as to what course 
he should pursue, he decided upon conve\ing Garnet to the 
Hall, where he could procure restoratives and assistance ; and 
though he was fully sensible of the danger of this plan, not 
doubting the mansion would be visited and searched by his pur- 
suers before morning, yet the necessity of warning Guy Fawkes 
outweighed every other consideration. Accordingly, again 
shouldering the priest, who, though he had regained his sensi- 
bility, was utterly unable to move, he commenced his toilsome 
march; and being frequently obliged to pause and rest himself, 
more than an hour elapsed before he reached his destination. 

It was just growing light as he crossed the drawbridge, and 
seeing a horse tied to a tree, and the gate open, he began to 
fear the enemy had preceded him. Full of misgiving, he laid 
Garnet upon a heap of straw in an outbuilding, and entered the 
house. He found no one below, though he glanced into each 
room. He then noiselessly ascended the stairs, with the inten- 
tion of proceeding to Guy Fawkes's chamber. 

As he traversed the gallery, he heard voices in one of the 
chambers, the door of which was ajar, and pausing to listen, dis- 
tinguished the tones of Viviana. Filled with astonisiuncnt, ho 

K 



150 GUY FAWKES. 

Has about to enter tlie room to inquire by what means she had 
reached the Hall, when he was arrested by the voice of her 
companion. It was that of Humphrey Chetham. Maddened 
b}' jealousy, Catesby's first impulse was to rush into the room, 
and stab his rival in the presence of his mistress. But he re- 
strained his passion by a powerful effort. 

After listening for a few minutes intently to their conversa- 
lion, he found that Chetham was taking leave, and creeping 
softly down-stairs, stationed himself in the hall, through which 
he knew his rival must necessarily pass. Chetham presently 
appeared. His manner was dejected ; his looks downcast ; and 
he would have passed Catesby without observing him, if the latter 
had not laid his hand upon his shoulder. 

" Mr. Catesby I" exclaimed the young merchant, starting as 
he beheld the stern glance fixed upon him " I thought " 

" You thought I was a prisoner, no doubt," interrupted Catesby, 
bitterly. ** But you are mistaken. I am here to confound you 
and your juggling and treacherous associate." 

"I do not understand you," replied Chetham. 

" I will soon make myself intelligible," retorted Catesby. 
'* Follow me to the garden." 

*' I perceive your purpose, Mr. Catesby," replied Chetham, 
<alnily ; " but it is no part of my principles to expose my life 
to ruffianly violence. If you choose to lay aside this insolent 
•<icineanour, which is more befitting an Alsatian bully than a 
gentleman, I will readily give you such explanation of my con- 
duct as will fully content you, and satisfy you that any sus- 
picions you may entertain of me are unfounded." 

"Coward I" exclaimed Catesby, striking him. "I want no 
explanation. Defend yourself, or I will treat you with still 
greater indignity." 

" Lead on, then," cried Chetham : *' I would have avoided 
the quarrel if I could. But this outrage shall not pass un- 
punished." 

As they quitted the hall, Viviana entered it ; and, though she 
was greatly surprised by the appearance of Catesby, his furious 
gestures left her in no doubt as to his purpose. She called to 
him to stop. But no attention was paid by either party to her 
I'rics. 

On gaining a retired spot beneath the trees, Catesby, without 
giving his antagonist time to divest himself of the heavy horse- 
man's cloak with which he was encumbered, and scarcely to draw 
his sword, assaulted him. The combat was furious on both sides, 
but it was evident that the young merchant was no match for 
his adversary. He maintained his ground, however, for some 
time with great resolution ; but, being hotly pressed, in retreating 
to avoid a thrust, his foot caught in the long grass, and he fell. 
CatCi by would have passed his sword through his body, if it had 




J^Y/^ ^yam^J 




'y/ryCy/7^ 7' 



THE EXPLANATION. 131 

not been turned aside by another weapon. It was that of Guy 
Fawkes, who, followed by Martin Heydocke, had staggered 
towards the scene of strife, reaching it just in time to save the 
life of Humphrey Chetham. 

" Heaven be praised ! I am not too late !" he exclaimed. 
Put up your blade, Catesby ; or, turn it against me." 



«< 



CHAPTER XVIH. 

THE EXPLANATION. 



Uttering an exclamation of rage, Catesby turned fiercely 
upon Fawkes, and for a moment appeared disposed to 
accept his invitation to continue the combat with him. But as 
he regarded the other's haggard features, and perceived in them 
the traces of his recent struggle with death — as he saw he was 
scarcely able to wield the blade he opposed against him — his 
wrath changed to compassion, and he sheathed his sword. By 
this time, Humphrey Chetham had sprung to his feet, and 
picking up his fallen weapon, stood on his defence. But finding 
that Catesby meditated no further hostilities, he returned it to 
the scabbard. 

" I owe my life to you," he said to Guy Fawkes, in a tone of 
<leep gratitude. 

" You owe it to Viviana Radcliffe, not to me," returned 
Fawkes feebly, and leaning upon his sword for support. " Had 
it not been for her cries, I should have known nothing of this 
<juarrel. And I would now gladly learn what has occasioned it.'* 

" So would I," added Chetham ; " for I am as ignorant as 
yourself how I have offended Mr. Catesby." 

" I will tell you, then," returned Catesby, sternly. '* You 
were a party to the snare set for us by Dr. Dee, from which I 
narrowly escaped with life, and Father Garnet at the expense of 
a broken limb." 

" Is Garnet hurt ?" demanded Fawkes, anxiously. 

" Grievously," replied Catesby ; " but he is out of the reach 
of his enemies, of whom," he added, pointing to Chetham, " one 
of the most malignant and treacherous now stands before you." 

" I am quite in the dark as to what has happened," observed 
fawkes, " having only a few minutes ago been roused from my 
slumbers by the shrieks of Viviana, who entreated mc to come 
and separate you. But I cannot believe Humphrey Chcthaiu 
so treacherous as you represent him." 

" So far from having any enmity towards Father Garnet, 
observed Chetham, " my anxious desire was to preserve him ; 
and with that view, I was repairing to Dr. Dec, when I cn- 

K2 



132 GUY FAWKES. 

countered Mr. Catesby in the hall, and before I could offer any 
explanation, I. was forced by his violence and insults into this 
combat." 

" Is this the truth, Catesby ?" asl<ed Fawkes. 

"Something near it," rejoined the latter; "but perhaps Mr, 
Chetham will likewise inform you by whose agency Viviana was 
transported hither from the Collegiate Church?" 

" That inquiry ought rather to be made of the lady herself, 
sir," rejoined Chetham, coldly. "But, as I am assured she 
would have no objection to my answering it, I shall not hesitate 
to do so. She was conveyed hither by Kelley and an assistant, 
who departed as soon as their task was completed." 

"Indeed!" exclaimed Catesby between his ground teeth. 
" But how chanced it, sir, that you arrived here so oppor- 
tunely ?" 

" I might well refuse to answer a question thus insolently 
put," rejoined Chetham. " But to prevent further misunder- 
standing, I will tell you, that I came by Viviana's invitation at 
midnight ; and, ascertaining from my servant, Martin Heydocke, 
whom I found watching by the couch of Guy Fawkes, the 
melancholy business on which she was engaged, I determined to 
await her return, which occurred about an hour afterwards, in 
the manner I have just related." 

" I was in the court-yard when Mistress Viviana was brought 
back," interposed Martin Heydocke, who was standing at a 
respectful distance from the group; "and, after Kelley had 
delivered her to my charge, I heard him observe in an under 
tone to his companion, ' Let us ride back as fast as we can, and 
see what they have done with the prisoners.' " 

" They made sure of their prey before it was captured," ob» 
served Catesby, bitterly. "But we have disappointed them. 
Dee and his associate may yet have reason to repent their 
perfidy." 

" You will do well not to put yourself again in their power,'* 
observed Humphrey Chetham. "If you will be counselled by 
me, you and Guy Fawkes will seek safety in instant flight" 

"And leave you with Viviana?" rejoined Catesby, sar- 
castically. 

" She is in no present danger," replied Chetham. " But, if it 
is thought fitting or desirable, I will remain with her." 

" I do not doubt it," returned Catesby, with a sneer ; " but it 
is neither fitting nor desirable. And, hark ye, young sir, if you 
have indulged any expectations with regard to Viviana Radcliffe,. 
it is time you were undeceived. She will never wed one of your 
'Icgree, nor of your faith." 

" I have her own assurance she will never wed at all," replied 
Chetham, in an offended tone. " But had she not crushed my 
hopes by declaring she was vowed to a convent, no menaces of 



THE DISCOVERY. 133 

yours, who have neither right nor title thus to interfere, should 
induce me to desist from my suit." 

" Either resign all pretensions to her hand, or prepare to 
renew the combat," cried Catesby, fiercely. 

" No more of this," interposed Guy Fawkes. " Let us return 
to the house, and adjust our differences there." 

" I have no further business here," observed Humphrey Che- 
tham. " Having taken leave of Viviana," he added, with much 
emotion, " I do not desire to meet her again." 

" It is well, sir," rejoined Catesby: "yet, stay ! — you mean us 
no treachery ?" 

*' If you suspect me, I will remain," replied Humphrey 
Chetham. 

" On no account," interposed Guy Fawkes. " I will answer 
for him with my life." 

*' Perhaps, when I tell you I have procured the liberation of 
Father Oldcorne," returned Chetham, " and have placed him in 
security in Ordsall cave, you will admit that you have done me 
wrong." 

" I have been greatly mistaken in you, sir, I must own," ob- 
served Catesby, advancing towards him, and extending his hand. 
But Humphrey Chetham folded his arms upon his breast, and 
bowing coldly, withdrew. He was followed by Martin Hey- 
docke, and presently afterwards the tramp of his horse's feet 
was heard crossing the drawbridge. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE DISCOVERY. 



Tendering his arm to Fawkes, who was almost too feeble to 
walk unsupported, Catesby led him slowly to the Hall. On 
reaching it, they met Viviana, in a state bordering upon distrac- 
tion, but her distress was speedily relieved by their assurances 
that the young merchant had departed unhurt, — a statement 
immediately afterwards confirmed by the entrance of Martin 
Heydocke, charged with a message from his master to her. 
Without communicating his design to the others, and, indeed, 
almost shunning Viviana, Catesby proceeded to the outbuilding 
where he had deposited Garnet. He found him in great pain, 
and praying fervently to be released from his suffering. 

"Do not'despair," father," said Catesby, in as chcerf^ul a tone 

' as he could assume, " the worst is over. Viviana is in safety. 

Father Oldcorne has escaped, and is within a short distance of 

us, and Guy Fawkes is fully able to undertake a journey of any 

distance. You are our sole concern. But I am assured, if you 



154 GUY FAWKES. 

Mill allow me to exercise the slight surgical skill I possess in 
your behalf, that you will be able to accompany us." 

" Do with me what you please, my son," groaned Garnet. 
" But, if my case is as desperate as I believe it, I entreat you 
not to bestow any further care upon me, and, above all, not to- 
expose yourself to risk on my account. Our enemies are sure 
to pursue us, — and what matter if I am captured? They will 
wreak their vengeance on a worthless carcass, — for such I shall 
soon be. But it would double the anguish 1 now endure, if you 
and Fawkes were to fall into their hands. Go, then, and leave- 
me here to perish. My dying moments will be cheered by the 
conviction that the great enterprise — for which alone I desire to 
live — will not be unaccomplished." 

" There is no need to leave you, father," replied Catesby,. 
"nor shall any consideration induce me to do so, till 1 have ren- 
dered you every aid that circun)stances will permit." 

" My son," replied Garnet, faintly, " the most efficacious balnt 
you can apply will be the certainty that you are in safety. You 
say Viviana is here. Fly with Fawkes, and leave me to her care." 

" She must go with us," observed Catesb}', uneasily. 

" Not so, my son," returned Garnet ; " her presence will only 
endanger you. She must not go. And you must abandon all 
hopes of an union with her." 

'* I would as soon abandon the great design itself," returned 
Catesby, moodily. 

"If you persist in this, you will ruin it," rejoined Garnet. 
*' Think of her no more. Bend your thoughts exclusively or* 
the one grand object, and be what you are chosen to be, the 
defender and deliverer of our holy Church." 

" I would gladly act as you advise me, father," replied Catesby j 
" but I am spell-bound by this maiden." 

" This is idle from you, my son," replied Garnet, reproach- 
fully. " Separate yourself from her, and you will soon rcgaiit 
your former mastery over yourself" 

" Well, well, father," rejoined Catesby, " the effort, at least, 
shall be made. But her large possessions, which would be so 
useful to our cause, and which, if I wedded her, would be wholly 
devoted to it, — think of what we lose, father." 

" I //at;6' thought of it, my son," replied Garnet; "but the 
consideration docs not alter my opinion : and if I possess any 
authority over you, I strictly enjoin you not to proceed farther 
in the matter. Viviana never can be yours." 

" She shallhc, nevertheless," muttered Catesb}^ "and before 
many hours have elapsed, — if not b}' her own free will, by force. 
I have ever shown myself obedient to your commands, father," 
he added aloud, " and I shall not transgress them now." 

" Heaven keep you in this disposition, my dear son I" exclaimeii 
Garnet, with a look of distrust : "and let me recommend you to 



THE DISCOVERY. 135 

remove j'ourself as soon as possible out of the way of tempta- 
tion." 

Catesby muttered an affirmative, and taking Garnet in his 
arms, conveyed him carefully to his own chamber, and placing 
him on a couch, examined his wounds, which were not so serious 
as either he or the sufferer imagined, and with no despicable 
skill — for the experiences of a soldier's life had given him some 
practice — bandaged his broken arm, and fomented his bruises. 

This done. Garnet felt so much easier, that he entreated 
Catesby to send Viviana to him, and to make preparations for 
his own immediate departure. Feigning acquiescence, Catesby 
quitted the room, but with no intention of complying with the 
request. Not a moment he felt must be lost if he would execute 
his dark design, and, after revolving many wild expedients, an 
idea occurred to him. It was to lure Viviana to the cave where 
Father Oldcorne was concealed ; and he knew enough of the 
pliant disposition of the latter to be certain he would assent to 
his scheme. No sooner did this plan occur to him than he 
hurried to the cell, and found the piiest, as Chetham had stated. 
As he had foreseen, it required little persuasion to induce Old- 
corne to lend his assistance to the forced marriage, and he only 
feared the decided opposition they should encounter from 
Viviana. 

" Fear nothing, then, father," said Catesby; *'in this solitary 
spot no one will hear her cries. Whatever resistance she may 
make, perform the ceremony, and leave the consequences to me.'* 

" The plan is desperate, my son," returned Oldcorne, " but 
so are our fortunes. And, as Viviana will not hear reason, we 
have no alternative. You swear that if you are once wedded to 
her, all her possessions shall be devoted to the furtherance of the 
great cause." 

*' All, father — I swear it," rejoined Catesby, fervently. 

" Enough," replied Oldcorne. " The sooner it is done, the 
better." 

It was then agreed between them that the plan least likely 
to excite suspicion would be for Oldcorne to proceed to the 
Hall, and under some plea prevail upon Viviana to return with 
him to the cave. Acting upon this arrangement, they left the 
cell together, shaping their course under the trees to avoid 
observation ; and while Oldcorne repaired to the Hall, Catesby 
proceeded to the stable, and saddling the only steed left, rode 
back to the cave, and concealing the animal behind the brush- 
wood, entered the excavation. Some time elapsed before the 
others arrived, and as in his present feverish state of mind 
moments appeared ages, the suspense was almost intolerable. 
At length, he heard footsteps approaching, and, with a beating 
heart, distinguished the voice of Viviana. The place was buried 
in profound darkness j but Oldcorne struck a light, and set fire 



136 GUY FAWKES. 

to a candle in a lantern. The feeble glimmer diflTused by it was 
not sufficient to penetrate the recesses of the cavern ; and 
Catesby, who stood at the farther extremity, was completely 
sheltered from observation. 

" iVnd now, father," observed Viviana, seating herself with her 
back towards Catesby, upon the stone bench once used by the 
unfortunate prophetess, " I would learn the communication you 
desire to make to me. It must be something of importance since 
YOU would not disclose it at the Hall." 

" Tt is, daughter," replied Oldcorne, who could scarcely con- 
ceal his embarrassment. " I have brought you hither, where I 
am sure we shall be uninterrupted, to confer with you on a sub- 
ject nearest my heart. Your lamented father being taken from 
us, I, as his spiritual adviser, aware of his secret wishes and inten- 
tions, conceive myself entitled to assume his place." 

" I consider you in the light of a father, dear sir," replied 
Viviana, " and will follow your advice as implicitly as I would 
that of him I have lost." 

" Since I find you so tractable, child," returned Oldcorne, re- 
assured by her manner, " 1 will no longer hesitate to declare the 
motive I iiad in bringing you hither. You will recollect that I 
have of late strongly opposed your intention of retiring to a 
convent." 

" I know it, father," interrupted Viviana ; " but- 



" Hear me out," continued Oldcorne ; " recent events have 
strengthened my disapproval of the step. You are now called 
upon to active duties, and must take your share in the business 
of life, — must struggle and suffer like others, — and not shrink 
from the burthen imposed upon you by Heaven." 

" I do not shrink from it, father," replied Viviana: "and if I 
were e(jual to the active life you propose, I would not hesitate to 
embrace it, but I feel I should sink under it." 

" Not if you had one near you who could afford you that 
support which feeble woman ever requires," returned Oldcorne. 

" What mean you, father?" mquired Viviana, fixing her dark 
eyes full upon him. 

" That you must marry, daughter," returned Oldcorne, " unite 
yourself" to some worthy man, who will be to you what I have 
described." 

" And was it to tell me this that vou brought me here ?" 
asked Viviana, in a slightly offended tone. 

" It was, daughter," replied Oldcorne; "but I have not yet 
done. It is not only needful you should marry, but your choice 
must be such as I, who represent your father, and have your 
welfare thoroughly at heart, can approve." 

"You can find me a husband, I doubt not?" remarked 
Viviana, coldly. 

"I have already found one," returned Oldcorne: "a gentle- 



THE DISCOVERY. 127 

man suitable to you in rank, religion, years, — for your husband 
should be older than yourself, Viviana." 

'*I will not affect to misunderstand you, father," she replied; 
**you mean Mr. Catesby." 

" You have guessed aright, dear daughter," rejoined Oldcorne. 

*•! thought I had made myself sufficiently intelligible on this 
point before, father," she returned. 

*' True," replied Oldcorne ; " but you are no longer, as I have 
Just laboured to convince you, in the same position you were 
when the subject was formerly discussed." 

" To prevent further misunderstanding, father," rejoined 
Viviana, " I now tell you, that in whatever position I may be 
placed, I will never, under any circumstances, wed Mr. Catesby." 

" What are your objections to him, daughter?" asked Oldcorne. 

"They are numberless," replied Viviana; "but it is useless to 
particularize them. I must pray you to change the conversation, 
or you will compel me to quit you." 

" Nay, daughter, if you thus obstinately shut your ears to 
reason, I must use very different language towards you. Armed 
with parental authority, I shall exact obedience to my com- 
mands." 

" I cannot obey you, father," replied Viviana, bursting into 
tears, — " indeed, indeed I cannot. My heart, I have already 
told you, is another's." 

" He who has robbed you of it is a heretic," rejoined Oldcorne, 
sternly, " and therefore your union with him is out of the ques- 
tion. Promise me you will wed Mr. Catesby, or, in the name 
of your dead father, I will invoke a curse upon your head. Pro- 
mise me, I say." 

•' Never," replied Viviana, rising. " My father would never 
have enforced my compliance, and I dread no curse thus im- 
piously pronounced. You are overstepping the bounds of your 
priestly office, sir. Farewell." 

As she moved to depart, a strong grasp was laid on her arm, 
and turning, she beheld Catesby. 

" You here, sir ?" she cried, in great alarm. 

" Ay," replied Catesby. " At last you are in my power, 
Viviana." 

" I would fain misunderstand you, sir," she rejoined, trem- 
bling; " but your looks terrify me. You mean no violence ?" 

"I mean that Father Oldcorne shall wed us, — and that too 
without a moment's delay," replied Catesby, sternly. 

" Monster I" shrieked Viviana, " you will not, — dare not com- 
mit this foul offence. And if you dare. Father Oldcorne will 
not assist you. Ah I what means that sign? I cannot be mis- 
taken in you, father? You cannot be acting in concert with 
this wicked man ? Save me from him 1 — save mc." 

But the priest kej)t aloof, and taking a missal from his vest. 



138 GUV FAWKES. 

hastily turned over the leaves. Viviana saw that her appeal to 
him was vain. 

" Let me go 1" she shrieked, struggling; with Catesby. " You 
cannot force me to wed you whether I will or not ; and I will 
die rather than consent. Let me go, I say ? Help ! — help 1" 
And she made the cavern ring with her screams. 

*' Heed her not, father," shouted Catesby, who still held her 
^st, " but proceed with the ceremony." 

Oldcorne, however, appeared irresolute, and Viviana pcrceiv- 
ii<' it, redoubled her cries. 

" This will be no marriage, father," she said, " even if you 
proceed with it. I will protest against it to all the world, and 
you will be deprived of your priestly office for your share in so 
infamous a transaction." 

" You will think otherwise anon, daughter," replied Oldcorne, 
advancing towards them with the missal in his hand. 

'* If it be no marriage," observed Catesby, significantly, " the 
time will come when you may desire to have the ceremony 
repeated." 

" Mr. Catesby," cried Viviana, altering her manner, as if she 
had taken a sudden resolution, " one word before you proceed 
with your atrocious purpose, which must end in misery to us all. 
There are reasons why you can never wed me." 
" Ha I" exclaimed Catesby, starting. 
" Is it so, my son ?" asked Oldcorne, imeasily. 
" Pshaw r exclaimed Catesby. " She knows not what she 
says. Proceed, father." 

'" I have proofs that will confound you," cried Viviana, break- 
ing: from him. And dartinq; towards the lifjht, she took from 
her bosom the packet given her by Guy Fawkes, and tore it 
open. A letter was within it, and a miniature. 

Opening the letter, she cast her eye rapidly over its contents, 
and then looking up, exclaimed in accents of delirous joy, 
" Saved ! saved! Father Oldcorne, this man is married already." 
Catesby, who had watched her proceedings in silent astonish- 
ment, and was now advancing towards her, recoiled as if a thun- 
derbolt had fallen at his feet. 

" Can this be true ?" cried the priest, in astonishment. 
" Let your own eyes convince you," rejoined Viviana, hand- 
ing him the letter. 

" 1 am satisfied," returned Oldcorne, after he had glanced at 
it. " We have both been spared the commission of a great 
crime. Mr. Catesby, it appears from this letter that you have a 
wife living in Spain." 

" It is useless to deny it," replied Catesby. " But, as you 
were ignorant of the matter, the offence (if any) would have Iain 
wholly at my door ; nor should I have repented of it, if it had 
enabled mr to achieve the object I have in view." 



THE DEPARTURE FROM THE HALL. T39 

** Thank Heaven it has gone no further !" exclaimed Old- 
corne. " Daughter, I humbly entreat your forgiveness." 

'* How came that packet in your possession ?" demanded 
Catesby fiercely of Viviana. 

" It was given me by Guy Fawkes," she replied. 

" Guy Fawkes I" exclaimed Catesby. *' Has he betrayed his. 
friend?'' 

"He has proved himself your best friend, by preventing yoii 
from committing a crime, which would have entailed wretched- 
ness on yourself and me," returned Viviana. 

" I have done with him, and with all of you," cried Catesby,. 
with a fierce glance at Oldcorne. "Henceforth, pursue your 
projects alone. You shall have no further assistance from me, 
I will serve the Spaniard. Englishmen are not to be trusted." 

So saying, he rushed out of the cavern, and seeking his horse,, 
mounted him, and rode off at full speed. 

*' How shall I obtain your forgiveness for my conduct in this, 
culpable affair, dear daughter?" said Oldcorne, with an imploring 
look at Viviana. 

" By joining me in thanksgivings to the Virgin for my deli- 
verance," replied Viviana, prostrating herself before the stone 
cross. 

Oldcorne knelt beside her, and they continued for some time 
in earnest prayer. They then arose, and quitting the cave, pro- 
ceeded to the Hall. 



CHAPTER XX. 

THE DEPARTURE FROM THE HALL, 

Guy Fawkes was as much surprised to hear of the suddert 
departure of Catesby' as he was concerned at the cause ; but he 
still thought it probable he would return. In this expectation,, 
however, he was disappointed. The day wore on, and no one 
came. The imcertainty in which Fawkes was kept, added to his- 
unwillingness to leave Garnet, still detained him, in spite of the 
risk he ran, at the Hall ; and it was only when urged by Viviana 
that he began seriously to reflect whither he should bend his- 
steps. Towards evening. Garnet was so much better, that he 
was able to sit up, and he passed some hours in conference with 
Oldcorne. 

" If I do not suffer a relapse," he observed to the latter, " I 
will set out with Guy Fawkes to-morrow, and we will proceed by 
easy stages to London." 

" I cannot but approve your resolution," returned Oldcorne ; 
**for though so long a journey may be inconvenient, and retard 



140 - GUY FAWKES. 

yonr recovery, yet every hour you remain here is fraught with 
additional peril. I will accompany you. We shall hoth be safer 
in the capital ; and perhaps Viviana, now she will be no longer 
exposed to the persecutions of Catesby, will form one of the party.'* 

*' I should not wonder," replied Garnet. *' I shall be deeply 
concerned if Catesby has really abandoned the enterprise. But 
I cannot think it. I did all 1 could to dissuade him from pro- 
eecuting this union, knowing how hopeless it was, and little 
thinking he would be rash enough to seek to accomplish it by 
force, or that he would find an assistant in you." 

•* Say no more about it, father, I entreat you," rejoined Old- 
corne. " The scheme failed, as it deserved to do ; and I sin- 
cerely repent the share I was induced by Catesby's artful repre- 
sentations to take in it. If we have lost our leader we have still 
Guy Fawkcs, who is a host in himself, and as true as the steel 
that hangs by his side." 

" We cannot spare Catesby," replied Garnet. " With many 
faults, he has one redeeming quality, courage. I am not sorry 
he has been thwarted in his present scheme, as if he returns to 
«s, as I doubt not he will, it will fix his mind steadily on the one 
object, which should be ever before it. Give me your arm, 
father. I am glad to find I can walk, though feebl}'. That is 
Avell," he added, as they emerged upon the gallery ; " I shall be 
able to reach Viviana's chamber without further assistance. Do 
you descend, and see that Martin Heydocke is on the watch." 

In obedience to the injunctions of his superior, Oldcorne went 
in search of Martin Heydocke, who had been stationed in the 
•court-yard to give timely notice of any hostile approach ; but not 
finding him there, he proceeded towards the drawbridge. Garnet, 
meanwhile, had reached the door of Viviana's chamber, which 
was slightly ajar, and he was about to pass through it, when he 
perceived that she was on her knees before Guy Fawkes, whom 
.-she was addressing in the most passionate terms. The latter 
was seated at a table, with his head upon his hand, in a thought- 
ful posture. Surprised at the sight, and curious to hear what 
Viviana could be saying, Garnet drew back to listen. 

" When you quit this house," were the first words that caught 
the listener's ear, " we shall never meet again ; and oh ! let me 
have the consolation of thinking that, in return for the devoted 
•attachment you have shown me, and the dangers from which 
you have preserved me, I have preserved you from one equally 
imminent. Catesb}', from whatever motive, has abandoned the 
conspiracy. Do you act likewise, and the whole dreadful scheme 
-will fall to the ground." 

" Catesby cannot abandon it," replied Fawkes. " He is bound 
by ties that no human power can sunder. And, however he 
may estrange himself from us now, when the time for action 
.arrives, rest assured he will not be absent." 



THE DEPARTURE FROM THE HALL. 141 

*' It may be so," replied Viviana ; " but I deny that the oath 
either he or you have taken is binding. The deed you have- 
sworn to do is evil, and no vow, however solemnly pronounced, 
can compel you to commit crime. Avoid this sin — avoid further 
connexion with those who would work j'our undoing, and do not 
stain your soul with guilt from which it will never be cleansed." 

" You seek in vain to move me," replied Guy Fawkes, firmly. 
*• My purpose is unalterable. The tempest that clears away the 
pestilence destroys many innocent lives, but it is not the less 
wholesome on that account. Our unhappy land is choked with 
the pestilence of heresy, and must be freed from it, cost what it 
will, and suffer who may. The wrongs of the English Catholics- 
imperatively demand redress ; and, since it is denied us, we must 
take it. Oppression can go no farther ; nor endurance hold out 
longer. If this blow be not struck we shall have no longer a 
religion. And how comes it, Viviana, that you, a zealous- 
Catholic, whose father perished by these very oppressors, and 
who are yourself in danger from them, can seek to turn me from 
my purpose ?" 

" Because I know it is wrongful," she replied. " I have no- 
desire to avenge the death of my slaughtered father, still less to- 
see our religion furthered by the dreadful means you propose. 
In his own due season, the Lord will redress our wrongs." 

" The Lord has appointed me one of the ministers of his ven- 
geance," cried Fawkes, in a tone of enthusiasm. 

"Do not deceive yourself," returned Viviana, "it is not by 
Heaven, but by the powers of darkness, that you are incited to- 
this deed. Do not persevere in this fatal course," she continued, 
clasping her hands together, and gazing imploringly in his face,. 
" do not — do not I" 

Guy Fawkes continued in the same attitude as before, with 
his gaze turned upwards, and apparently lost in thought. 

" Have I no power to move you ?" cried Viviana, her eyes 
streaming with tears. 

'* None whatever," replied Guy Fawkes, firmly. 

" Then you are lost," she rejoined. 

" If it is Heaven's will, I am," answered Fawkes ; " but at 
least I believe I am acting rightly." 

" And rest assured you are so, my son," cried Garnet, throw- 
ing open the door, and stepping into the room. " I have over- 
heard your conversation, and I applaud your resolution." 

" You need have no fears of me, father," replied Fawkes. " I 
do not lightly undertake a project; but once embarked in it 
nothing can turn me aside." 

■ " In this case your determination is wisely formed, my son," 
returned Garnet ; " and if Viviana will ever give me an oppor- 
tunity of fully discussing the matter, I am sure I can satisfy her 
you are in the right." 



142 GUY FAWKES. 

" I will discuss it with you whenever you think proper," she 
replied. *' But no arguments will ever convince me that your 
project is approved by Heaven." 

"Let it pass now, daughter," rejoined Garnet; "enough has 
been said on the subject. I came hither to tell Guy Fawkes, 
that if our enemies permit us to pass the night without molesta- 
tion (as Heaven grant they may !) I think I shall be strong 
<:nough to set out with him to-morrow, when 1 propose we should 
journey together to London." 

" Agreed," replied Fawkes. 

" Father Oldcornc will accompany us," pursued Garnet. 

"And I, too, will go with you, if you will permit me," said 
Viviana. " I cannot remain here ; and I have no further fears 
of Mr. Catesby. Doctor Dee told me my future fate was strangely 
mixed up with that of Guy Fawkes. I know not how it 
may be, but I will not abandon him while there is a hope to 
cling to." 

"Viviana RadclifFe," rejoined Guy Fawkes, coldly, " deeply 
as 1 feel the interest you take in me, I think it right to tell you 
that no efforts you can use will shake me from my purpose. If 
I live, I will execute my design." 

" While I live, I will urge you to it," remarked Garnet. 

" And while / live, I will dissuade you from it," added Vivi- 
ana. " We shall see who will obtain the victory." 

" We shall," replied Garnet, smiling confidently. 

" Hear me further," continued Viviana ; " I do not doubt that 
your zeal is disinterested ; yet still, your mode of life, and the 
difhculties in which you are placed, may not unnaturally influence 
your conduct. That this may no longer be the case, I here place 
part of my fortune at your disposal. I require little or nothing 
myself. But I would, if possible, save one to whom I owe so 
much, and whom I value so much, from destruction." 

*' I fully appreciate your generosity— to give it its lightest 
term — Viviana," returned Guy Fawkes, in a voice of deep emo- 
tion. " Under any circumstances I should reject it, — under the 
present, I do so the more positively, because the offer, kind as 
it is, scenis to imply that my poverty leads me to act contrary to 
my principles. Gold has no power over me : I regard it as 
dross; and when I could easily have won it, I neglected the 
opj)ortunit3'. As no reward would ever induce me to commit an 
action my conscience disapproved, so none will deter me from a 
purpose which I regard as my duty." 

" Enough," replied Viviana, sadly. « I will no longer question 
your motives, or oppose your plan, but will pray Heaven to open 
your eyes to the truth." 

"Your conduct is in all respects worthy of you, daughter," 
observed Garnet, kindly. 

"You have rejected one offer," continued Viviana, looking at 



THE DEPARTURE FROM THE HALL. 143 

Fawkcs ; " but I trust you will not decline that I am about to 
propose to you." 

" What is it ?" asked Fawkee, in some surprise. 

" It is that I may be permitted to regard yen as a father," re- 
plied Viviana, with some hesitation. " Having lost my own 
father, I feel I need some protector, and I would gladly make 
choice of you, if you will accept the office." 

** I willingly accede to your request, and am much flattered 
by it, Viviana," replied Fawkes. " I am a homeless man, and a 
friendless, and the affection of such a being as yourself will fill 
up the only void in my heart. But I am wedded to the great 
cause. I can never be more to you than a father." 

" Nay, I ask nothing more," she replied, blushing deeply. 

" Having thus arranged the terms upon which we shall travel," 
observed Garnet, with a smile, " nothing is needed but to pre- 
pare for our journey. We start early to-morrow morning." 

" I shall be ready at daybreak," replied Viviana. 

" And I am ready now," added Guy Fawkes. " In my opinion, 
we run great risk in remaining here another night. But be it as 
you will." 

At this moment they were interrupted by the entrance of 
Father Oldcorne, who with a countenance of great alarm in- 
formed them he could nowhere find Martin Heydocke. 

" Do you suspect any treacliery on his part?" asked Garnet of 
Viviana. 

" I have always found him trustworthy," she answered ; "and 
his father was viy father's oldest servant. I cannot think ho 
would betray us. At the same time, I must admit his disap- 
pearance at this juncture looks suspicious." 

" If my strength were equal to it," returned Guy Fawkes, " I 
would keep watch throughout the night ; but that might prevent 
me from accompanying you to-morrow. My advice, I repeat. 



is — to set out at once " 



This opinion, however, was overruled by Garnet and Viviana, 
who did not think the danger so urgent, and attributed the ab- 
sence of Martin Heydocke to some unimportant cause. Guy 
Fawkes made no further remonstrance, and it was agreed they 
should start, as originally proposed, at daybreak. 

The party then separated, and Viviana wandered alone over 
the old house, taking a farewell, which she felt would be her 
last, of every familiar object. Few things were as she had known 
them, but even in their present forlorn state they were dear to 
her ; and the rooms she trod, though dismantled, were the same 
she had occupied in childhood. 

There is no pang more acute to a sensitive nature than that 
occasioned by (jnitting an abode or spot endeared by early rccoi- 
le'jtions and associations, to which we feci a strong prcseiuimonc 
Wt; Miall never return. Viviana experienced this feeling in its 



144* GUY FAWKES. 

full force, and she llnnrered in each room as if she had not the 
power to leave it. Her emotions at length became so over- 
powering, that to relieve them she strolled forth into the garden. 
Here, new objects awakened her attention, and recalled happier 
times with painful distinctness. Twilight was fast deepening, 
and, viewed through this dim and softened medium, everything 
looked as of old, and produced a tightening and stifling sensa- 
tion in her breast, that nothing but a flood of tears could 
remove. 

The flowers yielded forth their richest scents, and the whole 
scene was such as she had often beheld it in times long ago, 
when sorrow was wholly unknown to her. Perfumes, it is well! 
known, exercise a singular influence over the memory. A par- 
ticular odour will frequently call up an event and a long train 
of circumstances connected with the time when it was first 
inhaled. Without being aware whence it arose, Viviana felt a 
tide of recollections pressing upon her, which she would have 
willingly repressed, but which it was out of her power to control. 
Her tears flowed abundantly, and at length, with a heart some- 
what lightened of its load, she arose from the bench on which 
she had thrown herself, and proceeded along a walk to gather a 
few flowers as memorials of the place. 

In this way, she reached the further end of the garden, and 
was stooping to pluck a spray of some fragrant shrub, when she 
perceived the figure of a man behind a tree at a little distance 
from her. From his garb, which was that of a soldier, she 
instantly knew he was an enemy, and, though greatly alarmed^ 
she had the courage not to scream, but breaking off the branch, 
she uttered a careless exclamation, and slowly retraced her steps. 
She half expected to hear that the soldier was following her, and 
prepared to start off' at full speed to the house ; but, deceived by 
her manner, he did not stir. On reaching the end of the walk^ 
she could not resist the inclination to look back, and glancing 
over her shoulder, perceived the man watching her. But as she 
moved, he instantly withdrew his head. 

Her first step on reaching the house was to close and fasten 
the door ; her next to hasten to Guy Fawkes's chamber, where 
she found him, together with Garnet and Oldcorne. All three 
were astounded at the intelligence, agreeing that an attack was- 
intended, and that a large force was, in all probability, concealed 
in the garden awaiting only the arrival of night to surprise and 
seize them. The disappearance of the younger Heydocke was 
no longer a mystery. He had been secured and carried off" by 
the hostile pany, to prevent him from giving the alarm. The 
emergency was a fearful one, and it excited consternation 
amongst all except Guy Fawkes, who preserved his calmness. 

" 1 foresaw we should be attacked to-night," he said, ".nnd 1 
am therefore not wholly unprepared. Our only chance is to 



THE DEPARTURE FROM THE HALL. 145 

steal out unobserved ; for resistance would be in vain, as their 
force is probably numerous, and I am as helpless as an infant, 
while Father Garnet's broken arm precludes any assistance from 
him. The subterranean passage leading from the oratory to the 
further side of the moat having been stopped up by the pursui- 
vant and his band, it will be necessary to cross the drawbridge, 
and as soon as it grows sufficiently dark, we must make the 
attempt. We have no horses, and must trust to our own exer- 
tions for safety. Catesby would now be invaluable. It is not 
his custom to desert his friends at the season of their greatest 
need." 

" Great as is my danger," observed Viviana, " I would rather, 
so far as I am concerned, that he were absent, than owe my pre- 
servation to him. I have no fears for myself." 

** And my only fears are for you," rejoined Fawkes. 

Half an hour of intense anxiety was now passed by the party. 
Garnet was restless and uneasy. Oldcorne betrayed his agita- 
tion by unavailing lamentations, by listening to every sound, and 
by constantly rushing to the windows to reconnoitre, until he 
was checked by Fawkes, who represented to him the folly of his 
conduct. Viviana, though ill at ease, did not allow her terror 
to appear, but endeavoured to imitate the immoveable demea- 
nour of Guy Fawkes, who always became more collected in pro- 
portion to the danger by which he v/as threatened. 

At the expiration of the time above mentioned, it had become 
quite dark, and desiring his companions to follow him, Guy 
Fawkes drew his sword, and, grasping Viviana's hand, led the 
way down stairs. Before opening the door, he listened intently, 
and, hearing no sound, issued cautiously forth. The party had 
scarcely gained the centre of the court, when a caliver was dis- 
charged at them, which, though it did no damage, served as a 
signal to the rest of their foes. Guy Fawkes, who had never 
relinquished his hold of Viviana, now pressed forward as rapidly 
as his strength would permit, and the two priests followed. But 
loud shouts were raised on the drawbridge, and it was evident it 
was occupied by the enemy. 

Uncertain what to do, Guy Fawkes halted, and was about to 
return to the house, when a shout from behind told him their 
retreat was intercepted. In this dilemma there was nothing for 
at but to attempt to force a passage across the drawbridge, or to 
surrender at discretion ; and though Guy Fawkes would not at 
other seasons have hesitated to embrace the former alternative, 
he knew that his strength was not equal to it now. 

. While he was internally resolving not to yield himself with 
life, and supporting Viviana, who clung closely to him, the clatter 
of hoofs was heard rapidly approaching along the avenue, and 
presently afterwards two horsemen galloped at full speed toward 
the drawbridge. The noise had likewise attracted the attentioQ 



146 GUY FAWKES. 

of the enemy; who, apprehensive of a rescue, prepared to stop 
them. But the tremendous pace of the riders rendered this im- 
possihlc. A few blows were exchanged, a few shots fired, and 
they had crossed the drawbridge. 

" Who goes there ?" shouted Guy Fawkes, as the horsemen 
ap}>roached him. 

" It is the voice of Guy Fawkes," cried the foremost, whose 
tones proclaimed it was Catesby. " They are here," he cried, 
reining in his steed. 

" Where is Viviana ?" vociferated his companion, who was no 
)ther than Humphrey Chetham. 

" Here — here," replied Guy Fawkes. 

With the quickness of thought, the young merchant was by 
her side, and in another moment she was placed on the saddle 
before him, and borne at a headlong pace across the drawbridge. 

" Follow me," cried Catesby, " I will clear a passage for 
you. Once across the drawbridge, you are safe. A hundred 
yards down the avenue, on the right, you will find a couple of 
horses tied to a tree. Quickl quick !" 

As he spoke, a shot whizzed past his head, and a tumultuous 
din in the rear told that their pursuers were close upon them. 
Striking spurs into his steed, Catesby dashed forward, and deal- 
ing blows right and left, cleared the drawbridge of its occupants, 
many of whom leaped into the moat to escape his fury. His 
"ompanions were close at his heels, and got over the bridge in 
safety. 

" Fly !— fly I" cried Catesby, — " to the horses — the horses ! I 
will check all pursuit." 

So saying, and while the others flew towards the avenue, he 
faced his opponents, and making a desperate charge upon them, 
drove them backwards. In this conflict, though several shots 
were fired, and blows aimed at him on all sides, he sustained no 
injury, but succeeded in defending the bridge sufficiently long 
to enable his friends to mount. 

He then rode off" at full speed, and found the party waiting 
for him at the end of the avenue. Father Oldcorne was seated 
on the same steed as his superior. After riding with them 
upwards of a mile, Humphrey Chetham dismounted, and resign- 
ing his horse to Viviana, bade her farewell, and disappeared. 

'* And now to London !" cried Catesby, striking into a road 
on the right, and urging his steed to a rapid pace. 

" Ay, to London 1 — to the Parliament House I" echoed Fawkes, 
following him with the others. 



END OF THE FIRST BOOK. 



THE D I S C Y E K Y. 



The next point to be considered is the means to compass and work these designs. 
These means were most cruel and damnable ; — by mining, and by thirty-six barrels 
of powder, having crows of iron^ stones, and wood, laid upon the barrels, to have 
made the breach the greater. Lord ! what a wind, what a fire, what a motion and 
commotion of earth and air would there have been ! — Sir Edward Coke's Speech oA 
the Trial of the Conspirators in the Gunpowder Plot. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE LANDING OF THE POWDER. 

Towards the close of the sixth day after their departure from 
Ordsall Hall, the party approached the capital. The sun was 
setting as they descended Highgate Hill, and the view of the 
ancient, and then most picturesque city, was so enchanting, that 
Viviana, who beheld it for the first time, entreated her compa- 
nions to pause for a few minutes to allow her to contemplate it. 
From the spot where they halted, the country was completely 
open to Clerkenwell, and only a few scattered habitations lay 
between them and the old grey ramparts of the city, witli their 
gates and fortifications, which were easily discernible even at 
that distance. Above them rose the massive body and central 
tower of Saint Paul's cathedral, — a structure far surpassing that 
which has succeeded it, — while amid the innumerable gables, 
pointed roofs, and twisted chimneys of the houses sprang a mul- 
titude of lesser towers and spires, lending additional beauty to 
the scene. Viviana was enraptured, and, while gazing on the 
prospect, almost forgot her sorrows, Guy Fawkes and Catesby, 
who were a little in advance of the others, turned their gaze 
westward, and the former observed to his companion, 

" The sun is setting over the Parliament House. The sky seems 
stained with blood. It looks portentous of what is to follow." 

" I would gladly behold the explosion from this hill, or from 
yon heights," replied Catesby, pointing towards Hainpstead. 
*'It will be a sight such as man has seldom seen." 

" I shall never live to witness it !" exclaimed Guy Fawkes, in 
a melancholy tone. 

**What! still desponding?" returned Catesby, reproachfully. 
*' I thought, since you had fully recovered from your wound, 
you had shaken off your fears." 

" You misunderstand me," replied Fawkes. " I mean that I 
shall ?)erish with our foes." 

L2 



148 GUY FAWKES. 

" Why so ?" cried Catesby. " There will be plenty of time to 
escape after you have fired the train." 

" I shall not attempt it," rejoined Fawkes, in a sombre voice. 
" I will abide the result in the vault. If I perish, it will be a 
glorious death." 

" Better live to see the refreneration of our faith, and our 
restoration to our rights," rejoined Catesby.. *' But we will 
speak of this hereafter. Here comes Garnet." 

" Where do you propose we should lodge to-night?" asked the 
latter, riding up. 

" At the house at Lambeth, where the powder is deposited," 
returned Catesby. 

" Will it be safe ?" asked Garnet, uneasily. 

"We shall be safer there than elsewhere, father," replied 
Catesby. "If it is dark enough to-night, Fawkes and I will 
remove a portion of the powder. But we are losing time. We 
must pass through the city before the gates are closed." 

In this suggestion Garnet acquiesced, and calling to Viviana 
to follow them, — for, since his late atrocious attempt, Catesby 
had not exchanged a word or look with her, but during the whole 
of the journey kept sedulously aloof, — the whole party set for- 
ward, and proceeding at a brisk pace, soon reached the walls of 
the city. Passing through Cripplegate, they shaped their course 
towards London Bridge. Viviana was filled with astonishment 
at all she saw: the multitude and magnificence of the shops, 
compared with such as she had previously seen ; the crowds in 
the streets, — for even at that hour they were thronged ; the 
varied dresses of the passengers — the sober garb of the merchant, 
contrasting with the showy cloak, the preposterous ruff, swelling 
hose, plumed cap, and swaggering gait of the gallant or the 
ruffler; the brawls that were constantly occurring ; the number 
of signs projecting from the dwellings; all she witnessed or heard 
surprised and amused her, and she would willingly have proceeded 
at a slower pace to indulge her curiosity, had not her companions 
urged her onward. 

As they were crossing Eastchcap, in the direction of Crooked- 
lane, a man suddenly quitted the footpath, and, rushing towards 
Garnet, seized his bridle, and cried, 

" I arrest you. You are a Romish priest." 

"It is false, knave," returned Garnet. " I am as good a Pro- 
testant as thyself, and am just arrived with my companions from 
a long journey." 

" Your companions arc all rank Papists," rejoined the stranger. 
" You yourself are Father Garnet, superior of the Jesuits, and, 
if I am not deceived, the person next you is Father Oldcorne, 
also of that order. If I am wrong you can easily refute the 
charge. Come with me to the council. If you refuse, I will 
call assistance from the passengers." 




•^39<W«»Ki*^^ 



■:^/fm .^7/^^YJ t/'//^/ 0//Af^^ ////^//m m: iS^/^iUi 



THE LANDING OF THE POWDER, 149 

Garnet saw he was lost if he did not make an immediate 
effort at self-preservation, and resolving to be beforehand with 
his assailant, he shouted at the top of his voice, 

" Help I help I my masters. This villain would rob me of 
my purse." 

" He is a Romish priest," vociferated the stranger. " I call 
upon you to assist me to arrest him." 

While the passengers, scarcely knowing what to make of these 
contradictory statements, flocked round them, Guy Fawkes, who 
Avas a little in advance of Catesby, rode back, and seeing how 
matters stood, instantly drew a petronel, and with the butt-end 
felled the stranger to the ground. Thus liberated. Garnet struck 
spurs into his steed, and the whole party dashed off at a rapid 
pace. Shouts were raised by the bystanders, a few of whom 
started in pursuit, but the speed at which the fugitives rode soon 
bore them out of danger. 

By this time they had reached London Bridge, and Viviana, 
in some degree recovered from the fright caused by the recent 
occurrence, ventured to look around her. She could scarcely 
believe she was crossing a bridge, so completely did the tall 
houses give it the appearance of a street ; and, if it had not been 
for occasional glimpses of the river caught between the openings 
of these lofty habitations, she would have thought her compa- 
nions had mistaken the road. As they approached the ancient 
gateway (afterwards denominated Traitor's Tower), at the South - 
Avark side of the bridsre, she remarked with a shudder the dismal 
array of heads garnishing its spikes, and pointing them out to 
Fawkes, cried, 

" Heaven grant yours may never be amongst the number I' 

Fawkes made no answer, but dashed beneath the low and 
gloomy arch of the gate. 

Striking into a street on the right, the party skirted the walls 
of Saint Saviour's Church, and presently drew near the Globe 
theatre, above which floated its banner. Adjoining it was the 
old Bear-garden — the savag-e inmates of which made themselves 
sufficiently audible. Garnet hastily pointed out the first-men- 
tioned place of amusement to Viviana as they passed it, and her 
reading having made her well acquainted with the noble dramas 
produced at that unpretending establishment — little better than 
a barn in comparison with a modern playhouse, — she regarded it 
with deep interest. Another theatre — the Swan — speedily 
claimed her attention ; and, leaving it behind, they came upon 
the open country. 

It was now growing rapidly dark, and Catesby, turning off into 
a narrow lane on the right, shouted to his companions to keep 
near him. The tract of land they were traversing was flat and 
marshy. The air was damp and unwholesome — for the swamp 
had not been drained as in later times, — and the misty exhalu- 



ir,Q GUY FAWKES. 

tions arising from it added to the obscurity. Catesby, however, 
did not relax his pace, and his companions imitated his example. 
Another turn on the right seemed to bring them still nearer the 
river, and involved them in a thicker fog. 

All at once Catesby stopped, and cried, 

" We should be near the house. And yet this fog perplexes 
me. Stay here while I search for it." 

" If you leave us, we shall not readily meet again," rejoined 

Fawkcs. 

But the caution was unheeded, Catesby having already disap- 
peared. A few moments afterwards, Fawkes heard the sound of 
a horse's hoofs approaching him ; and, thinking it was Catesby, 
he hailed the rider. 

The horseman made no answer, but continued to advance 
towards them. 

Just then the voice of Catesby was heard at a little distance, 
shouting, " I was right. It is here." 

The party then hastened in the direction of the cry, and per- 
ceived through the gloom a low building, before the door of 
which Catesby, who had dismounted, was standing. 

" A stranger is amongst us," observed Fawkes, in an under 
tone, as he rode up. 

" Where is he ?" demanded Catesby, hastily. 

" Here," replied a voice. " But, fear nothing. I am a friend.'* 

"I must have stronger assurance than that," replied Catesby. 
« Who are you ?" 

" Robert Keyes," replied the other, " Do you not know my 
voice t 

" In good truth I did not," rejoined Catesby ; " and you have 
spoken just in time. Your arrival is most opportune. But what 
brings you here to night ?" 

" The same errand as yourself, I conclude, Catesby," replied 
Keyes. " I came here to see that all was in safety. But, who 
have you with you ?" 

" Let us ente*r the house, and you shall learn," replied Catesby. 

With this, he tapped thrice at the door in a peculiar manner, 
and presently a light was seen through the windows, and a voice 
from within demanded who knocked. 

" Your master," replied Catesby. 

Upon this, the door was instantly unbarred. After a hasty 
irrceting between Catesby and his servant, whom he addressed as 
Thomas Bates, the former inquired whether aught had occurred 
(Uulng his absence, and was answered that, exce[)t an occasional 
visit from jMr. Percy, one of the conspirators, no one had been 
near the house; everything being in precisely the same state he 
had left it. 

" Tliat is well," replied Catesby. " Now, then, to dispose of 

the horses." 



THE LANDING OF THE POWDER, lol 

All the party liavincr dismounted, their steeds were led to a 
stable at the back of the premises by Catesby and Bates, while 
the others entered the house. It was a small, mean-looking; 
habitation, standing at a short distance from the river-side, on 
the skirts of Lambeth Marsh, and its secluded situation and 
miserable appearance seldom induced any one to visit it. On 
one side was a deep muddy sluice communicating with the river. 
Within, it possessed but slight accommodation, and only num- 
bered four apartments. One of the best of these was assigned 
to Viviana, and she retired to it as soon as it could be prepared 
for her reception. Garnet, who still carried his arm in a sling, 
but who was in other respects almost recovered from his accident, 
tendered every assistance in his power, and would have remained 
with her, but she entreated to be left alone. On descending to 
the lower room, he found Catesby, who, having left Bates in 
care of the horses, produced such refreshments as they had 
brought with them. These were scanty enough ; but a few 
flasks of excellent wine which they found within the house made 
some amends for the meagre repast. Viviana was solicited by 
Guy Fawkes to join them ; but she declined, alleging that she 
was greatly fatigued, and about to retire to rest. 

Their meal ended, Catesby proposed that they should ascer- 
tain the condition of the powder, as he feared it might have 
suffered from being so long in the vault. Before making tliis 
examination, the door was carefully barred ; the shutters of the 
windows closed ; and Guy Fawkes placed himself as sentinel at 
the door. A flag beneath the grate, in which a fire was never 
kindled, was then raised, and disclosed a flight of steps leading 
to a vault beneath. Catesby having placed a light in a lantern, 
descended with Keyes; but both Garnet and Oldcorne refused 
to accompany them. 

The vault was arched and lofty, and, strange to say, for its 
situation, dry — a circumstance owing, in all probability, to the 
great thickness of the walls. On either side were ranged twenty 
barrels filled with powder ; and at the further end stood a pile 
of arms, consisting of pikes, rapiers, demi-lances, petroncis, 
calivers, corslets, and morions. Removing one of the barrels 
from its station, Catesby forced open the lid, and examined its 
contents, which he found perfectly dry and uninjured. 

" It is fit for use," he observed, with a significant smile, as he 
exhibited a handful of the powder to Keyes, who stood at a little 
distance with the lantern; "if it will keep as well in the cellar 
beneath the Parliament House, our foes will soon be nearer 
heaven, than they would ever be if left to themselves." 

" When do you propose to transport it across the river ?" asked 
Keyes. 

" To-night," replied Catesby. *' It is dark and foggv, and 
fitting for the purpose. Bates I" he shouted ; and at the call 



152 GUY FAWKES. 

his servant instantly descended. "Is the wherry at hef 
moorings ?" 

" She is, your worship," replied Bates. 

" You must cross the river instantly, then," rejoined Catesb}', 
"and proceed to the dwelling adjoining the Parliament House, 
which we hired from Ferris. Here is the key. Examine the 
premises, — and bring word whether all is secure." 

Bates was about to depart, when Keyes volunteering- to ac- 
company him, they left the house together. Having fastened 
down the lid of the cask, Catesby summoned Fawkes to his 
assistance, and by his help as many barrels as could be safely 
stowed in the boat were brought out of the vault. More than 
two hours elapsed before Bates returned. He was alone, and in- 
formed them that all was secure, but that Keyes had decided on 
remaining where he was, — it being so dark and foggy, that it was 
scarcely possible to cross the river. 

" I had some difficulty in landing," he added, " and got con- 
siderably out of my course. I never was out on so dark a nif>-ht 
before." 

" It is the better for us," rejoined Catesby. " We shall be 
sure to escape observation." 

In this opinion Guy Fawkes concurred, and they proceeded 
to transport the powder to the boat, which was brought up the 
sluice within a few yards of the door. This done, and the barrels 
covered with a piece of tarpaulin, they embarked, and Fawkes, 
seizing an oar, propelled the skiff along the narrow creek. 

As Bates had stated, the fog was so dense that it was whollv 
impossible to steer correctly, and Fawkes was therefore obliged 
to trust to chance as to the course he took. However, having 
fully regained his strength, he rowed with great swiftness, and, 
as far as he could judge, had gained the mid-stream, when, be- 
fore he could avoid it, he came in violent contact with another 
boat, oversetting it, and plunging its occupants in the stream. 

Disregarding the hints and even menaces of Catesby, who 
urged him to proceed, Fawkes immediately lay upon his oars, 
and, as the water was perfectly smooth, succeeded, without much 
difficulty, in extricating the two men from their perilous situa- ■ 
tion. Their boat having drifted down the stream, could not be 
recovered. The chief of these personagf^s was profuse in his 
thanks to his deliverers, whom he supposed were watermen, and 
they took care not to undeceive him. 

" You may rely upon my gratitude," he said ; " and when I 
tell you I am the Earl of Salisbury, you will be satisfied I have 
the means of evincing it." 

" The Earl of Salisbury !" exclaimed Catesby, who was 
seated by Fawkes, having taken one of the oars. " Is it 
possible ?" 

*' I have been on secret state business," replied the Earl, " and 



THE LANDING OF THE POWDER. 153 

did not choose to employ my own barge. I was returning to 
"Whitehall, when your boat struck against mine." 

*' It is our bitterest enemy," observed Catesby, in an under 
tone, to Fawkes. " Fate has delivered him into our hands." 

" What are you about to do ?" demanded Fawkes, observing' 
that his companion no longer pulled at the oar. 

" Shoot him," replied Catesby. *' Keep still, while I dis- 
engage my petronel." 

*' It shall not be," returned Fawkes, laying a firm grasp upon, 
his arm. " Let him perish with the others." 

" If we suffer him to escape now, we may never have such a 
chance again," rejoined Catesby. " I will shoot him." 

" I say you shall not," rejoined Fawkes. " His hour is not 
yet come." 

" What are you talking about, my masters?" demanded the 
Earl, who was shivering in his wet garments. 

" Nothing," replied Catesby, hastily. " I will throw him over- 
board," he whispered to Fawkes. 

" Again I say, you shall not," replied the latter. 

" I see what you are afraid of," cried the Earl. " You are 
smugglers. You have got some casks of distilled waters on board,, 
and are afraid I may report you. Fear nothing. Land me 
near the palace, and count upon my gratitude." 

" Our course lies in a different direction," replied Catesb}', 
sternly. "If your lordship lands at all, it must be where we 
choose." 

" But I have to see the King to-night. I have some important 
papers to deliver to him respecting the Papists," replied 
Salisbury. 

"Indeed!" exclaimed Catesby. "We must, at least, have 
those papers," he observed, in a whisper, to Fawkes. 

" That is a different affair," replied Fawkes. " They may 
prove serviceable to us." 

" My lord," observed Catesby, " by a strange chance you have 
fallen into the hands of Catholics. You will be pleased to- 
deliver these papers to us." 

" Ah ! villains, would you rob me ?" cried the Earl. " Your 
shall take my life sooner." 

"Wc will take both, if you resist," replied Catesby, in a 
menacing tone. 

" Nay, then," returned Salisbury, attempting to draw his i 
sword, " wc will see who will obtain the mastery. We are- , 
equally matched. Come on ; I fear you not." 

But the waterman who had rowed the Earl was not of cqua? 
courage with his employer, and refused to take part in the 
conflict. 

*'It will be useless to contend with us," cried Catesby, re- 
linquishing the oar to Fawkes, and springing forward. " I nmst 



154 GUY FAWKES. 

have those papers," he added, seizing the Earl by the throat, "or 
I will throw you overboard." 

" I am mistaken in you," returned Salisbury ; " you are no 
common mariner." 

"It matters not who or what I am," rejoined Catcsby, fiercely. 
^' Your papers, or you die." 

Finding it in vain to contend with his opponent, the Earl was 
fain to yield, and reluctantly produced a packet from his doublet, 
and delivered it to him. 

" You will repent this outrage, villain," he said. 

" Your lordship will do well to recollect you are still in my 
power," rejoined Catesby. " One thrust of my sword will wipe 
off some of the injuries you have inflicted on our suffering 
party." 

" I have heard your voice before," cried Salisbury ; " you shall 
not escape me." 

" Your imprudence has destroyed you," retorted Catesby, 
clutching the Earl's throat more tightl}', and shortening his sword, 
•with the intent to plunge it into his breast. 

"Holdl" exclaimed Fawkes, grasping his arm, and preventing 
the blow. " I have already said you shall not slay him. You 
are in possession of his papers. What more would you have ?" 

" His life," replied Catesby, struggling to liberate his arm. 

" Let him swear not to betray us," rejoined Fawkes. " If he 
refuses, I will not stay your hand." 

" You hear what my companion says, my lord," cried Catesby. 
■" Will you swear to keep silence as to what has just occurred?" 

After a moment's hesitation, Salisbury assented, and Catesbj 
Tclinquishcd his grasp. 

During this time, the boat had drifted considerably down the 
stream, and, in spite of the darkness, Catesby noticed with some 
tineasiness that they were approaching more than one vessel. 
The Earl of Salisbury also perceived this, and raised a cry for 
help, but was instantly checked by Catesby, who took a seat 
beside him, and placing the point of his rapier at his breast, 
swore he would stab him if he made any further clamour. 

The threat, and the dangerous propinquity of his enem}', 
•effectually silenced the Earl, and Catesby directed Fawkes to 
make for the shore as quickly as he could. His injunctions were 
obeyed, and Fawkes plied the oars with so much good-will, that 
m a few minutes the wherry struck against the steps, which pro- 
jected far into the water, a little to the right of the Star Chamber, 
precisely on the spot where Westminster Bridge now stands. 

Plere the Earl and his companion were allowed to disembark, 
and they had no sooner set foot on land than Guy Fawkes pushed 
off the boat, and rowed as swiftly as he could towards the centre 
of the stream. He then demanded of Catesby whether he should 
make for the Parliament House, or return. 



THE LANDING OF THE POWDER. 155 



(( 



I scarcely Icnow what to advise," replied Catesby. *' I do 
not think the Earl will attempt pursuit. And yet I know not. 
The papers we have obtained may be important. Cease rowing 
for a moment, and let us listen." 

Guy Fawkes complied, and they listened intently, but could 
only hear the rippling of the current against the sides of the 
skiff. 

" We have nothing to fear," observed Catesby. " He will not 
pursue us, or he cannot find a boat." 

As he spoke, the glimmer of torches was visible on the shore, 
and the plunge of oars into the water convinced him his opinion 
was erroneous. 

** What course shall we take ?" inquired Fawkes. 

" I care not," replied Catesby, sullenly. " If I had had my 
own way, this would not have happened." 

" Have no fears," replied Fawkes, rowing swiftly down the 
stream. " We shall easily escape." 

" We will not be taken alive," returned Catesby, seating him- 
self on one of the barrels, and hammering against the lid with 
the butt-end of his petronel. *' I will sooner blow us all to per- 
dition than he shall capture us." 

" You are right," replied Fawkes. " By my patron. Saint 
James, he is taking the same course as ourselves." 

" Well, let him board us," replied Catesby. " I am ready for 
him." 

" Do as you think proper if the worst occurs," returned 
Fawkes. " But, if we make no noise, I am assured we shall not 
be perceived." 

With this he ceased rowing, and suffered the boat to drop 
down the stream. As ill-luck would have it, it seemed as if the 
hostile bark had struck completely into their track, and, aided by 
the current, and four sturdy rowers, was swiftly approaching. 

" The Earl will be upon us in a few minutes," replied Catesby. 
*' If you have any prayers to ofler, recite them quickly, for I 
swear I will be as good as my word." 

" I am ever prepared for death," replied Fawkes. " Ha ! we 
are saved !" 

This last exclamation was occasioned by his remarking a large 
barge, towards which they were rapidly drifting. 

'* What are you about to do ?" cried Catesby. — " Leap on 
board, and abandon the skiff, together with its contents ?" 

" No," replied Fawkes ; "sit still, and leave the rest to me." 

By this time, they had approached the barge, which was lying 
at anchor, and Guy Fawkes, grasping at a boat-hook, fixed it in 
the vessel as they passed, and drew their own boat close to its 
fiide — so close, in fact, that it could not be distinguished from it. 

The next moment, the chase came up, and they distinctly per- 
ceived the Earl of Salisbury seated in the stern of the boat. 



156 GUY FAWKES. 

holiling a torch. As he approached the barge, he held the h*"-ht 
towards it; but the skiff being on the off-side, entirely escaped 
notice. When the chase had got to a sufficient distance to be 
out of hearing, the fugitives rowed swiftly in the contrary direc- 
tion. 

Not judging it prudent to land, they continued to ply the oars, 
until fatigue compelled them to desist, and they had placed some 
miles between them and their pursuers. 

"Long before this, the Earl must have given up the chase,'* 
observed Catesb}'. " We nuist return before daybreak, and 
either land our powder near the Parliament House, or take it 
back to the vault at Lambeth." 

*' We shall run equal risk either way," replied Fawkes, " and, 
having ventured thus far, we may as well go through with it. 1 
am for landing at Westminster." 

" And I," rejoined Catesby. " I do not like giving up a 
project when I have once undertaken it." 

" You speak my sentiments exactly," returned Fawkes. " West- 
minster be it." 

After remaining stationary for about an hour, they rowed back 
again, and, aided by the stream, in a short time reached their 
destination. The fog had in a great degree cleared off, and day 
began to break as they approached the stairs leading to the Par- 
liament House. Though this was not what they desired, inas- 
much as the light added to the risk they would have run in 
landing the powder, it enabled them to ascertain that no one was 
on the watch. 

Running swiftly in towards a sort of wharf, protected by a 
roofed building, Catesby leapt ashore, and tied the skiff to a ring 
in the steps. He then desired Fawkes to hand out the powder 
as quickly as he could. The order was promptly obeyed, and in 
a few minutes several barrels were on the strand. 

*' Had you not better fetch Keyes to help us, while I get out 
the rest ?" observed Fawkes. 

Catesby assented, and hurrying to the house, found Keyes, 
who was in great alarm about them. He instantly accompanied 
the other to the wharf, and by their united efforts the powder 
was expeditiously and safely removed. 



CHAPTER H. 

THE TRAITOR. 



The habitation, to which the powder was conveyed, adjoined, ns 
has already been stated, the Parliament House, and stood at the 
south-west corner of that structure. It was a small building. 



THE TRAITOR. 157 

two stories high, with a little garden attached to it, surrounded 
by lofty walls, and belonged to Whinneard, the keeper of the 
royal wardrobe, by whom it was let to a person named Ferris. 
From the latter it was hired by Thomas Percy, one of the con- 
spirators, and a relative of the Earl of Northumberland,-^f 
whom it will be necessary to speak more fully hereafter, — for the 
purpose to which it was now put. 

Having bestowed the barrels of powder carefully in the cellar, 
and fastened the door of the house and the garden-gate after 
ihem, the trio returned to the boat, and rowed back to Lambeth, 
M'here they arrived without being noticed. They then threw 
themselves upon the floor, and sought some repose after their 
fatigue. 

It was late in the day before they awoke. Garnet and Old- 
corne had been long astir ; but Viviana had not quitted her 
chamber. Catesby's first object was to examine the packet he 
had obtained from the Earl of Salisburv, and withdrawing to a 
corner, he read over the papers one by one carefully. 

Guy Fawkes watched his countenance as he perused them, 
but he asked no questions. Many of the documents appeared to 
have little interest, for Catesby tossed them aside with an ex- 
clamation of disappointment. At length, however, a small note 
dropped from the bundle. Catesby picked it up, opened it, and 
his whole expression changed. His brow grew contracted; and, 
springing to his feet, he uttered an ejaculation of rage, crying, 
*• It is as I suspected. We have traitors among us." 

" Whom do you suspect ?" cried Fawkes. 

" Tresham I" cried Catesb}', in a voice of thunder, — " the 
fawning, wily, lying Tresham. Fool that I was to league him 
with us." 

" He is your own kinsman," observed Garnet. 

" He is," replied Catesby; " but were he my own brother he 
should die. Here is a letter from him to Lord Mounteagle, 
which has found its way to the Earl of Salisbury, hinting that a 
plot is hatching against the state, and offering to give him full 
information of it." 

" Traitor I false, perjured traitor I" cried Fawkes. " He must 
die." 

" He shall fall by my hand," rejoined Catesby. " Stay I a 
plan occurs to me. He cannot be aware that this letter is in 
my possession. I will send Bates to bid him come hither. We 
will then charge him with his criminality, and put him to death." 

" He deserves severe punishment, no doubt," replied Garnet ; 
" but I am unwilling you should proceed to the last extremitic3 
with him." 

" There is no alternative, father," replied Catesby. " Oar 
safety demands his destruction." 

Garnet returned no answer, but bowed his head sorrowfully 



I5S GUY FAWKES. 

upon his breast. Bates was then despatched to Tresham ; and 
preparations were made by the three lay conspirators for exe- 
cuting their fell design. 

It was af^reed, that on his arrival, Tresham should be seized 
and disarmed, and after being interrogated by CaCesby touclilng 
the extent of his treachery, shonid be stabbed by Guy Fawkes. 
This being resolved upon, it became a question how they should 
act in thcT interim. It was possible that, after the loss of his 
papers, some comnumication might take place between the Earl 
of Salisbury and Lord Mounteagle, and through the latter with 
Tresham. Thus prepared, on the arrival of Bates, Tresham, 
seeing through their design, instead of accompanying him, might 
give information of tiieir retreat to the officers. The contin- 
gency was by no means improbable ; and it was urged so 
strongly by "Garnet, that Catesby began to^ regret his pre- 
cipitancy in sending the message. Still, his choler was so 
ereadv roused against Tresham, that he resolved to gratify his 
vengeance at any risk. 

<'"lf he betrays us, and brings the officers here, we shall 
know how to act," he remarked to Fawkes. "There is that 
below which will avenge us on them all." 

" True," replied Fawkes. " But I trust we shall not be 
obliged to resort to it." 

Soon after this, Bates returned with a message from Tresham, 
stating that he would be at the rendezvous at nightfall, and 
that he had important disclosures to make to them. He de- 
sired them, moreover, to observe the utmost caution, and not 
to stir abroad. 

" He may, perhaps, be able to offer an explanation of his 
conduct," observed Keyes. 

" Impossible," returned Catesby. " But he shall not die 
without a hearing." 

" That is all I desire," returned Keyes. 

While the others were debating upon the interrogations they 
should put to Tresham, and further examining the Earl of 
Salisbury's papers. Garnet repaired to Viviana's chamber, and 
informed her what was about to take place. She was filled 
with consternation, and entreated to be allowed to see Guy 
Fawkes for a few moments alone. Moved by her supplications. 
Garnet complied, and presently afterwards Fawkes entered the 
room. 

" You have sent for me, Viviana," he said. " What would 

fOU?" 

" I have just heard you are about to put one of your com- 
panions to death," she replied. " It must not be." 

" Viviana B adcliffe," returned Fawkes, " by your own desire 
you have mixed yourself up with my fortunes. I will not now 
discuss the prudence of the step you have taken. But 1 deem 



THE TRAITOR. 159 

it necessary to tell you, once for all, that any attempts to turn 
me from the line of conduct I have marked out to myself will 
fail. Tresham has betrayed us, and he must pay the penalty of 
his treason." 

" But not with his life," replied Viviana. " Do you not now 
perceive into what enormities this fatal enterprise will lead you? 
It is not one crime alone that you are about to commit, but 
many. You constitute yourselves judges of your companion, 
and without allowing him to defend himself, take his life. 
Disguise it as you may, it is assassination — cold-blooded 
assassination." 

"His life is justly forfeited," replied Guy Fawkes, sternly, 
"When he took the oath of secrecy and fidelity to our league, 
he well knew what the consequences would be if he violated 
it. He has done so. He has compromised our safety. Nay, 
he has sold us to our enemies, and nothing shall save him." 

" If this is so," replied Viviana, " how much better would it 
be to employ the time now left in providing for your safety, 
than in contriving means of vengeance upon one, who will be 
sufficiently punished for his baseness by his own conscience. 
Even if you destroy him, you will not add to your own security, 
while you will commit a foul and needless crime, equal, if not 
exceeding in atrocity that you seek to punish." 

" Viviana," replied Fawkes, in an angry tone, " in an evil 
hour, I consented to your accompanying me. I now repent my 
acquiescence. But, having passed my word, I cannot retract. 
You waste time, and exhaust my patience and your own by 
ihese unavailing supplications. When I embarked in this en- 
terprise, I embraced all its dangers, all its crimes if you will, and 
1 shall not shrink from them. The extent of Tresham's treachery 
is not yet known to us. There maj' be — and God grant it! — 
extenuating circumstances in his conduct that may save his life. 
But, as the case stands at present, his offence appears of that 
dye that nothing can wash it out but his blood." 

And he turned to depart. 

" When do you expect this wretched man ?" asked Viviana, 
arresting him. 

" At nightfall," replied Fawkes. 

" Oh I that there were any means of warning him of his 
danger!" she cried. 

" There are none," rejoined Fawkes, fiercely, — " none that 
you can adopt. And I must lay my injunctions upon you not 
to quit your chamber." 

So saying, he retired. 
• Left alone, Viviana became a prey to the most agonizing re- 
flections. Despite the strong, and almost unaccountable interest 
siie feit in Guy Fawkes, she began to repent the step she had 
taken in joining him, as calculated to make her a party to his 



IfiO CUY FAWKES. 

criminal conduct But this feeling was transient, and was suc- 
•ceeded by a firmer determination to pursue the good work she 
]iad undertaken. 

" Though sHght success has hitherto attended my efforts," she 
thought, " that is no reason why I should relax them. The time 
is arrived when I may exert a beneficial influence over him ; and 
it may be, that what occurs to-night will prove the first step 
towards complete triumph. In any case, nothing shall be wanting 
to prevent the commission of the meditated atrocity." 

With this, she knelt down and prayed long and fervently, and 
arose confirmed and strengthened in her resolution. 

Meanwhile, no alteration had taken place in the purposes of 
the conspirators. Night came, but with it came not Tresham. 
"Catesby, who, up to this time had managed to restrain his im- 
patience, now arose, and signified his intention of going in search 
of him, and was with difficulty prevented from carrying his 
threat into execution by Guy Fawkes, who represented the folly 
-and risk of such a course. 

" If he comes not before midnight, we shall know what to 
think, and how to act," he observed ; " but till then let us 
remain tranquil." 

Keyes and the others adding their persuasions to those of 
Fawkes, Catesby sat sullenly down, and a profound silence en- 
sued. In this way, some hours were passed, when just at the 
stroke of midnight, Viviana descended from her room, and ap- 
peared amongst them. Her countenance was deathly pale, and 
•she looked anxiously around the assemblage. All, however, 
with the exception of Fawkes, avoided her gaze. 

" Is he come ?" she exclaimed at length. " I have listened 
Intently, but have heard nothing. You cannot have murdered 
him. And yet 3'our looks alarm me. Father Garnet, answer 
me, — is the deed done ?" 

**No, my daughter," replied Garnet, sternly. 

" Then he has escaped !" she cried, joyfully. " You expected 
him at nightfall." 

" It is not yet too late," replied Fawkes, in a sombre tone ; 
*' his death is only deferred." 

" Oh I do not say so," she cried, in a voice of agony. *'I 
hoped you had relented." 

At this moment a peculiar knock was heard at the door. It 
was thrice repeated, and the strokes vibrated, though with 
oifferent effect, through every bosom. 

'• He is here," cried Catesby, rising. 

" Viviana, go to your chamber," commanded Guy Fawkes, 
grasping her hand, and leading her towards the stairs. 

But she resisted his efforts, and fell on her knees. 

*' I will not go," she cried, in a supplicating tone^ " unless you 
will spare this man's life." 



THE TRAITOR. 161 



« 



I have already told you my fixed determination," rejoiced 
Fawkes, fiercely. " If you will not retire of your own free will, 
I must force you." 

" If you attempt it, I will scream, and alarm your victim," she 
replied. " Mr. Catesby," she added, " have my prayers, my 
entreaties, no weight with you ? Will you not grant me his life ?" 

"No!" replied Catesby, fiercely. "She must be silenced," 
he added, with a significant look at Fawkes. 

" She shall," replied the latter, drawing his poniard. " Viviana!" 
he continued, in a voice, and with a look that left no doubt as 
to his intentions, " do not compel me to be your destroyer." 

As he spoke, the knocking was repeated, and Viviana uttered 
a prolonged and piercing cry. Guy Fawkes raised his weapon, 
and was about to strike, but his resolution failed him, and his 
arm dropped nerveless to his side. 

"Your betterangel has conquered!" shecried, clasping his knees. 

While this was passing, the door was thrown open by Catesby, 
and Tresham entered the room. 

" What means this outcry ?" he asked, looking round in 
alarm. " Ah ! what do I see ? Viviana Radcliffe here ! Did 
she utter the scream ?" 

" She did," replied Viviana, rising, " and she hoped to warn 
you by it. But you were led on by your fate." 

" Warn nie from what ?" ejaculated Tresham, starting. " I 
am among friends." 

" You are among those who have resolved upon your death," 
replied Viviana. 

"Ah!" exclaimed Tresham, making an effort to gain the 
door, and draw his sword. 

In both attempts, however, he was foiled, for Catesby inter- 
cepted him, while Fawkes and Keyes flung themselves upon 
him, and binding his arms together with a sword-belt, forced 
him into a chair. 

*' Of what am I accused?" he demanded, in a voice tremulous 
with rage and terror. 

"You shall learn presently," replied Catesby. And he 
motioned to Fawkes to remove Viviana. 

" Let me remain," she cried, fiercely. " My nature is changed, 
and is become as savage as your own. If blood must be spilt, I 
will tarry to look upon it." 

" This is no place for you, dear daughter," interposed Garnet. 

" Nor for you either, father," retorted Viviana, bitterly ; "unless 
you will act as a minister of Christ, and prevent this violence." 

" Let her remain, if she will," observed Catesby. " Her pre- 
sence need not hinder our proceedings." 

So saying, he seated himself opposite Tresham, while the two 
priests placed themselves on either side. Guy Fawkes took up 
a position on the left of the prisoner, with his drawn diiggor iu 

M 



1G2 GUY FAWKES. 

his hand, and Keycs stationed hinisolf near the door. The 
unfortunate captive regarded them with terrified glances, and 
trembled in every limb. 

" Thomas Tresham," commenced Catesby, In a stern voice, 
" you are a sworn brother in our plot. Before I proceed further, 
I will ask you what should be his punishment who violates his 
oath, and betrays his confederates? We await your answer ?" 

But Tresham remained obstinately silent. 

" I will tell you, since you refuse to speak," continued 
Catesby. " It is death — death by the hands of his associates." 

*' It may be," replied Tresham ; " but I have neither broken 
my oath, nor betrayed you." 

*' Your letter to Lord Mounteagle is in my possession," replied 
Catesby. " Behold it !" 

" Perdition I" exclaimed Tresham. " But you will not slay 
me ? I have betrayed nothing. I have revealed nothing. On 
my soul's salvation, I have not I Spare me ! spare me I and I 
will be a faithful friend in future. I have been indiscreet — I 
own it — but nothing more. I have mentioned no names. And 
Lord Mounteagle, as you well know, is as zealous a Catholic ss 
any now present." 

" Your letter has been sent to the Earl of Salisbury," pursued 
Catesby, coldly. " It was from him I obtained it." 

*' Then Lord Mounteagle has betrayed me," returned Tres- 
ham, becoming pale as death. 

*' Have you nothing further to allege?" demanded Catesby. 
As Tresham made no answer, he turned to the others, and said, 
"Is it your judgment he should die?" 

All, except Viviana, answered in the affirmative. 

" Tresham," continued Catesby, solemnly, "prepare to meet 
your fate like a man. And do you, father," he added to Garnet, 
" proceed to shrive him." 

*' Hold I" cried Viviana, stepping into the midst of them, — 
" hold !" she exclaimed, in a voice so authoritative, and with a 
look so commanding, that the whole assemblage were awe-stricken. 
*' If you think to commit this crime with impunity, you are mis- 
taken. I swear by everything sacred, if you take this man's life, 
I will go forth instantly, and denounce you all to the Council. 
You may stare, sirs, and threaten me, but you shall find I will 
keep my word." 

" We must put her to death too," observed Catesby, in an 
under tone to Fawkes, ** or we shall have a worse enemy left 
than Tresham," 

" I cannot consent to it," replied Fawkes. 

"If you mistrust this person, why not place him in restraint?" 
pursued Viviana. " You will not mend matters by killing him." 

" She says well," observed Garnet; "let us put him in some 
place of security." 



THE ESCAPE PREVENTED. 1G3 

" I am anjreed," replied Fawkes. 

" And I," added Keyes. 

" My judgment, then, is overruled," rejoined Catesby . " But 
I will not oppose you. We will imprison him in the vault 
beneath this chamber." 

*' He must be without light," said Garnet. 

'* And without arms," added Keyes. 

** And without food," muttered Catesby. " He has only 
exchanged one death for another." 

The flag was then raised, and Treshara thrust into the vault, 
after which it was restored to its former position. 

" I have saved you from the lesser crime," cried Viviana to 
Guy Fawkes ; " and, with Heaven's grace, I trust to preserve 
jou from the greater !" 



CHAPTER HL 

THE ESCAPE PREVENTED. 



Viviana having retired to her chamber, apparently to rest, a 
long and anxious consultation was held by the conspirators as to 
the next steps to be pursued. Garnet was of opinion that, as 
the Earl of Salisbury was aware of a conspiracy against the 
state being on foot among the Catholics, their project ought to 
be deferred, if not altogether abandoned. 

*' We are sure to be discovered," he said. " Arrests without 
end will take place. And such rigorous measures will be adopted 
by the Earl, such inquiries instituted, that all will infallibly be 
brought to light. Besides, we know not what Tresham may 
have revealed. He denies having betrayed our secret, but no 
credit can be attached to his assertions." 

" Shall we examine him again, father," cried Catesby, " and 
wring the truth from him by threats or torture ?" 

" No, my son," replied Garnet; " let him remain where he is 
till morning. A night of solitary confinement, added to the 
stings of his own guilty conscience, is likely to produce a stronger 
effect upon him than any torments we could inflict. He shall 
be interrogated strictly to-morrow, and, I will answer for it, will 
make a full confession. But even if he has revealed nothing 
material, there exists another and equally serious ground ot 
alarm. I allude to your meeting with the Earl on the river. I 
should be the last to counsel bloodshed. But if ever it could be 
justified, it might have been so in this case." 

" I would have slain him if I had had my own way," returned 
Catesby, with a fierce and reproachful look at Fawkes. 

"■' If I have done wrong, I will speedily repair my error,'* 

M 2 



15 t GUY FAWKES. 

observed the latter. " Do you desire his death, father? and will 
you absolve me from the deed ?" he added, turning to Garnet. 

"It is better as it is," replied Garnet, njaking; a gesture in the 
negative. *' I woiJd not have our high and holy purpose stainci) 
by common slaughter. Tlie power that delivered him into your 
hands, and stayed them, no doubt preserved him for the general 
sacrifice. My first fear was lest, having noticed the barrels of 
powder within the boat, he might have susjiected your design. 
But I am satisfied his eyes were blinded, and his reason benighted, 
so that he could discern nothing." 

" Such was my own opinion, father," re))lied Fawkes. " Let 
us observe the utmost caution, but proceed at all hazards with 
the enterprise. If we delay, we fail." 

" Right,''' returned Catesby ; " and for that counsel I forgive 
you for standing between me and our enemy." 

Upon this, it was agreed that if nothing occurred in the 
interim, more powder should be transported to the habitation in 
Westminster on the following night, — that Fawkes and Catesby, 
who might be recognised by Salisbury's description, should keep 
close house during the day, — and that the rest of the conspirators 
should be summoned to assist in digging the mine. Prayers 
were then offered up by the two priests for their preservation 
from peril, and for success in their enterprise ; after which, they 
threw themselves on benches or seats, and courted slumber. AH 
slept soundly except Fawkes, who, not being able to close his 
eyes, from an undefinable apprehension of danger, arose, and 
cautiously opening the door, kept watch outside. 

Shortly afterwards, Viviana, who had waited till all was quiet, 
softly descended the stairs, and, shading her light, gazed 
timorously round. Satisfied she was not observed, she glided 
swiftly and noiselessly to the fire-place, and endeavoured to raise 
the flag. But it resisted all her efforts, and she was about to 
abandon the attempt in despair, when she perceived a bolt on 
one side, that had escaped her notice. Hastily withdrawing it, 
she experienced no further difficulty. The stone revolved on 
hinges like a trap-door, and lifting it, she hurried down the steps. 

Alarmed by her ajiproach, Trcsham had retreated to the 
farther end of the vault, and snatching up a halbert from the 
pile of weapons, cried, in a voice of desperation — 

'•' Stand off! 1 am armed, and have severed my bonds. Off, 
I say ! You shall not take me with life." 

" Hush I" cried Viviana, putting her finger to her lips, " I am 
come to set you free." 

"Do I behold an inhabitant of this world?" cried Tresham, 
crossing hiuiself, and drop])ing tlie halbert, " or some blessed 
saint ? Ah !" he exclaimed, as she advanced towards him, " it 
is Viviana Raddiffe — my preserver. Pardon, sweet lady. My 
ejes were dazzled by the light, and your sudden appearance and 



THE ESCAPE PREVENTED. IC)5 

speech, — and I might almost say loolvs, — made me think you 
were some supernatural being come to deliver me from these 
(jloody-m'snded men. Where are they?" 

*' In the room above," she replied, in a whisper, — " asleep, — 
and if you speak so loud you will arouse them." 

*' Let us fly without a moment's delay," returned Tresham, in 
the same tone, and hastily picking up a rapier and a dagger. 

" Stay I" cried Viviana, arresting him. " Before you go, you 
must tell me what you are about to do." 

" We will talk of that when we are out of this accursed place," 
he replied. 

" You shall not stir a footstep," she rejoined, placing herself 
resolutely between him and the outlet, " till you have sworn 
neither to betray your confederates, nor to do them injury." 

" May Heaven requite me, if I forgive them 1" cried Tresham 
between his ground teeth. 

"Remember I — ^}'ou are yet in their power," she rejoined, 
■*' One word from me, and they are at your side. Swear I — and 
swear solemnly, or you do not quit tiiis spot." 

Tresiiam gazed at her fiercely, and griped his dagger, as if 
determined to free himself at any cost, 

" Ah I" she ejaculated, noticing the movement, *' you are 
indeed a traitor. You have neither sense of honour nor grati- 
ffude, and I leave you to your fate. Attempt to follow me, and 
I give the alarm." 

"' Forgive me, Viviana," he cried, abjectly prostrating himself 
at her feet, and clinginn; to the hem of her dres?. " I meant 
•only to terrify you ; I would not injure you for worlds. Do not 
leave me with these ruthless cut-throats. They will assuredly 
murder me. Do not remain with them yourself, or you will 
•come to some dreadful end. Fly with me, and I will place you 
beyond their reach — will watch over your safety. Or, if you are 
resolved to brave their fury, let me go, and I will take any oath 
you propose. As I hope for salvation I will not betray them," 

" Peace !" cried Viviana, contemptuously. " If I set you free, 
Bt is not to save you, but them." 

" What mean you ?" asked Tresham, hesitating. 

" Question me not, but follow," she rejoined, " and tread 
softly, as you value your life." 

Tresham needed no caution on this head, and as they emerged 
from the trap-door in breathless silence, and he beheld the figures 
•of his sleeping foes, he could scarcely muster sufficient courage to 
pass through them. Motioning him to proceed quickly, Viviana 
moved towards the door, and to her surprise found it unfastened. 
Without pausing to consider whence this neglect could arise, she 
opened it, and Trerham, who trembled in every limb, and walked 
upon the points of his feet, stepped forth. As he crossed the 
threshold, however, a powerful grasp was laid upon his shoulder. 



166 r.UY FAWKES 

and a drawn sword presented to his breast, while the voice of 
Fawkcs thundered in his ear, " Who goes there ? Speak, or I 
strike." 

While the fugitive, not daring to answer, lest his accents 
should betray him, endeavoured vainly to break away, Viviana, 
hearing the struggle, threw open the door, and exclaimed, " It is 
Tresham. I set him free." 

" You 1" cried Fawkes, in astonishment. *' Wherefore ?" 

" In the hope that his escape would induce you to abandon 
3'our design, and seek safety in flight," she rejoined, "But you 
have thwarted my purpose." 

Fawkes made no reply, but thrust Tresham forcibly into the 
house, and called to Catesby, who by this time had been roused 
with the others, to close and bar the door. The command was 
instantly obeyed, and as Catesby turned, a strange and fearful 
group met his view. In the midst stood Tresham, his haggard 
features and palsied frame bespeaking the extremity of his terror. 
His sword having been beaten from his grasp by Fawkes, and his 
dagger wrested from him by Keyes, he was utterly defenceless. 
Viviana had placed herself between him and his assailants, and 
screening him from their attack, cried — 

" Despatch me. The fault is mine — mine only — and I am 
ready to pay the penalty. Had I not released him, he would 
not have attempted to escape. I am the rightful victim." 

" She speaks the truth," gasped Tresham. " If she had not 
offered to liberate me, I should never have thought of flying. 
Would to Heaven I had never yielded to her solicitations I" 

"Peace, craven hound!" exclaimed Fawkes, furiously; "you 
deserve to die for your meanness and ingratitude, if not for your 
treachery. And it is for this miserable wretch, Viviana," he 
added, turning to her, " that you would have placed your friends 
in such fearful jeopardy, — it is for him, who would sacrifice you 
without scruple to save himself, that you now offer your own life ?" 

" I deserve your reproaches," she rejoined, in confusion. 

" Had I not fortunately intercepted him," pursued Fawkes, 
*' an hour would not have elapsed ere he would have returned 
with the officers ; and we should have changed this dwelling for 
a dungeon in the Tower, — these benches for the rack." 

" In pity stab me !" cried Viviana, falling at his feet. " But 
oh ! do not wound me with your words. I have committed a 
grievous wrong ; but I was ignorant of the consequences ; and, as 
I hope for mercy hereafter, my sole motive, beyond compassion 
for this wretched man, was to terrify you into relinquishing your 
dreadful project." 

**You have acted wrongfully, — very wrongfully, Viviana," 
interposed Garnet: "but since you arc fully convinced of your 
error, no more need be said. Tliere are seasons when the heart 
must be closed against coaq)assion, and when mercy becomes 



THE ESCAPE PREVENTED. 1G7 

i'Vjustice. Go to your chamber, and leave us to deal with 
ihis unhappy man." 

"To-morrowyou must quit us," observed Fawkes, as she passed 
him. 

" Quit you I" she exclaimed. *' 1 will never offend again.'' 

" I will not trust you," replied Fawkes, " unless — but it is 
useless to impose restrictions upon you, which you will not — 
perhaps, cannot observe." 

" Impose any restrictions you please," replied Viviana. " But 
do not bid me leave you/' 

" The time is come when we must separate," rejoined Fawkes. 
" See you not that the course we are taking is slippery with blood, 
and beset with perils which the firmest of your sex could not 
encounter ?" 

" 1 will encounter them nevertheless," replied Viviana. 
" Be merciful," she added, pointing to Tresham, " and mercy 
shall be shown you in your hour of need." And she slowly 
withdrew. 

While this was passing, Catesby addressed a few words aside- 
to Keyes and Oldcorne, and now stepping forward, and fixing 
his eye steadily upon the prisoner, to note the effect of his speech . 
upon him, said — 

" I have devised a plan by which the full extent of Trcsham's 
treachery can be ascertained." 

" You do not mean to torture him, 1 trust ?" exclaimed Garnet, 
uneasily. 

" No, father," replied Catesby. " If torture is inflicted at all, 
it will be upon the mind, not the body." 

" Then it will be no torture," observed Garnet. " State your 
plan, my son." 

" It is this," returned Catesby. " He shall write a letter to 
Lord Mounteagle, stating that he has important revelations to./ 
make to him, and entreating him to come hither unattended." 

" Here 1" exclaimed Fawkes. 

" Here," repeated Catesby ; " and alone. We will conceal 
ourselves in such manner that we may overhear what passes 
between them, and if any attempt is made by the villain to betray 
our presence, he shall be immediately shot. By this means we 
cannot fail to elicit the truth." 

" I approve your plan, my son," replied Garnet; "but who 
will convey the letter to Lord Mounteagle ?" 

"I will," replied FaNvkes. " Let it be prepared at once, and 
the case will be thought the more urgent. I will watch him, and 
see that he comes unattended, or give you timely warning." 

" Enough," rejoined Garnet. " Let writing materials be pro- 
cured, and I will dictate the letter." 

Tresham, meanwhile, exhibited no misgiving ; but, on the con- 
tiary, his countenance brightened up as the plan was apj)rovcd. 



1()8 GUY FAWKES. 

" My life will be spared if you find I have not deceived you, 
will it not?" he asked, in a supplicating voice. 

*' Assuredly," replied Garnet. 

" Give me pen and ink, then," he cried, " and I will write 
whatever you desire." 

" Our secret is safe," whispered Catcsby to Garnet. " It is 
useless to test him further." 

" I think so," replied Garnet. " Would we had made this 
experiment sooner!" 

'• ])o not delay, I entreat you," implored Trcsham. " I am 
eager to prove my innocence." 

" We are satisfied with the proof we have already obtained," 
returned Garnet. 

Trcsham dropped on his knees in speechless gratitude. 

*' We are spared the necessity of being your executioners, my 
son," pursued Garnet, "and I rejoice at it. But I cannot acquit 
you of the design to betray us; and till you have unburthened 
your whole soul to me, and proved by severe and self-inflicted 
y)enance that you are really penitent, you nuist remain a captive 
within these walls." 

" I will disguise nothing from you, father," replied Tresham, 
" and will strive to expiate my offence by the severest penance 
you choose to inflict." 

" Do this, my son," rejoined Garnet; "leave no doubt of your 
sincerity, and you may be yet restored to the place you have 
iorfeitcd, and become a sharer in our great enterprise." 

" I will never trust him more," observed Favvkes. 

" Nor I," added Keyes. 

" I will," rejoined Catesby : " not that I have more faith in 
him than either of you; but I will so watch him that he shall 
not dare to betray us. Nay, more," he added, in an under tone, 
to Gnrnct, " I will turn his treachery to account. He will be a 
useful spy upon our enemies." 

" If he can be relied on," observed Garnet. 

" After this, you need have no fears," rejoined Catesby, with 
a significant smile. 

" The first part of your penance, my son," said Garnet, ad- 
dressing Tresham, " shall be to pass the night in solitary vigil 
and prayer within the vault. Number your transgressions, and 
reflect upon their enormity. Consider not only the injury your 
conduct might have done \'i^, but the hol}^ church of which you 
are so sinhil a member. Weigh over all this, and to-morrow I 
will hear your confession ; when, if I find you in a stale of grace, 
absolution shall not be refused." 

Tresham humbly bowed his head in token of acquiescence. 
He was then led to the vault, and the flag closed over him, as 
before. This done, after a i)rief conversation, the others again 
stretched themselves on the floor, and sought repose. 



THE MINE. ]C9 

CHAPTER IV. 

THE MINE. 

So3iE (lays elapsed before the conspirators ventured forth from 
their present abode. They had intended to remove the rest of 
the powder without loss of time, but were induced to defer their 
purpose on the representations of Tresham, who stated to Garnet, 
cliat in his opinion they would run a great and needless risk. 
Before the expiration of a week, Tresham's apparent remorse for 
his perfidy, added to his seeming zeal, had so far reinstated him 
in the confidence of his associates, that he was fully absolved of 
his offence by Garnet ; and, after taking fresh oaths of even 
greater solemnity than the former, was again admitted to the 
league. Catesby, however, who placed little faith in his protes- 
tations, never lost sight of him for an instant, and, even if he 
meditated an escape, he had no opportunity of effecting it. 

A coldness, stronger on his side than hers, seemed to have 
arisen between Viviana and Guy Fawkes. Whenever she de- 
scended to the lower room, he withdrevv on some excuse ; and 
though he never urged her departure by words, his looks plainly 
bespoke that he desired it. Upon one occasion, she found him 
alone, — the others being at the time within the vault. He was 
whetting the point of his dagger, and did not hear her approach, 
until she stood beside him. He was slightly confused, and a 
deep ruddy stain flushed his swarthy cheeks and brow^; but he 
averted his gaze, and continued his occupation in silence. 

"Why do you shun me?" asked Viviana, laying her hand 
gently upon his shoulder. And, as he did not answer, she re- 
peated the question in a broken voice. Guy Fawkes then 
looked up, and perceived that her eyes were filled with tears. 

" I shun you, Viviana, for two reasons," he replied gravely, 
but kindly ; " first, because I would have no ties of sympathy to 
make me cling to the world, or care for it ; and I feel that if I 
suffer myself to be interested about you, this will not long be 
the case : secondly, and chiefly, because you are constantly 
striving to turn me from my fixed purpose ; and, though your 
efforts have been, and will be unavailing, yet I would not be 
exposed to them further." 

"You fear me, because 3'ou think I shall shake your resolu- 
tion," she rejoined, with a forced smile. " But I will trouble you 
no more. Nay, if you wish it, I will go." 

" It were better," replied Fawkes, in accents of deep emotion, 
and taking her hand. " Painful as will be the parting with you, 
I shall feel more easy when it is over. It grieves me to the soul 
to see you — the daughter of the ])r()ud, the wealthy Sir William 
Radcliffe — an inmate of this wretched abode, surrounded by 



170 GUY FAWKES. 

desperate men, wliosc actions yon disapprove, and whose danger 
you arc compelled to share. Think how it would add to my 
sullerinfi; if our plot — whicli Heaven avert — should be discovered, 
and you be involved in it." 

*' Do not think of it," replied Viviana. 

" I cannot banish it from my thoughts," continued Fawkes. 
** I cannot reconcile it to my leclings that one so young, so 
beautiful, should be thus treated. Dwelling on this idea unmans 
me — unfits me for sterner duties. The great crisis is at hand, 
and I must live only for it." 

" Live for it, then," rejoined Viviana; "but, oh! let me re- 
main with you till the blow is struck. Something tells me 1 
may yet be useful to you — may save you." 

" No more of this, if you would indeed remain," rejoined Guy 
Fawkes, sternly. " Regard me as a sword in the hand of fate, 
which cannot be turned aside, — as a bolt launched from the cloud, 
and shattering all in its course, which may not be stopped, — as 
something terrible, exterminating, immovable. Regard me as 
this, and say whether I am not to be shunned." 

" No," replied Viviana ; " I am as steadfast as yourself. I will 



remam." 



Guy Fawkes gazed at her in surprise mixed with admiration, 
and pressing her hand affectionately, said, 

" 1 applaud your resolution. If I had a daughter, I should 
wish her to be like you." 

" You promised to be a father to me," she rejoined. " How 
can you be so if I leave you ?" 

" How ca7i I be so if you stay?" returned Fawkes, mournfully. 
" No, you must indulge no filial tenderness for one so utterly un- 
able to requite it as myself. Fix your thoughts wholly on 
Heaven. Pray for the restoration of our holy religion — for the 
success of the great enterprise — and haply your prayers may 
prevail." 

" I cannot pray for that," she replied ; " for I do not wish it 
success. But I will pray— and fervently — that all danger may 
be averted from your head." 

At this moment, Catesby and Keyes emerged from the vault, 
and Viviana hurried to her chamber. 

As soon as it grew dark, the remaining barrels of powder were 
brought out of the cellar, and carefully placed in the boat. 
Straw was then heaped upon them, and tlie whole covered v/ith 
a piece of tarjjuulin, as upon the former occasion. It being 
necessary to cross the river more than once, the conduct of the first 
and most hazard(;us passage was intrusted to Fawkes, and accom- 
panied by Keyes and Bates, both of whom were well armed, 
he set out a little before midnight. It was a clear starlight night; 
but as the moon had not yet risen, they were under no appre- 
htnsiou of discovery. Tlie few craft they encountered, bent 



THE MINE. J 7] 

probably on some suspicious errand like themselves, paid no 
attention to them ; and plying their oars swiftly, they shot under 
the low parapet edging the gardens of the Parliament House, 
just as the deep bell of the Abbey tolled forth the hour of twelve. 
Keeping in the shade, they silently approached the stairs. No 
one was there, not even a waterman to attend to the numerous 
wherries moored to the steps ; and, without losing a moment, 
they sprang ashore, and concealing the barrels beneath their 
cloaks, glided like phantoms summoned by the witching hour 
along the passage formed by two high walls, leading to Old 
Palace Yard, and speedily reached the gate of the habitation. 
In this way, and with the utmost rapidity, the whole of the fear- 
ful cargo was safely deposited in the garden ; and leaving the 
others to carry it into the house, Guy Fawkes returned to the 
boat. As he was about to push off, two persons rushed to the 
stair-head, and the foremost, evidently mistaking him for a 
waterman, called to him to take them across the river. 

" I am no waterman, friend," replied Fawkes ; " and am 
engaged on business of my own. Seek a wherry elsewhere." 

" By heaven !" exclaimed the new-comer,in accents of surprise, 
" it is Guy Fawkes. Do you not know me ?" 

"Can it be Humphrey Chetham?" cried Fawkes, equally 
astonished. 

" It is," replied the other. " This meeting is most fortunate. 
I was in search of you, having somewhat of importance to com- 
municate to Viviana." 

" State it quickly, then," returned Fawkes ; " I cannot tarry 
here much longer." 

"I will go with you," rejoined Chetham, springing into the 
boat, and followed by his companion. " You must take me to her." 

" Impossible," cried Fawkes, rising angrily ; " neither can I 
permit you to accompany me. I am busied about my own con- 
cerns, and will not be interrupted." 

" At least, tell me where I can find Viviana," persisted 
Chetham. 

" Not now — not now," rejoined Fawkes, impatiently. *' Meet 
me to-morrow night, at this hour, in the Great Sanctuary, at the 
farther side of the Abbey, and you shall learn all you desire to 
know." 

" Why not now ?" rejoined Chetham, earnestly. " You need 
not fear me. I am no spy, and will reveal nothing." 

" But your companion ?" hesitated Fawkes. 

" It is only Martin Ileydocke," answered Chetham, "He can 
keep a close tongue as well as his master." 

" Well, sit down, then," returned Fawkes, sullenly. " 'J'hcre 
will be less risk in taking them to Lambeth," he muttered, " than 
in loitering here." And rowing with great swiftness, he soon 
gained the centre of the stream. 



172 t^UV FAWKES. 

-' And so," he observed, resting for a moment on his oars, 
*'yoa still cherish your attachment to Viviana, 1 see. Nay, 
never start, man. I am no enemy to your suit, though others 
may be. And if she would place herself at my disposal, I 
"would give her to you, — certain that it would be to one upon 
whom her affections are fixed." 

" Do you think any change likely to take ))lace in her senti- 
ments towards me ?" faltered Chetham. "May I indulge a hope ?" 

" I would not have you despair," replied Fawkes. " Because, 
as far as I have noticed, women are not apt to adhere to their 
resolutions in matters of the heart; and because, as I have just 
Hixkl, she loves you, and I see no reasonable bar to your union." 

" You give me new life," cried Chetham, transported with 
joy. " Oh I that you, who have so much influence with her, 
would speak in my behalf" 

" Nay, you must plead your own cause," replied Fawkes. " I 
cannot hold out much hope at present ; for recent events have 
cast a deep gloom over her spirit, and she appears to be a prey 
to melancholy. Let this wear off, — and with one so young and 
fio firm-minded it is sure to do so, — and then your suit may be 
renewed. Urge it when you may, you have my best wishes for 
success, and shall have my warmest efforts to second you." 

Humphrey Chetham murmured his thanks in accents almost 
unintelligible from emotion, and Guy Fawkes continued, 

" It would be dangerous for you to disembark with me ; but 
when I put you ashore, I will point out the dweliing at present 
occupied by Viviana. You can visit it as early as 3'ou please to- 
morrow. You will find no one with her but Father Oldcorne, 
and I need scarcely add, it will gladden me to the heart to find 
on my return that she has yielded to your entreaties." 

" I cannot thank you," cried Chetham, warmly grasping his 
hand; " but I hope to find some means of evincing my gratitude." 

" Prove it by maintaining the strictest secresy as to all you 
may see or hear, — or even suspect, — within the dwelling you 
are about to visit," returned Guy Fawkes. " Knowing that I 
am dealing with a man of honour, I require no stronger obliga- 
tion than your word." 

" You have it," replied Chetham, solemnly. 

" Your worship shall have my oath, if you desire it," remarked 
Martin Heydocke. 

" No," rejoined Fawkes ; "your master will answer for your 
fidelity." 

Shortly after this, Guy Fawkes pulled ashore, and his com- 
panions landed. After pointing out the solitary habitation, which 
possessed greater interest in llum])hrey Chctham's eyes than the 
proud structures he had just quilted, and extracting a pronuse 
that the young merchant would not approach it till the morrow, 
he rowed off, and while the others proceeded to Lambeth in 



THE MINE. 17S 

search of loclginp; for the night, made the best of his way to the 
little creek, and entered the house. 

He found the utiier conspirators anxiously awaiting his arrival, 
and the certainty afforded by his presence that the powder had 
been landed in safety gave general satisfaction. Preparations were 
immediately made for another voyage. A large supply of provi- 
sions, consisting of baked meat of various kinds, hard-boiled eggs, 
pasties, bread, and other viands, calculated to serve for a week's con- 
sumption, without the necessity of having recourse to any culinary 
process, and which had been previously procured with that view, 
together with a few flasks of wine, occupied the place in the boat 
lately assigned to the powder. At the risk of overloading the vessel, 
they likewise increased its burthen by a quantity of mining im- 
plements — spades, pickaxes, augers, and wrenching irons. To 
these were added as many swords, calivers, pikes, and petroncls, 
as the space left would accommodate. Garnet and Catesby then 
embarked, — the former having taken an affectionate farewell of 
Viviana, whom he committed, with the strictest injunction to 
watch over her, to the care of Father Oldcorne. Guy Fawkes 
lingered for a moment, doubting whether he should mention his 
rencounter with Humphrey Chetham. He was the more un- 
decided from the deep affliction in which she was plunged. At 
last, he determined upon slightly hinting at the subject, and to 
be guided as to what he said further by the manner in which 
the allusion was received. 

" And you decide upon remaining here till we return, 
Viviana ?" he said. 

She made a siijn in the affirmative. 

" And you will see no one?" 

" No one," she answered. 

" But, should any old friend find his way hither — Humphrey 
Chetham, for instance — will you not receive him ?" 

" Why do you single out him .?" demanded Viviana, inquir- 
ingly. " Is he in London ? Have you seen him ?" 

"I have," replied Guy Fawkes; "I accidentally met him to- 
night, and have shown him this dwelling. He will come hither 
to-morrow." 

" I wanted only this to make me thoroughly wretched," cried 
Viviana, clasping her hands with anguish. " Oh I what un- 
happy chance threw him across your path ? Why did you teh 
him I was here? Why give him a hope that I would see him? 
But I will not see him. "l will quit this house rather than be 
exposed to the meeting." 

"What means this sndden excitement, Viviana?" cried Guy 
Fawkes, greatly surprised by her agitation. " WHiy should a 
visit from Humphrey Chetham occasion you uneasiness?' 

" I know not," she answered, blushing deeply ; " but I will 
not hazard it." 



174) GUY FAWKES. 

"I thought 3'ou superior to your sex," rejoined Fawkes, 
** and should never have suspected you of waywardness or 
caprice." 

*' You charge me with failings that do not belong to me," 
she answered. "I am neither wayward nor capricious; but I 
would be willingly spared the pain of an interview with one 
whom I thought I loved." 

" Thought you loved !" echoed Fawkes, in increased astonish- 
ment. 

" Ay, thought^'' repeated Viviana, " for I have since examined 
my heart, and find he has no place in it." 

" You might be happy with him, Viviana," rejoined Fawkes, 
reproachfully. 

" I might have been," she replied, *' had circumstances favoured 
our union. But I should not be so now. Recent events have 
wrought an entire change in my feelings. Were I to abandon 
my resolution of retiring to a cloister, — were I to return to the 
world, — and were such an event possible as that Humphrey 
Chetham should conform to the faith of Rome, — ^still, I would 
not — could not wed him." 

" I grieve to hear it," replied Fawkes, 

" Would you have me wed him ?" she cried, in a slightly mor- 
tified tone. 

" In good sooth would I," replied Fawkes ; *' and I repeat my 
firm conviction you would be happier with him than with one 
more iiighly born, and of less real worth." 

Viviana made no reply, and her head declined upon her 
bosom. 

" You will see him," pursued Fawkes, taking her hand, " if 
only to tell him what you have just told me." 

" Since you desire it, I will," she replied, fixing a look of 
melancholy tenderness upon him ; " but it will cost me a bitter 
pang." 

" I would not tax you with it, if I did not think it needful," 
returned Fawkes. " And now, farewell." 

" Farewell, — it may be, for ever," replied Viviana, sadly. 

" The boat is ready, and the tide ebbing," cried Catesby, im- 
patiently, at the door. *' We shall be aground if you tarry longer.'' 

" I come," replied Fawkes. And, waving an adieu to Viviana, 
he departed. 

" Strange I" he muttered to himself, as he took his way to the 
creek. " I could have sworn she was in love with Humphrey 
Chetham, Who can have superseded him in her regard ? No*^ 
Catesby, of a surety. 'Tis a perplexing sex. The best are 
fickle. Heaven be praised I I have long been proof against 
their wiles." 

Thus musing, he sprang into the skiff, and assisting Catesby 
to push it into deep water, seized an oar, and exerted himself 



THE MINE. 175 

Stoutly to make up for lost time. The second voyage was as 
prosperous as the first. A thick veil of cloud had curtained the 
stars ; the steps were deserted as before ; and the provisions, 
arms, and implements were securely conveyed to their desti- 
nation. 

Thus far fortune seemed to favour their undertaking, and 
Garnet, falling on his knees, offered up the most fervent thanks- 
givings. Prayers over, they descended to the cellar, and their 
first care was to seek out a place as free from damp as possible, 
where the powder could be deposited till the excavation, which 
it was foreseen would be a work of time and great labour, was 
completed. A dry corner being found, the barrels were placed 
in it, and carefully concealed with billets of wood and coals, so 
as to avert suspicion in case of search. This, with other arrange- 
ments, occupied the greater part of the night, and the commence- 
ment of the important undertaking was deferred till the morrow, 
when an increase of their party was anticipated. 

Throughout the whole of the day no one stirred forth. The 
windows were kept closed ; the doors locked ; and, as no fires 
were lighted, the house had the appearance of being uninhabited. 
In the course of the morning they underwent considerable alarm. 
Some mischievous urchins having scaled the garden wall, one 
of them fell within it, and his cries so terrified his playmates 
that they dropped on the other side, and left him. The con- 
spirators reconnoitred the unhappy urchin, who continued his 
vociferations in a loud key, through the holes in the shutters, 
uncertain what to do, and fearing that this trifling mischance 
might lead to serious consequences, when the subject of their 
uneasiness relieved them by scrambling up the wall near the 
door, and so effecting a retreat. With this exception, nothing 
material occurred till evening, when their expected associates 
arrived. 

The utmost caution was observed in admitting them. The 
new-comers were provided with a key of the garden-gate, but a 
signal was given and repeated before the house-door was opened 
by Bates, to whom the office of porter was intrusted. As soon 
as the latter had satisfied himself that all was right, by unmasking 
a dark lantern, and throwing its radiance upon the faces of the 
elder Wright, Rookwood, and Percy, he stam[)ed his foot thrice, 
and the conspirators emerged from their hiding-places. A warm 
greeting passed between the confederates, and they adjourned 
to a lower chamber, adjoining the vault, where the sound of their 
voices could not be overheard, and where, while partaking of 
a frugal meal — for they desired to eke out their store of pro- 
visions as long as possible — they discoursed upon their plans, 
and all that had occurred since their last meeting. Nothing was 
said of the treachery of Tresham — his recent conduct, as already 
observed, having been such as to restore him in a great degree 



175 GUY FAWKES, 

to the confidence of his companions. Percy, whose office as a 
gentleman-pensioner gave him the best opportunities of hearing 
court-whispers and secrets, informed them it was rumoured that 
the Earl of Salisbury had obtained a clue to some Catholic plot, 
whether their own he could not say ; but it would seem from all 
that could be gathered, that his endeavours to trace it out had 
been frustrated. 

" Where is Lord Mountcagle ?'' demanded Catesbj. 

*' At his mansion near Hoxton," replied Percy. 

" Have you observed him much about the court of late, or 
with the Earl of Salisbury ?" pursued Catesby. 

" No," replied Percy. " Yet now, I bethink me, I did observe 
them toGrethcr, and in earnest conversation about a week ao:o. 
But Lord Mountcagle knows nothing o^ our plot." 

" Hum !" exclaimed Catesby, shrugging his shoulders, while 
significant looks were exchanged by the others, and Tresham 
hung his head. " Lord Mountcagle may not know that you or 
I, or Fawkes, or Rookwood, are conspiring against the State; but 
he knows that a plot is hatching amongst our party. It is from 
him that the Earl of Salisbury derived his information." 

"Amazement!" exclaimed Percy. 

*' A good Catholic, and betray his fellows !" cried Rookwood ; 
** this passes my com])rehension. Arc you sure of it?" 

" Unhappily we are so, my son," replied Garnet, gravely. 

*' We will speak of this hereafter," interposed Catesby. " I 
have a plan to get his lordship into our power, and make him 
serve our purposes in spite of himself. We will outwit the 
crafty Salisbury. Can any one tell if Tresham's sudden dis- 
appearance has been noticed." 

" His household report that he is on a visit to Sir Evcrard 
Digby, at Gothurst," replied Rookwood. *' I called at his resi- 
dence yesterday, and was informed that a letter had just been 
received from him dated from that place. His departure, they 
said, was sudden, but his letter fully accounted for it." 

*' The messenger who bore that letter had only to travel from 
Lambeth," observed Catesby, smiling. 

" So I conclude," returned Rookwood. 

" And, now that our meal is ended, let us to work," cried 
Fawkes, who had taken no part in the foregoing conversation. 
" I will strike the first blow," he added, rising and seizing a 
mattock. 

*' Hold, my son !" exclaimed Garnet, arresting him. " The 
work upon which the redemption of our holy church hangs must 
be commenced with due solemnity." 

" You are right, father," replied Fawkes, humbly. 

Headed by Garnet, bearing a crucifix, they then repaired to 
the vault. A silver chalice, filled with holy water, was carried 
by Fawkes, and two lighted tapers by Catesby. Kneeling down 



THE MINE. '77 

before that part of the wall against which operations were about 
to be directed, and holding the crucifix towards it, Garnet com- 
menced praying in a low but earnest tone, gradually raising his 
voice, and increasing in fervour as he proceeded. The others 
knelt around him, and the whole formed a strange and deeply- 
interesting group. The vault itself harmonized with its occu- 
pants. It was of great antiquity ; and its solid stone masonry had 
acquired a time-worn hoary tint. In width it was about nine 
feet, and of corresponding height, supported by a semi-circular 
arch, and its length was more than twenty feet. 

The countenances of the conspirators showed that they were 
powerfully moved by what was passing ; but next to Garnet, 
Guy Fawkes exhibited the greatest enthusiasm. His ecstatic 
looks and gestures evinced the strong effect produced upon his 
superstitious character by the scene. Garnet concluded his 
prayer as follows: — 

" Thus far, O Lord, we have toiled in darkness and in dif- 
ficulty ; but we have now arrived at a point where all thy support 
is needed. Do not desert us, we beseech thee, but let thy light 
guide us through these gloomy paths. Nerve our arms, — sharpen 
our weapons, — and crumble these hard and flinty stones, so that 
they may yield to our efforts. Aid our enterprise, if thou 
approvest it, and it be really, as in our ignorance we believe it to 
be, for the welfare of thy holy Church, and the confusion of its 
enemies. Bear witness, O Lord, that we devote ourselves wholly 
and entirely to this one end,— and that we implore success only 
for thy glory and honour." 

With "this he arose, and the following strains were chanted b^ 
the whole assemblage : — 

HYMN OF THE CONSPIEATOES. 

The heretic and heathen, Lord, 
Consume with fire, cut down with sword ; 
The spoilers from thy temples thrust, 
Their altars trample in the dust. 

False princes and false priests lay low. 
Their habitations fill with woe. 
Scatter them, Lord, with sword and flame, 
And bring them utterly to shame. 

Thy vengeful arm no longer stay, 
•Arise! exterminate, and slay. 
So shall thy fallen worship be 
Restored to its prosperity. 

This hymn raised the enthusiasm of the conspirators to tho 
highest pitch, and such was the effect produced by it, as it rolled 
in sullen echoes along the arched roof of the vault, that several of 
them drew their swords, and crossed the blades, with looks of the 
most detcnnincd devotion to their cause. When it was ended, 
Garnet recited other prayers, and sprinkled holy water upon the 
wall, and upon every implement about to be used, bestowing a 



178 GUY FAWKES. 

separate benediction on each. As he deHvcrcd the pick-axc to 
Guy Fawkcs, he cried in a solemn voice — 

" Strike, my son, in the name of the Most High, and in behalf 
of our holy religion, — strike!" 

Guy Fawkcs raised the weapon, and stimulated by excitement, 
threw the whole strength of his arm into the blow. A large 
piece of the granite was chipped off, but the mattock snapped in 
twain. Guy Fawkes looked deeply disconcerted, and Garnet, 
though he concealed his emotion, was filled with dismay. 

" Let me take your place," cried Keyes, advancing, as Guy 
Fawkcs retired. 

Keyes was a powerful man, and exerting his energies, he 
buried the point of the pick-axc so deeply in the mortar, that he 
could not remove it unassisted. These untoward circumstances 
cast a slight damp upon their ardour ; but Catcsby, who per- 
ceived it, went more cautiously to work, and in a short time suc- 
ceeded with great labour in getting out the large stone upon 
which the others had expended so much useless exertion. The 
sight restored their confidence, and as many as could work in the 
narrow space joined him. But they found that their task was 
nmch more arduous than they had anticipated. More than an 
hour elapsed before they could loosen another stone, and though 
ihey laboured with the utmost perseverance, relieving each other 
by turns, they had made but a small breach when morning 
arrived. The stones were as hard and unyielding as iron, and 
the mortar in some places harder than the stones. 

After a few hours' rest, they resumed their task. _ Still, they 
made but small progress ; and it was not until the third day that 
they had excavated a hole sufficiently wide and deep to admit 
one man within it. They were now arrived at a compost of 
gravel and flint stones ; and if they had found their previous task 
difficult, what they had now to encounter was infinitely more so. 
Their implements made litde or no impression on this unyielding 
substance, and though they toiled incessantly, the work pro- 
ceeded with disheartening slowness. The stones and rubbish 
were conveyed at dead of night in hampers into the garden, and 
buried. 

One night, when they w^ere labouring as usual, Guy Fawkes, 
who was foremost in the excavation, thought he heard the tolling 
of a bell within the wall. He instantly suspended his task, and 
being convinced that he was not deceived, crept out of the hole, 
and made a sign to the others to listen. Each had heard the 
awful sound before ; but as it was partially drowned by the noise 
of the pick-axe, it had not produced much impression upon 
them, as they attributed it to some vibration in the wall, caused 
by the echo of the blows. But it was now distinctly audible — 
deep, clear, slow, — like a passing bell, — but so_ solemn, so un- 
earthly, that its tones froze the blood in their veins. 



c 



THE CAPTURE OF VIVIANA. 179 

They listened for a while in speechless astonishment, scarcely 
daring to look at each other, and expecting each moment that 
the building would fall upon them, and bury them alive. The 
light of a single lantern placed upon an upturned basket fell upon 
figures rigid as statues, and countenances charged with awe, 

" My arm is paralysed," said Guy Fawkes, breaking silence ; 
** I can work no more." 

** Try holy water, father," cried Catesby. " If it proceeds 
from aught of evil, that will quell it." 

The chalice containing the sacred lymph was brought, and 
pronouncing a solemn exorcism, Garnet sprinkled the wall. 

The sound immediately ceased. 

"It is as I thought, father," observed Catesby; "it is the 
delusion of an evil spirit," 

As he spoke, the tolling of the mysterious bell was again 
heard, and more solemnly, — more slowly than before. 

" Sprinkle the wall again, in Heaven's name, father," cried 
Fawkes, crossing himself devoutly. " Avoid thee, Sathanas !" 

Garnet complied, and throwing holy water upon the stones, 
the same result followed. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE CAPTURE OF VIVIANA. 



On the morning after his encounter with Guy Fawkes, Humphrey 
Chetham, accompanied by Martin Heydocke, took his way to 
Lambeth Marsh. With a throbbing heart he approached the 
miserable dwelling he knew to be inhabited by Viviana, and 
could scarcely summon courage to knock at the door. His first 
summons not being answered, he repeated it more loudly, and 
he then perceived the face of Father Oldcorne at the window, 
who, having satisfied himself that it was a friend, admitted him 
and his attendant. 

" You were expected, my son," said the priest, after a friendly 
greeting. " Guy Fawkes has prepared Viviana for your coming." 

"Will she not see me?" demanded the young merchant, 
uneasily. 

" I believe so," replied Oldcorne. " But I will apprise her of 
your arrival. Be seated, my son." 

He then carefully fiistened the door, and repaired to Viviana's 
chamber, leaving Chetham in that state of tremor and anxiety 
which a lover, hoping to behold his mistress, only knows. 

It was some time before Viviana appeared, and the young 
merchant, whose heart beat violently at the sound of her footstep, 
was startled by the alteration in her looks, and the extreme 
^ N2 



180 GUY FAWKES. 

coldness of her ninnncr. Oldcorne was with her, and motioning 
jNIartin Heydocke to follow him, the youthful pair were left 
alone. 

"You desire to see me, I am given to understand, sir," 
observed Viviana, in a freezing tone. 

" I have journeyed to London for that express purpose,** 
replied Humphrey Chetham, tremulously. 

"I am much beholden to you, sir," returned Viviana, in the 
same rcpelliup; tone as before; "but I regret yon should have 
taken so much trouble on my account." 

" To serve you is happiness, not trouble, Viviana," replied 
Humphrey Chetham, ardently ; " and I am overjoyed at finding 
an opportunity of proving my devotion." 

" I have yet to learn what service I must thank you for," she 
returned. 

" I can scarcely say that I am warranted in thus intruding 
upon you," replied Chetham, greatly abashed ; " but, having 
learnt from my servant, Martin Heydocke, that Doctor Dee had 
set out for London, with the view of seeking you out, and with- 
drawing you from your present associates, I was determined to 
be beforehand with him, and to acquaint you, if possible, with 
his intentions." 

" What you say surprises me," replied Viviana. " Doctor 
Dee has no right to itUerfere with ray actions. Nor should I 
obey him were he to counsel me, as is scarcely probable, to quit 
my companions." 

" T know not what connexion there may be between you to 
justify the interposition of his authority," replied Chetham ; 
"neither did I tarry to inquire. But presuming from what I 
heard, that he icould attempt to exercise some control over you, 
I set out at once, and, without guide to your retreat, or the 
slightest knowledge of it, was fortunate enough, on the very 
night of my arrival in London, to chance upon Guy Fawkes, 
who directed me to you." 

*' I am aware of it," was the chilling answer. 

" I will not avouch," pursued Chetham, passionately, "that I 
have not been actuated as much by an irrepressible desire to see 
you again, as by anxiety to apprise you of Doctor Dee's coming. 
I wanted only a slitjht excuse to myself to induce me to yield to 
my inclinations. Your departure made me wretched. I thought 
I had more control over myself. But I find I cannot live with- 
out you." 

"Alas I alas I" cried Viviana, in a troubled tone, and losing 
all her self-command. "I expected this. Why — why did you 
come?" 

" I have told you my motive," replied Chetham ; " but, oh ! 
do not reproach me I" 

" I do not desire to do so," returned Viviana, with a look of 



THE CAPTURE OF VIVIANA. 181 

agony. *' I bitterly reproach myself that I cannot meet you as 
of old. But I would rather — far rather have encountered 
Doctor Dee, had he come hither resolved to exert all his magical 
power to force me away, than have met you." 

"Have I unwittingly offended you, Viviana?" asked Che- 
tham, in astonishment. 

"Oh I no — no — nol" she replied, "you have not offended 

me ; but " 

" But what ?" he cried, anxiously. 

" I would rather have died than see you," she answered. 
" I will not inquire wherefore," rejoined Chetham, " because I 
too well divine the cause. I am no longer what I was to you." 

"Press this matter no further, I pray of you," returned 
Viviana, in much confusion, and blushing deeply. " I shall ever 
esteem you, — ever feel the warmest gratitude to you. And what 
matters it whether my heart is estranged from you or not, since 
I can never wed you ?" 

" What matters it ?" repeated the young merchant, in accents 
of despair, — " it matters much. Drowning love will cling to 
straws. The thought that I was beloved by you, though I could 
never hope to possess your hand, reconciled me in some degree 
to my fate. But now," he added, covering his face with his 
hands, — " now, my heart is crushed." 

" Nay, say not so," cried Viviana, in a voice of the deepest 
emotion. " I do love you, — as a sister." 

" That is small comfort," rejoined Chetham, bitterly. " I 
echo your own wish. Would we had never met again ! I 
might, at least, have deluded myself into the belief that you 
loved me." 

" It would have been better so," she returned. " I would 
inflict pain on no one — far less on you, whom I regard so much, 
and to whom I owe so much." 

"You ovi-e me nothing, Viviana," rejoined Chetham. "All 
I desired was to serve you. In the midst of the dangers we have 
shared together, 1 felt no alarm except for your sake. I have 
done nothing— nothing. Would I had died for you I" 

"Calm yourself, sir, I entreat you," she returned. 

" You did love me once V demanded Chetham, suddenly. 

" I thought so," she answered. 

The young merchant uttered an exclamation of anguish, and 

a mounitul [)ause en.-ueii, broken oiily by his groans. 

" Answer me, Vivian:)/' lie said, turning abruptly upon licr, — 
"answer me,and, in mercy, answer truly, — do you love another.'' 

"It is a question I cannot answer," she replied, becoming 
ashy pale, 

"Your looks speak for you!" ho vociferated, in a terrible 
tone, — "you do! Ills name? — his name ?— that I may wreak 
my vengeance upon him.'' 



182 GUY FAWKES. 

*' Your violence terrifies me," returned Viviana, withdrawinp: 
the hand he had seized. " I must put an end to this interview." 

"Pardon me, Viviana!" cried Chetham, faUing on his knees 
before her — " in pity pardon me ! I am not myself. I shall be 
calmer presently. But if you knew the anguish of the wound 
you have inflicted, you would not add to it." 

" Heaven knows I would not !" she returned, motioning him 
to rise. "And, if it will lighten your suffering, know that the 
love I feel for another — if love, indeed, it be, — is as hopeless as 
your own. But it is not a love of which even you could be 
jealous. It is a higher and a holier passion. It is affection 
mixed with admiration, and purified from all its grossness. It is 
more, perhaps, than the love of a daughter for her father — but it 
is nothing more. I shall never wed him I love — could not if I 
would. Nay, I would shun him, if I did not feel that the hour 
will soon come when the extent of my affection must be proved." 

" This is strange sophistry," returned Chetham ; " and you 
may deceive yourself by it, but you cannot deceive me. You 
love as all ardent natures do love. But in what way do you 
mean to prove your affection ?" 

" Perhaps, by the sacrifice of my life," she answered. 

" I can tell you who is the object of your affections!" said 
Chetham. " It is Guy Fawkes." 

*' I will not deny it," replied Viviana ; " he is." 

" Hear me, then," exclaimed Chetham, who appeared inex- 
pressibly relieved by the discovery he had made; **in my 
passage across the river with him last night, our conversation 
turned on the one subject ever nearest my heart, yourself, — and 
Guy Fawkes not only bade me not despair, but promised to aid 
my suit." 

" And he kept his word," replied Viviana, " for, while an- 
nouncing your proposed visit, he urged me strongly in your 
behalf." 

" Then he knows not of your love for him ?" demanded 
Chetham. 

" He not only knows it not, but never shall know it from 
me, — nor must he know it from you, sir," rejoined Viviana, 
energetically. 

" Fear it not," said Chetham, sighing. "It is a secret I shall 
carefully preserve." 

" And now that you are in possession of it," she answered, 
*' I no longer feel your presence as a restraint. Let me still 
regard you as a friend." 

" Be it so," replied Humphrey Chetham, mournfully ; " and 
as a friend let me entreat you to quit this place, and abandon 
your ])resent associates. I will not seek to turn your heart 
from Fawkes — nor will I try to regain the love I have lost. But 
let me implore you to pause ere you irretrievably mix yourself 



THE CAPTURE OF VIVIANA. 183 

up with the fortunes of one so desperate. I am too well aware 
that he is engaged in a fearful plot against the State, — though I 
know not its precise nature." 

*' You will not betray him ?" she cried. 

" I will not, though he is my rival," returned Chetham. 
" But others may — nay, perhaps have done so already." 

" Whom do you suspect ?" demanded Viviana, in the greatest 
alarm. 

"I fear Doctor Dee," replied the young merchant; "but I 
know nothing certainly. My servant, Martin Heydocke, who is 
in the Doctor's confidence, intimated as much to me, and I have 
reason to think that his journey to town, under the pretext of 
searching for you, is undertaken for the purpose of tracing out 
the conspirators, and delivering them to the Government." 

*■' Is he arrived in London ?" inquired Viviana, eagerly. 

'' I should think not," returned Chetham. " I passed him, 
four days ago, on this side Leicester, in company with Kelley 
and Topcliffe." 

*' If the wretch Topcliffe was with him, your conjectures are 
too we!! founded," she replied. "I must warn Guy Fawkes 
instantly of his danger." 

" Command my services in any way," said Chetham. 

" I know not what to do," cried Viviana, after a pause, during 
Mhich she betrayed the greatest agitation. *' I dare not seek 
him out; — and yet, if I do not, he may fall into the hands of thi 
enemy. I must see him at all hazards." 

" Suffer me to go with you," implored Chetham. " You maj 
rely nj)on m}^ secrecy. And now I have a double motive for 
desiring to preserve Fawkes." 

" You are, indeed, truly noble-hearted and generous," replied 
Viviana ; " and I would fully confide in you. But, if you were 
to be seen by the others, you would be certainly put to death. 
Not even Fawkes could save you." 

" I will risk it, if you desire it, and it will save /izm," replied 
the young inerchant, devotedly. " Nay, I will go alone." 

" That were to insure your destruction," she answered. *' No 
— no — it must not be. I will consult with Father Oldcorne." 

With this, she hurried out of the room, and returned in a 
short time with the priest. 

" Father Oldcorne is of opinion that our friends must bo 
apprised of their danger," she said. " And he thinks it needful 
we should both go to their retreat, that no hindrance may bo 
ofTered to our flight, in case such a measure should be resolved 
upon." 

" You cannot accompany us, my son," added Oldcorne ; " for 
though I am as fully assured of your fidelity as Viviana, and 
would confide my life to you, there are those who will not so trust 
you, and who might rejoice in the opportunity of removing you." 



181. GUY FAWKES. 

" Vivianal" exclaimed Chctham, lookin": entreatingly at her. 

<'For my sake, — if not for your own, — do not urge this 
further," she returned. " There are already dangers and diffi- 
culties enow without adding to them. You would be safer amid 
a horde of robbers than amidst these men." 

" And it is to such persons you conmiit yourself?" cried Che- 
tham, reproachfully. " Oh ! be warned by me, ere it is too late I 
Abandon them !" 

*' It is too late, already," replied Viviana. " The die is cast.'* 

*' Then I can only lament it," returned Chetham, sadly. 
** Suffer me, at least, to accompany you to some place near their 
retreat, that you may summon me in case of need." 

« There can be no objection to that, Viviana," observed Old- 
come; "provided Humphrey Chetham will promise not to 
follow us." 

*' Readily," replied the young merchant, 

" I am unwilhng to expose him to further risk on my account,** 
said Viviana. *' But be it as you will." 

It was then agreed, that they should not set out till nightfall „ 
but proceed, as soon as it grew dark, to Lambeth, where Hum- 
phrey Chetham undertook to procure a boat for their conveyance 
across the river. 

The hour of departure at length arrived. Viviana, who had 
withdrawn to her own room, appeared in her travelling habit, 
and was about to set forth with her companions, when they were 
all startled by a sudden and loud knocking at the door. 

" We are discovered," she cried. " Doctor Dee has found out 
our retreat." 

" Fear nothing," rejoined Chetham, drawing his sword, while 
his example was imitated by Martin Heydockc; " they shall not 
capture you while I live.*' 

As he spoke, the knocking was repeated, and the door shaken 
so violently as to threaten to burst its fastenings. 

*' Extinguish the light," whispered Chetham, " and let Father 
Oldcorne conceal himself. We have nothing to fear." 

" Where shall I fly ?" cried Oldcorne despairingly. "It wilt 
be impossible to raise the flag, and seek refuge in the vault." 

" Fly to my room," cried Viviana. And finding he stood 
irresolute, as if paralysed with terror, she took his arm, and 
drasfcd him away. The next moment the door was burst open 
■witii a loud crash, and several anucd men, with their swords 
drawn, followed by Toj)cliffe, and another middle-aged man, of 
slight stature, and rather mider-sized, but richly dressed, and 
bearing all the marks of exalted rank, rushed into the room. 

" You are my prisoner !" cried Topcliffc, rushing up to 
Chetham, who had planted himself, with Martin Heydoeke, at 
the foot of the stairs. " I arrest you in the King's name I" 

"You are mistaken in your man, sir," cried Chetham, fiercely. 



THE CAPTURE OF VIVIANA. 185 

** I have committed no offence. Lay a hand upon me, at your 
peril !" 

" How is this ?" cried TopclifFe. " Humphrey Chetham here !" 

" Ay," returned the young merchant; "you have fallen upon 
the wrong house." 

"Not so, sir," replied Topcliffe. "I am satisfied from your 
presence that I am right. Where you are, Viviana Radcliffe is 
not far off. Throw down your arms. You can offer no resist- 
ance to my force, and your zeal will not benefit your friends, 
while it will place your own safety in jeopardy." 

But Chetham fiercely refused compliance, and after a few 
minutes' further parley, the soldiers were about to attack him, 
when Viviana opened a door above, and slowly descended the 
stairs. At her appearance the young merchant, seeing that 
further resistance would be useless, sheathed his sword, and she 
passed between him and Heydocke, and advanced towards the 
leaders of the band. 

" What means this intrusion ?" she asked. 

" We are come in search of two Jesuit priests, whom we have 
obtained information are hidden here," replied TopcUffe ; — " as 
well as of certain other Papists, disaffected against the State, foF 
whose apprehension I hold a warrant." 

'' You are welcome to search the house," replied Viviana. 
*' But there is no one within it except those you sec." 

As she said this, Chetham, who gazed earnestly at her, caught 
her eye, and from a scarcely-perceptible glance, felt certain that 
the priest, through her agency, had effected his escape. But 
the soldiers had not waited for her permission to make the 
search. Rushing up-stairs they examined the different cham- 
bers, — there were two small rooms besides that occupied by 
Viviana, — and found several of the priests' habiliments; but 
thou<z;h they examined every corner with the minutest attention,, 
sounded the walls, peered up the chimneys, underneath the bed, 
and into every place, likely and unlikely, they could find no 
other traces of those they sought, and were compelled to return, 
to their leader with tidings of their ill success. Topclifle, with 
another party, continued his scrutiny below, and discovering the 
moveable flag in the hearth, descended into the vault, where he 
made certain of discovering his prey. But no one was there ; 
and, the powder and arms having been removed, he gained 
nothing by his investigations. 

Meanwhile, his companion, — and evidently from his garb, and 
the deference paid him, though he was addressed by no title 
which could lead to the absolnte knowledge of his rank, his 
superior,— seated himself, and put many qnestions in a courteous 
but authoritative tone to Viviana respecting her residence ni this 
solitary abode,— the names of her companions,— where they were, 
—and ui)on what scheme they were engaged. To none of these 



186 GUY FAWKES. 

questions would she return an answer, and her interrogator, at 
last, losinpi; patience, said, 

" I hold it my duty, to inform you that you will be carried 
before the Council, and if you continue thus obstinate, means 
will be taken — and those none of the gentlest — to extort the 
truth from you." 

" You may apply the torture to me," replied Viviana, firmly • 
*' but it will wrest nothing from me." 

" That remains to be seen," replied the other; " I only trust 
you will not compel me to put my threat into execution." 

At this moment Topcliffe emerged from the vault, and the 
soldiers returned from their unsuccessful search above. 

" They have escaped us now," remarked Topcliffe to his supe- 
rior. " But I will conceal a party of men on the premises, who 
will be certain to capture them on their return." 

Viviana uttered an exclamation of irrepressible uneasiness, 
which did not escape her auditors. 

" I am right, you see," observed Topcliffe, significantly, to 
his companion. 

" You are so," replied the other. 

As this was said, Viviana hazarded a look at Humphrey 
Chetham, the meaning of which he was not slow to comprehend. 
He saw that she wished him to make an effort to escape, that he 
might warn her companions, and regardless of the consequence, 
be prepared to obey her. While those around were engaged in 
a last fruitless search, he whispered his intentions to Martin 
Heydocke, and only awaited a favourable opportunitv to put 
them in execution. It occiuTcd sooner than he expected. 
Before quitting the premises, Topcliffe determined to visit the 
upper rooms himself, and he took several of the men with him. 

Chetham would have made an attempt to liberate Viviana, 
but, feeling certain it would be unsuccessful, he preferred obey- 
ing her wisiics to his own inclinations. Topcliffe gone, he sud- 
denly drew his sword, — for neither he nor Heydocke had been 
disarmed,— and rushing towards the door, struck down the man 
next it, and followed by his servant, passed through it before he 
could be intercepted. They both then flew at a swift pace 
towards the marshy fields, and, owing to the darkness and 
unstable nature of the ground, speedily distanced their pursuers. 

Hearing the disturbance below, and guessing its cause, Top- 
cliffe immediately descended. But he was too late ; and though 
he joined in the pursuit, he was baffled like his attendants. Half 
an hour afterwards, he" returned to the house with an angry and 
disappointed look. 

" He has given us the slip," he observed to his superior, who 
appeared exceedingly provoked by the young merchant's flight; 
*' But we will soon have him again." 

After giving directions to his men how to conceal themselves. 



THE CELLAR. ] 87 

TopclifFe informed his companions that he was ready to attend 
him. Viviana, who had remained motionless and silent durino- 
the foregoing scene, was taken out of the house, and conducted 
towards the creek, in which lay a large wherry manned by four 
rowers. She was placed within it, and as soon as his superior 
was seated, Topcliffe inquired — 

" Where will your lordship go first ?" 

" To the Star- Chamber," was the answer. 

At this reply, in spite of herself, Viviana could not repress a 
shudder. 

" All is lost !" she mentally ejaculated. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE CELLAR. 



It was long before the conspirators gained sufficient courage to 
recommence digging the mine. Whenever holy water was 
thrown upon the stones, the mysterious bell ceased tolling, but 
it presently began anew, and such was the appalling effect of the 
sound that it completely paralysed the listeners. Prayers were 
said by Garnet; hymns sung by the others; but all was of no 
avail. It continued to toll on with increased solemnity, unless 
checked by the same potent application as before. 

The effect became speedily manifest in the altered looks and 
demeanour of the conspirators, and it was evident that if some- 
thing was not done to arouse them, the enterprise would be 
abandoned. Catesby, equally superstitious with his confederates, 
but having nerves more firmly strung, was the first to conquer his 
terror. Crossing himself, he muttered a secret prayer, and, snatch- 
ing up a pick-axe, entered the cavity, and resumed his labour. 

The noise of the heavy blows dealt by him against the wall 
drowned the tolling of the bell. The charm was broken. And 
stimulated by his conduct, the others followed his example, and 
though the awful tolling continued at intervals during the whole 
of their operations, it offered no further interruption to them. 

Another and more serious cause of anxiety, however, arose. 
As the work advanced, without being aware of it, they ap- 
proached the bank of the river, and the water began to ooze 
through the sides of the excavation, — at first, slightly, but by 
degrees to such an extent as to convince them that their labour 
would be entirely thrown away. Large portions of the clay, 
loosened by the damp, fell in upon them, nearly burying those 
nearest the tumbling mass ; and the floor was now in some places 
more than a foot deep in water, clearly proving it would be 
utterly impossible to keep the powder fit for use in such a spot. 



188 GUY FAWKES. 

Catesby bore these untoward circumstances with ill-concealed 
mortification. For a time, he struggled against them ; and 
though he felt that it was hopeless, worked on like a desperate 
military leader conducting a forlorn hope to certain destruction. 
At length, however, the water began to make such incursions 
that he could no longer disguise from himself or his companions 
that they were contending against insurmountable difficulties, 
and that to proceed further would be madness. He, therefore, 
■with a heavy heart, desisted, and throwing down his pick-axe, 
said it was clear that Heaven did not approve their design, and 
that it must be relinquished. 

*' We ought to have been warned by that doleful bell," he 
observed in conclusion. " I now perceive its meaning. And as 
I was the first to act in direct opposition to the declared will of 
the Supreme Being, so now I am the first to admit my error." 

" I cannot account for that dread and mysterious sound, my 
son," replied Garnet, ''and can only attribute it, as you do, to 
Divine interference. But whether it was intended as a warning 
or a guidance, I confess I am unable to say." 

" Can you longer doubt, father," returned Catesby, bitterly, 
" when you look at yon excavation ? It took us more than a 
week's incessant labour to get through the first wall ; and our 
toil was no sooner lightened than these fatal consequences ensued. 
If we proceed, we shall drown ourselves, instead of blowing up 
our foes. And even if we should escape, were the powder 
stowed for one day in that damp place, it would never explode. 
We have failed, and must take measures accordingly." 

" I entirely concur with you, my son," replied Garnet ; " we 
must abandon our present plan. But do not let us be dis- 
heartened. Perhaps at this very moment Heaven is preparing 
for us a victory by some unlooked-for means." 

" It may be so," replied Catesby, with a look of incredulity. 

As he spoke, an extraordinary noise, like a shower of falling 
stones, was heard overhead. And coupling the sound with their 
fears of the encroachment of the damp, the conspirators glanced 
at each other in dismay, thinking the building was falling in 
upon them. 

" All blessed saints protect us !" cried Garnet, as the sound 
ceased. " What was that ?" 

But no one was able to account for it, and each regarded his 
neighbour with apprehension. After a short interval of silence, 
the sound was heard again. There was then another pause — 
and again the same rushing and inexplicable noise. 

" What can it be ?" cried Catesby. " I am so enfeebled by 
this underground life, that trifles alarm me. Are our enemies 
pulHng down the structure over our heads ? — or arc they earthing 
us up like vermin ?" he added to Fawkes. " What is it ?" 

" I will go and see," replied the other. 



THE CELLAR. 189 

" Do not expose yourself, my son," cried Garnet. *' Let us 
abide the result here." 

" No, father," replied Fawkes. " Having failed in our scheme, 
what befals me is of little consequence. I will go. If I return 
not, you will understand what has happened." 

Pausing for a moment to receive Garnet's benediction, he then 
strode away. 

Half an hour elapsed before Fawkes returned, and the interval 
appeared thrice its duration in the eyes of the conspirators. 
When he re-appeared, a smile sat upon his countenance, and his 
looks instantly dispelled the alarm that had been previously felt. 

" You bring us good news, my son ?" cried Garnet. 

" Excellent, father," replied Fawkes : " and you were right in 
saying that at the very moment we were indulging in misgiving. 
Heaven was preparing for us a victory by unforeseen and mys- 
terious means." 

Garnet raised his hands gratefully and reverentially upwards 
And the other conspirators crowded round Fawkes to listen to 
his relation. 

"The noise we heard," he said, "arose from a very simple 
circumstance, — and when you hear it, you will smile at your fears. 
But you will not smile at the result to which it has led. Exactly 
overhead, it appears, a cellar is situated, belonging to a person 
named Bright, and the sound was occasioned by the removal ot 
his coals, which he had been selling off." 

" Is that all ?" cried Catesby. " We are indeed grown 
childish, to be alarmed by such a cause." 

" It appears slight now it is explained," observed Keyes, 
gravely; " but how were we to know whence it arose ?" 

" True," returned Fawkes ; "and I will now show you how the 
hand of Heaven has been manifested in the matter. Tlie noise 
which led me to this investigation, and which I regard as a signal 
from on high, brought me to a cellar I had never seen before, 
and knew not existed. That cellar lies immediatehj beneath the 
House of Lords ?^ 

" Ah 1 I see I" exclaimed Catesby. " You think it would form 
-a, good depository for the powder." 

" If it had been built for the express purpose, it could not be 
better," returned Fawkes. " It is commodious and dry, and in 
an out-of-the-way place, as you may judge, when we ourselves 
have never hitherto noticed it." 

" But what is all this to us, if we cannot use it ?" returned 
■Catesby. 

" We can use it,*' replied Fawkes. " It is ours." 

There was a general exclamation of surprise. 

" Finding, on inquiry, that Bright was about to quit the 
neighbourhood," continued Fawkes, " and did not require ihc 
place longer, I instantly proposed to take it from him, and to 



190 GUY FAWKES. 

create no suspicion, enga<];ed it in Percy's name, stating that he 
wanted it for his own fuel." 

" You have done admirably," cried Catcsby, in a tone of 
exultation. " The success of the enterprise will now be entirely 
owing to you." 

" Not to me, but to the Providence that directed me," replied 
Fawkes, solen)nly. 

" Right, my son," returned Garnet " And let this teach us 
never to despair again." 

The next day, Percy having taken possession of the cellar, it 
was carefully examined, and proved, as Fawkes had stated, 
admirably adapted to their purpose. Their fears were now at an 
end, and they looked on the success of their project as certain. 
The mysterious bell no longer tolled, and their sole remaining 
task was to fill up the excavation so far as to prevent any damage 
from the wet. 

This was soon done, and their next step was to transport the 
powder during the night to the cellar. Concealing the barrels 
as before with foggots and coals, they gave the place the appear- 
ance of a mere receptacle for lumber, by filling it with old hampers, 
boxes without lids, broken bottles, stone jars, and other rubbish. 

They now began to think of separating, and Fawkes expressed 
his intention of returning that night to the house at Lambeth. 
No intelligence had reached them of Viviana's captivity, and 
they supposed her still an inmate of the miserable dwelling with 
Father Oldcorne. 

Fawkes had often thought of her, and with uneasiness, during 
his toilsome labours ; but they had so much engrossed him that 
her image was banished almost as soon as it arose. Now that 
grand obstacle was surmounted, and nothing was wanting, how- 
ever, except a favourable moment to strike the blow, he began to 
feel the greatest anxiety respecting her. 

Still, he thought it prudent to postpone his return to a late hour, 
and it was not until near midnight that he and Catesby ventured 
to their boat. As he was about to descend the steps, he heard 
his name pronounced by some one at a little distance ; and the 
next moment, a man, whom he immediately^ recognised as Hum- 
phrey Cheihani, rushed up to him. 

" You here again !" cried Fawkes, angrily, and not unsuspi- 
ciously. *' Do you play the spy upon me ?" 

"I have watched for you for the last ten nights," replied 
Chetham hastily. " 1 knew not where you were. But I found 
your boat here, and I hoped you would not cross the water in 
any other." 

•' Why all this care?" demanded Fawkes. "Has aught hap- 
pened? — Is Viviana safe? — Speak, man ! do not keep me longer 
in suspense I" 

" Alas 1" rejoined Chetham, " she is a prisoner." 



THE CELLAR. 191 

" A prisoner!" ejaculated Fawkes, in a hollow voice. "Then 
my forebodings were not without cause." 

" How has this happened ?" cried Catesbj, who had listened 
to what was said in silent wonder. 

Chetham then hastily related all that had taken place. 
** I know not what has become of her," he said, in conclusion ; 
** but I have heard that she was taken to the Star-Ciiamber by 
the Earl of Salisbury, — for he, it appears, was the companion of 
TopelifFe, — and, refusing to answer the interrogations of the 
Council, was conveyed to the Tower, and, I fear, subjected to 
the torture." 

"Tortured!" exclaimed Fawkes, horror-stricken; "Viviana 
tortured I And I have brought her to this ! Oh, God ! Oh, 
God I" 

" It is indeed an agonizing reflection," replied Humphrey 
Chetham, in a sombre tone, " and enough to drive you to 
despair. Her last wishes, expressed only in looks, for she did 
not dai'e to give utterance to them, were that I should warn you 
not to approach the house at Lambeth, your enemies being con- 
cealed within it. I have now fulfilled them. Farewell !" 
And he turned to depart. 

" Stay I" cried Catesby, arresting him. " Where is Father 
Oldcorne ?" 

" I know not," replied Humphrey Chetham. " As I have told 
you, Viviana by some means contrived his escape. I have seen 
nothing of him." 

And, hurrying away, he was lost beneath the shadow of the 
wall. 

" Is this a troubled dream, or dread reality?" cried Fawkes to 
Catesby. 

" I fear it is too true," returned the other, in a voice of much 
emotion. "Poor Viviana !" 

" Something must be done to set her free," cried Fawkes. " I 
will purchase her liberty by delivering up myself" 

" Your oath— remember your oath !" rejoined Catesby. " You 
may destroy yourself, but not your associates." 

" True— true," replied Fawkes, distractedly, — I do remember 
it. I am sold to perdition." 

" Anger not Heaven by these idle lamentations, — and at a 
time, too, when all is so prosperous," rejoined Catesby. 

" What I" cried Fawkes, fiercely, " would you have me calm, 
when she who called me father, and was dear to me as a child, 
is taken from me by these remorseless butchers, — subjected to 
their terrible examinations, — plunged in a dismal dungeon, — 
and stretched upon the rack, — and all for me — for me I I shall 
go mad if I think upon it I" 

" You must not think upon it," returned Catesby,—" at least, 
not here. We shall be observed. Let us return to the house; 



l-;)2 ^uv lAWKiis. 

and perhaps — thoiijih I scarcely dare indulge the hope — some 
plan may be devised for her liberation." 

With this, he dratigod Fawkes, who was almost frenzied with 
anguish, forcibly along, and they returned to the house. 

Nothing more was said that night. Catesby judged it pru- 
dent to let the first violence of his friend's emotion expend itself 
before he attempted to soothe him ; and when he communicated 
the sad event to Garnet, the latter strongly approved the plan. 
Garnet was greatly distressed at the intelligence, and his afflic- 
tion was shared by the other conspirators. No fears were enter- 
tained by any of them that Viviana would reveal aught of the 
plot, but this circumstance only added to their regrets. 

" I will stake my life for her constancy," said Catesby. 

" And so will I," returned Garnet. "She will die a martyr 
for us." 

He then proposed that they should pra}' for her deliverance. 
And all instantly assenting, they knelt down, while Garnet 
poured forth the most earnest supplications to the Virgin in her 
behalf. 

The next morning, Guy Fawkes set forth, and ascertained that 
Humphrey Chetham's statement was correct, and that Viviana 
was indeed a prisoner in the Tower. He repaired thither, and 
tried to ascertain in what part of the fortress she was confined, 
in the hope of gaining admittance to her. But as he could 
obtain no information and his inquiries excited suspicion, he 
was compelled to return without accomplishing his object. 

Crossing Tower Hill on his way back, he turned to glance at 
the stern pile he had just quitted, and which was fraught with 
»Jie most fearful interest to him, when he perceived Chetham 
jssue from the Bulwark Gate. He would have made up to him; 
but the young inerchant, who had evidently seen him, though 
he looked sedulously another way, set off in the direction of the 
river, and was quickly lost to view. Filled with the gloomiest 
thoughts, Guy Fawkes proceeded to Westminster, where he 
arrived without further adventure of any kind. 

In the latter part of the same day, as the conspirators were 
conferring together, they were alarmed by a knocking at the 
outer gate ; and sending Bates to reconnoitre, he instantly 
returned with the intelligence that it was Lord Mounteagle. At 
the mention of this name, Tresham, who was one of the {)arty, 
turned pale as death, and trembled so violently that he cou^d 
scarcely support himself Having been allowed to go forth on 
that day, the visit of Lord Mounteagle at this juncture, coupled 
with the agitation it occasioned him, seemed to proclaim him 
guilty of treachery for the second time. 

" You have betrayed us, villain I" cried Catesby, drawing his 
dagger; "but you shall not escape. I will poniard you on the 
spot." 



THE CELLAR. 193 

"As you hope for mercy, do not strike I" cried Trcsham. 
** On my soul, 1 have not seen Lord Mounteagle, and know not, 
any more than yourselves, what brings him hither. Put it to 
the proof. Let him come in. Conceal yourselves, and you will 
hear what passes between us." 

" Let it be so," interposed Fawkes. *' I will step within this 
closet, the door of which shall remain ajar. From it I can watch 
him without being observed, and if aught occurs to confirm our 
suspicions, he dies." i 

*' Bates sl-.all station himself in the passage, and stab him if he 
attempts to fly," added Catesby. " Your sword, sir." 

"It is here," replied Tresham, delivering it to Catesby, who 
handed it to Bates. " Are you satisfied ?"" 

" Is Lord Mounteagle alone ?" inquired Catesby, without 
noticing the question. 

" He appears to be so," replied Bates. 

" Admit him, then," rejoined Catesby. . ^ 

Entering the closet with Keyes, he was followed by Fawkes, 
who drew his dagger, and kept the door slightly ajar, while Garnet 
and the rest retired to other hiding-places. A few moments after- 
wards. Bates returned with Lord Mounteagle, and, having 
ushered him into the room, took his station in the passage, as 
directed by Catesby. The room was very dark, the shutters 
being closed, and light only finding its way through the chinks 
in them; and it appeared totally so to Lord Mounteagle, who, 
groping his way, stumbled forward, and exclaimed in accents of 
some alarm, 

" Where am I ? Where is Mr. Tresham ?" 

" I am here," replied Tresham, advancing towards him. 
" How did your lordship find me out ?" he added, after the 
customary salutations were exchanged. 

" My servant saw you enter this house," replied Mounteagle, 
" and, knowing I was anxious to see you, waited for some hours 
without, in the expectation of your coming forth. But as this 
did not occur, he mentioned the circumstance to me on his 
return, and I immediately came in quest of you. When I 
knocked at the gate, I scarcely knew what to think of the place, 
and began to fear you must have fallen into the hands of cut- 
throats ; and, now that I have gained admittance, my wonder — 
and I may add my uneasiness — is not diminished. Why do you 
hide yourself in this wretched place ?" 

"Be seated," replied Tresham, placing a chair for Lord 
Mounteagle, with his back to the closet, while he took one oppo 
site him, and near a table, on which some })apcrs were laid 
"Your lordship niay remember," he continued, scarcely know- 
ing what answer to make to the question, " that I wrote to you 
some time ago, to say tliat a conspiracy was hatching among 
certain of our party against the State." 

u 



1[94 GUY FAWKES. 

*' I have reason to remember it," replied Mountcaglc. "The 
letter was laid before the Earl of Salisbury, and inquiries insti- 
tuted in consequence. But, owing to your disappearance, 
nothing could be elicited. What plot had you discovered ?" 

At this moment, Tresham, who kept his eye fixed on the 
closet, perceived the door noiselessly open, and behind it the 
figure of Guy Fawkes, with the dagger in his hand. 

" I was misinformed as to the nature of the plot," he stam- 
mered. 

*' Was it against the King's life?" demanded Mounteagle. 

" No," rejoined Tresham ; " as far as I could learn, it was an 
insurrection." 

" Indeed I" exclaimed Mounteagle, sceptically. " My infor- 
mation, then, differed from yours. Who were the parties you 
suspected ?" 

" As I wrongfully suspected them," replied Tresham, evasively, 
" your lordship must excuse my naming them." 

" Was Catesby— or Winter— or Wright— or Rookwood — or 
Sir Everard Digby concerned in it ?" demanded Mounteagle. 

" Not one ot'them," asseverated Tresham. 

*' They are the persons / suspect," replied Mounteagle; "and 
they are suspected by the Earl of Salisbury. But you have not 
told me what you are doing in this strange habitation. Are you 
ferreting out a plot, or contriving one ?" 

" Both," replied Tresham. 

" How?" cried Mounteagle. 

" I am plotting for myself, and cotmterplottlng the designs of 
others," replied Tresham, mysteriously. 

" Is this place, then, the rendezvous of a band of conspirators ?" 
asked Mounteagle, imeasily. 

Tresham nodded in the affirmative. 

" Who are they ?" continued Mounteagle. " There is no need 
of concealment with me." 

As this was said, Tresham raised his eyes, and saw that Guy 
Fawkes had stepped silently forward, and placed himself behind 
Mountcagle's chair. His hand grasped his dagger, and his gaze 
never moved from the object of his suspicion. 

" W^ho are they?" repeated Mounteagle. "Is Guy Fawkes 
one of them ?" 

" Assuredly not," replied Tresham. " Why should you name 
liim ? I never mentioned him to your lordship." 

" I think you did," replied Mounteagle. " But I am certain 
^ou spoke of Catesby." 

And Tresham's regards involuntarily wandered to the closet, 
when he beheld the stern glance of the person alluded to fixed 
upon him. 

" You have heard of Viviana Radcliffe's imprisonment, I sup- 
|)ose ?" pursued Mounteagle, unconscious of what was passing. 




'^/r .^^/^ ;^///^ //^//^ ^/^^ .97^*1/// ^^^" 



THE STAR-CHAMBER. 195 



« 



I have," replied Trcsham. 

" The Earl of Salisbury expected he would be able to wririf' 
all from her, but he has tailed," observed Mounteagle. 

" I am glad of it," observed Tresham. 

** I thought you were disposed to serve him ?" remarked 
Mounteagle. 

" So I am," replied Tresham. ** But, if secrets are to be 
revealed, I had rather be the bearer of them than any one else. 
I am sorry for Viviana." 

** I could procure her liberation, if I chose," observed Mount-* 
eagle. 

" Say you so ?" cried Fawkes, clapping him on the shoulder; 
** then you stir not hence till you have procured it I" 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE STAR-CHAMBER. 



Viviana, as has already been intimated, after her capture at 
the house at Lambeth, was conveyed to the Star-Chanibcr. 
Here she was detained until a late hour on the following day, 
when she underwent a long and rigorous examination by certain 
members of the Privy Council, who were summoned for that 
purpose by the Earl of Salisbury. Throughout this arduous 
trial she maintained the utmost composure, and never for a 
single moment lost her firnmcss. On all occasions, her match- 
less beauty and dignity produced the strongest impression on the 
beholders; but on no occasion had they ever produced so strong 
an effect as the present. Her features were totally destitute of 
bloom, but their very paleness, contrasted as it was with her 
large dark eyes, which blazed with unwonted brilliancy, as well 
as with her jet-black hair, so far from detracting from her love- 
liness, appeared to add to it. 

As she was brought before the Council, who were seated 
round a table, and remained standing at a short distance from 
them, guarded by Topcliffe and two halberdiers, a murmur of 
admiration pervaded the grouj), — nor was this feeling lessened 
as the examination proceeded. Once, when the Earl ot Salisbury 
adverted to tiie unworthy position in which she, the daughter oi 
the proud and loyal Sir William lladcliffe, had placed herself, a 
shade passed over her brow, and a slight convulsion agitatc(l her 
frame. But the next moment she recovered herself, and said, 

" However circumstances may appear against me, and what- 
ever opinion your lordships may entertain of my conduct, the 
King has not a more loyal subject than mvsclf, nor have any of 

b -2 



196 GUY FAWKES. 

you made greater efforts to avert the danger by which he is 
threatened." 

" Then you admit that his Majesty is in danger ?" cried the 
Earl of Salisbury, eagerly. 

" I admit nothing, replied Viviana. ^' But I affirm that I am 1 
his true and loyal subject." 

" You cannot expect us to believe your assertion," replied the 
Earl ; " unless you approve it by declaring all you know touch- 
ing this conspiracy." 

" I have already told you, my lord," she returned, " that my 
lips are sealed on that subject." 

" You disclaim, then, all knowledge of a plot against the 
King's life, and against his government ?" pursued Salisbury. • 

Viviana shook her head. 

" You refuse to give up the names of your companions, or to 
reveal their intentions?" continued the Earl, 

" I do," she answered, firmly. 

" Your obstinacy will not save them," rejoined the Earl, in a 
severe tone, and after a brief pause. "Their names and their 
atrocious designs are known to us." 

*' If such be the case," replied Viviana, " why interrogate me 
on the subject ?" 

" Because — but it is needless to give a reason for the course 
which justice requires me to pursue," returned the Earl. " You 
are implicated in this plot, and nothing can save you from con- 
dign punishment but a frank and full confession. 

" Nothing ca7i save me then, my lord," replied Viviana; " but 
Heaven knows I shall perish unjustly." 

A consultation was then held by the lords of the council, who 
whispered together for a few minutes. Viviana regarded them 
anxiously, but suffered no expression of uneasiness to escape her. 
As they again turned towards her, she saw from their looks, some 
of which exhibited great commiseration for her, that they had 
come to a decision (she could not doubt what) respecting her 
fate. Her heart stopped beating, and she could scarcely support 
herself. Such, however, was the control she exercised over her- 
self that, though filled with terror, her demeanour remained 
unaltered. She was not long kept in suspense. Fixing his 
searching gaze upon her, the Earl of Salisbury observed in a 
severe tone, 

" Viviana Radcliffe, I ask you for the last time whether you 
will avow the truth ?" 

No answer was returned. 

" I will not disguise from you," continued the Earl, " that 
3'ouryouth, your beauty, your constancy, and, above all, your ap- 
parent innocence, have deeply interested me, as well as the other 
noble persons here assembled to interrogate you, and who would 
villingly save you from the sufferings you will necessarily 







a^, 



y 



i^n- 



THE STAR-CHAMBER. 197 

undergo, from a mistaken fidelity to the heinous traitors with 
whom you are so unhappily leagued. I would give you time to 
reflect did I think the delay would answer any good purpose. I 
would remind you that no oath of secresy, however solemn, can 
be binding in an unrighteous cause. I would tell you that your 
first duty is to your prince and governor, and that it is as great 
a crime, as unpardonable in the eyes of God as of man, to with- 
hold the revelation of a conspiracy against the State, should it 
come to your knowledge, as to conspire against it yourself. I 
would lay all this before you. I would show you the magnitude 
of your offence, the danger in which you stand, and the utter 
impossibility of screening your companions, who, ere long, will 
be confronted with you, — did I think it would avail. But, as 
you continue obstinate, justice must take its coarse." 

" I am prepared for the worst, my lord," replied Viviana, 
humbly. " I thank your lordship for your consideration : but I 
take you all to witness that I profess the utmost loyalty and 
devotion for my sovereign, and that, whatever may be my fate, 
those feelinffs will remain unchano;ed to the last." 

" \ our manner and your words are so sincere, that, were not 
your conduct at variance with them, they might convince us," 
returned the Earl. " As it is, even if we could credit your inno- 
cence, we are bound to act as if you were guilty. You will be 
committed to the Tower till his Majesty's pleasure is known. 
And I grieve to add, if you still continue obstinate, the severest 
measures will be resorted to, to extract the truth from you." 

As he concluded, he attached his signature to a warrant which 
was lying on the table before him, and traced a few lines to Sir 
William Waad, lieutenant of the Tower. 

This done, he handed the papers to Topcliffe, and waving his 
hand, Viviana was removed to the chamber in which she had 
been previously confined, and where she was detained under a 
strict guard, until Topclit!e, who had left her, returned to say 
that all was in readiness, and bidding her follow him, led the 
way to the river-side, where a wherry, manned by six rowers, 
was waiting for them. 

The night was profoundly dark, and, as none of the guard 
carried torches, their course was steered in perfect obscurity. But 
the rowers were too familiar with the river to require the 
guidance of light. Shooting the bridge in safety, and pausing 
only for a moment to give the signal of their approach to tlic 
sentinels on the ramparts, they passed swiftly under the low- 
browed arch of Traitor's Gate. 



198 GUY FAWKES. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

THE jailer's daughter. 

As Viviana set foot on those fatal stairs, which so many have 
trod, and none without fcclinp: that they took their first ste{> 
towards the scaffohl, she invohmtarily shrank backward. But it 
was now too late to retreat ; and she surrendered her hand to 
Topcliffe, who assisted her up the steps, llalf-a-dozen nien-at- 
arnis, with a like number of warders bearing torches, were pre- 
sent; and as it was necessary that Topcliffe should deliver his 
warrant into Sir William's Waad's own hands, he committed his 
prisoner to the warders, with instructions to them to take her to 
the guard-room near the By-ward Tower, while he proceeded to 
the lieutenant's lodgings. 

It was the first time Viviana had beheld the terrible pile in 
which she was immured, though she was well acquainted with 
its history, and witli the persecutions which many of the profes- 
sors of her faith had endured within it during the recent reign 
of Elizabeth; and as the light of the torches flashed upon the 
grey walls of the Bloody Tower, and upon the adjoining ramparts, 
all the dreadful tales she had heard rushed to her recollection. 
But having recovered the first shock, the succeeding impressions 
were ])owerless in comparison, and she accompanied the warders 
to the guard-room without expressing any outward emotion. 
Here a seat was ofiered her, and as the men considerately with- 
drew, she was able to pursue her reflections unmolested. They 
were sad enough, and it required all her firmness to sujiport her. 

When considering what was likely to bcfal her in consequence 
of her adherence to the fortunes of Fawkes and his companions, 
she h.ad often pictured some dreadful situation like the present, 
but the reality far exceeded her worst anticipations. She had 
deemed herself equal to any emergency, but as she thought npon 
the dark menaces of the Earl of Salisbury, she felt it would 
retjuire greater fortitude than she had hitherto displayed to bear 
her through her trial. Nor were her meditations entirely con- 
fined to herself While trcnibling for the perilous situation of 
Guy Fawkes, she reproached herself that she could not requite 
even in thought the passionate devotion of Humphrey Chctham. 

" What matters it now," she thought, " that I cannot love- 
him? I shall soon be nothing to him, or to any one. And yet 
I feel I have done him wrong, and that I should be happier if I 
could requite his attachment. But the die is cast. It is too late 
to repent, or to retreat. My heart acquits nie of having been 
influenced by any unworthy motive, and I will strive to endure 
the keenest jjang without a murmur." 

Shortly after this, Topcliffe returned with Sir William Waad. 



THE jailer's daughter. 199 

On their entrance, Viviana arose, and the lieutenant eyed her 
with some curiosity. He was a middle-aged man, tall, stoutly- 
built, and having harsh features, stamped with an expression of 
mingled cimning and ferocity. His eyes had a fierce and blood- 
thirsty look, and were overshadowed by thick and scowling 
brows. Saluting the captive with affected courtesy, he observed, 

" So you refuse to answer the interrogations of the Privy 
Council, madam, I understand. I am not sorry for it, because I 
would have the merit of wringing the truth from you. Those 
who have been most stubborn outside these walls, have been the 
most yielding within them." 

" That will not be my case," replied Viviana, coldly. 

" We shall sec," returned the lieutenant, with a significant 
glance at Topcliffe. 

Ordering her to follow him, he then proceeded along the 
ward in the direction of the Bloody Tower, and passing beneath 
its arched gateway, ascended the steps on the left, and led hor 
to his lodgings. Entering the habitation, he mounted to the 
upper story, and tracking a long gallery, brought her to a small 
circular chamber in the Bell Tower. Its sole furniture were a 
chair, a table, and a couch. 

" Here you will remain for the present," observed the lieu- 
tenant, smiling grimly, and placing a lamp on the table. " It 
will depend upon yourself whether your accommodations are- 
better hereafter." 

With this, he quitted the cell with his attendants, and barred 
the door outside. 

Left alone, Viviana, who had hitherto restrained her anguish,, 
suffered it to find vent in tears. Never had she felt so utterly 
forlorn and desolate. All befoi'c her was threatening and terrible, 
full of dangers, real and imaginary; nor could she look back 
upon her past career without something like remorse. 

" Oh, that Heaven would take me to itself!" she murmured,, 
clasping her hands in an agony of distress, " for I feel unequal 
to my trials. Oh, that I had perished with my dear father! 
For what dreadful fate am I reserved ? — Torture, — I will bear 
it, if I can. But death by the hands of the public executioner,. 
— it is too horrible to think of! Is there no way to escape 
ihatr 

As this hideous thought occurred to her, she uttered a loud 
and prolonged scream, and fell senseless on the floor. When 
.she recovered it was daylight ; and, weak and exhausted, she 
crept to the couch, and throwing herself upon it, endeavoured 
to forget her misery in sleep. But, as is usually' the case with 
the afflicted, it lied her eyelids, and she passed several hours in 
the severest mental torture, unrelieved by a single cheering 
thought. 

About the middle of the day, the door of the cell was opened 



200 GUY FAWKES. 

by an old woman with a morus:^ and forbiddinoj countenance, 
attended by a younger female, who resembled her in all but the 
expression of her features (her look was gentle and com- 
passionate), and who appeared to be her daughter. 

Without paying any attention to Viviana, the old woman 
took a small loaf of bread and other provisions from a basket she 
had brought with her, and placed them on the table. This 
done, she was about to depart, when her daughter, who had 
glanced uneasily at the couch, observed in a kindly tone, 

" Shall we not inquire whether we can be of service to the 
poor young lady, mother ?" 

" Why should we concern ourselves about her, Ruth ?" returned 
the old woman, sharply. "If she wants anything, she has a 
tongue, and can speak. If she desires further comforts," she 
added, in a significant tone, " they must be paid for." 

" I desire nothing but death," groaned Viviana. 

*' The poor soul is dying, I believe," cried Ruth, rushing to 
the couch. " Have you no cordial-water about you, mother?" 

"Truly have I," returned the old woman ; *' and I have other 
things besides. But I must be paid for them." 

As she spoke she drew from her pocket a small, square, 
Dutch-shaped bottle. 

*' Give it me," cried Ruth, snatching it from her. " I am 
sure the young lady will pay for it." 

" You are very kind," said Viviana, faintly, "But I have no 
means of doing so." 

" I knew it," cried the old woman, fiercely. *' I knew it. 
Give me back the flask, Ruth. She shall not taste a drop. Do 
jou not hear, she has no money, wench? Give it me, I say." 

'•' Na}"^, mother, for pity's sake," implored Ruth. 

" Pity, forsooth !" exclaimed the old woman, derisively. " If 
I, and thy father, Jasper Ipgreve, had any such feeling, it would 
be high time for him to give up his post of jailer in the Tower 
of London. Pity for apoor prisoner ! Thou a jailer's daughter, 
and talk so. I am ashamed of thee, wench. But I thought this 
was a rich Catholic heiress, and had powerful and wealthy 
friends." 

" So she is," replied Ruth ; " and though she may have no 
money with her now, she can command any amount she pleases. 
1 heard Master Topcliffe tell young Nicholas Ilardesty, the 
Marder, so. She is the daughter of the late Sir William Rad- 
clid'e, of Ordsall Hall, in Lancashire, and sole heiress of his vast 
estates." 

" Is this so, sweet lady ?" inquired the old woman, stepping 
towards the couch. *'Arc you truly Sir William RadclifFe's 
daughter ?" 

" I am," replied Viviana. " But I have said I require nothing 
from you. Leave uic" 



<( 



THE JAILER'S DAUGHTER. 201 

'• No — no, dear young lady," rejoined Dame Ipgreve. in a 
whining tone, whicli was infinitely more disagreeable to Viviana 
than her previous harshness, " I cannot leave you in this state. 
Raise her head, Ruth, while I pour a few drops of the cordial 
down her throat." 

" I will not taste it," replied Viviana, putting the flask aside. 

" You would find it a sovereign restorative," replied Dame 
Ipgreve, with a mortified look; "but as you please. I will not 
urge you against your inclination. The provisions I have been 
obliged to bring you are too coarse for a daintily-nurtured 
maiden like you, — but you shall have others presently." 

" It is needless," rejoined Viviana. "Pray leave me." 

" Well, well, I am going," rejoined Dame Ipgreve, hesitating. 

Do you want to write to any one? I can find means of 
conveying a letter secretly out of the Tower." 

"Ah !" exclaimed Viviana, raising herself. " And yet no — 
no— I dare not trust you." 

*' You may," replied the avaricious old woman, — "provided 
you pay me well." 

"I will think of it," returned Viviana. "But I have not 
strength to write now." 

" You must not give way thus, — indeed, you must not, dear 
lady," said Ruth, in a voice of great kindness. " It will not be 
safe to leave you. Suffer me to remain with you." 

" Willingly," replied Viviana ; " most willingly." 

*' Stay with her, then, child," said Dame Ipgreve. *' I will 
go and prepare a nourishing broth for her. Take heed and 
make a shrewd bargain with her for thy attendance," she added 
in a hasty whisper, as she retired. 

Greatly relieved by the old woman's departure, Viviana 
turned to Ruth, and thanked her in the warmest terms for her 
kindness. A few minutes sufficed to convert the sympathy 
which these two young persons evidently felt towards each other 
into affectionate regard, and the jailer's daughter assured 
Viviana, that so long as she should be detained, she would 
devote herself to her. 

By this time the old woman had returned with a mess of hot 
broth, which she carried with an air of great mystery beneath 
her cloak, Viviana was prevailed upon by the solicitations of 
Ruth to taste it, and found herself much revived in consecjucnce. 
Her slight meal ended, Dame Ipgreve departed, with a promise 
to return in the evening Avith such viands as she could manage 
to introduce unobserved, and with a flask of wine. 

" You will need it, sweet lady, 1 fear," she said ; " for my 
husband tells me you are in peril of the torture. Oh I it is a 
j-ad thing, that such as you should be so cruelly dealt with I 
But we will take all the care of you we can. You will not forget 
to requite us. You ujust give me an order on your steward, cr 



202 GUY FAWKES. 

on some rich Catliolic friend. I am half a Papist myself, — that 
is, I like one relifjion as well as the other, — and I like thoi;e 
best, whatever their creed may be, \vho pay best. That is my 
maxim : and it is the same with my liusband. We do all we 
can to scrape together a penny for our child." 

" No more of this, good mother," interrupted Rutli. " It 
distresses the lady I I will take care she wants nothing." 

*' Right, child, right," returned Dame Ipgreve ; — '* do not 
forget what I told you," she added in a whisper. 

And she quitted the cell. 

Ruth remained with Viviana during the rest of the day, and 
it was a great consolation to the latter to find that her com- 
panion was of the same faith as herself, — having been converted 
by Father Poole, a Romish priest who was confined in the 
Tower during the latter part of Elizabeth's reign, and whose 
sufferings and constancy for his religion had made a powerful 
impression on the jailer's daughter. As soon as Viviana ascer- 
tained this, she made Ruth, so far as she thought prudent, a 
confidante in her misfortunes, and after besuilins; some hours in 
conversation, they both knelt down and offered up fervent 
prayers to the Virgin. Ruth then departed, promising to return 
in the evening with her mother. 

Soon after it became dark, Dame Ipgreve and her daiighter 
reappeared, the former carrying a lamp, and the latter a basket 
of provisions. Ruth's countenance was so troubled, that Viviana 
was certain that some fresh calamity was at hand. 

" What is the matter?" she hastily demanded. 

" Make yom- meal first, dear young lad}'," replied Dame 
Ipgreve. " Our news might take away your appetite, and you 
will have to pay for your su{)per, whether you eat it or not." 

" You alarm me greatly," cried Viviana, anxiously. " What 
ill ne\i-s do vou brin<2; ?" 

" I will not keep you longer in suspense, madam," said Ruth. 
"You are to be examined to-night by the lieutenant and certain 
members of the Privy Council, and if you refuse to answer their 
questions, I lament to say you will be put to the torture." 

" Heaven give me strength to endure it!" ejaculated Viviana, 
in a despairing tone. 

" Eat, madam, eat," cried Dame Ipgreve, pressing the viands 
npon her. " You will never be able to go through with the 
examination, if you starve yourself in this way." 

" Are you sure," incjuired Viviana, appealing to Ruth, " that 
it will take place so soon ?" 

" Quite sure," replied Ruth. " My father has orders to attend 
the lieutenant at midnight." 

" Let me advise you to conceal nothing," insinuated the old 
Woman. '' They are determined to wring the truth from you, — 
and they rcill do so." 



THE JAILER'S DAUGHTER. 203 

" You arc mistalcen, good woman," replied Vivlana, firmly. 
** I will die before I utter a word." 

" You think so now," returned Dame Ipgreve, maliciouslv. 
" But the sight of the rack and the thumbscrews will alter your 
tone. At ail events, support nature." 

"No," replied Viviana ; "as I do not desire to live, I will 
use no effort to sustain myself. They may kill me if they please."" 

" Misfortune has turned her brain," muttered the old woman 
" I must take care and secure my dues. Well, madam, if you 
will not eat the supper I have provided, it cannot be helped. I 
must find some one who will. You must pay for it all the same. 
My husband, Jasper Ipgreve, will be present at your interroga- 
tion, and 1 am sure, for my sake, he will use you as lightly as he- 
can. Come, Ruth, you umst not remain here longer." 

" Oh, let her stay with me," implored Viviana. '^ I will make- 
it well worth your while to grant me the indulgence." 

" What will you give ?" cried the old woman, eagerly. " But 
no — no — I dare not leave her. The lieutenant may visit you,, 
and find her, and then I should lose my place. Come along, 
Ruth. She shall attend you after the interrogation, madam. I 
shall be there myself" 

" Farewell, madam," sobbed Ruth, who was almost drowned vi 
tears. " Heaven grant you constancy to endure your trial !" 

"Be ruled bj' me," said the old woman. " Speak out, and 
secure your own safety." 

She would have continued in the same strain, but Ruth 
dragged her away. And casting a commiserating glance at 
Viviana, she closed the door. 

The dreadful interval between their departure and midnight 
was passed by Viviana in fervent prayer. As she heard through 
the barred embrasure of her dungeon the deep strokes of the- 
clock toll out the hour of twelve, the door opened, and a tall, 
gaunt personage, habited in a suit of rusty black, and with a 
large bunch of keys at his girdle, entered the cell. 

" You are Jasper Ipgreve ?" said Viviana, rising. 

"Right," replied the jailer. " I am come to take you before 
the lieutenant and the council. Are you ready ?" 

Viviana replied in the affirmative, and Ij^greve quitting the 
•^ell, outside which two other officials in sable habiliments were 
"tationed, led the way down a short spiral staircase, which 
brought them to a narrow vaulted passage. Pursuing it for some 
time, the jailer halted before a strong door, cased with iron, and 
opening it, admitted the captive into a square chamber, the root 
^)f which was supported by a heavy stone pillar, while its walls 
Were garnished with implements of torture. At a table on the 
Jeft sat the lieutenant and three other grave-looking personages. 
Across the lower end of the chamber a thick black cm-tain was 
stretched, hiding a deep recess ; and behind it, as was evident 



■£04; GUY FAWKES. 

from tlic plimincr that escaped from its folds, there was a light 
Ocrtain iiuli-tinct, but ominous sounds, issuino; from the recess, 
])rovcd that there were persons within it, and Viviana's quaking 
heart tokl her what was the nature of their proceedings. 

She had ample time to survey this dismal apartment and its 
occupants, for several minutes elapsed before a word was ad- 
dressed to her by her interrogators, who continued to confer 
together in an under tone, as if unconscious of her presence. 
During this pause, broken only by the ominous sounds before 
mentioned, Viviana scanned the countenances of the group at 
the table, in the hope of discerning in them some glimpses of 
compassion ; but they were inscrutable and inexorable, and 
scarcely less dreadful to look upon than the hideous implements 
on the wails. 

Viviana wished the earth would open and swallow her, that 
■she might escape from them. Anything was better than to be 
left at the mercy of such men. At certain times, and not un- 
frequcntly at the most awful moments, a double current o 
thought will flow through the brain, and at this frightful juncture 
it was so with Viviana. While shuddering at all she saw around 
her, nay, dwelling upon it, another and distinct train of thought 
led her back to former scenes of happiness, when she Avas undis- 
turbed by any but remote apprehensions of danger. She thought 
of her tranquil residence at Ordsall, — of the flowers she had 
tended in the garden, — of her father, and of his affection for 
her, — of Humphrc}' Chetham, and of her early and scarce- 
acknowledG;cd attachment to him, — and of his generositv and 
devotion, and how she had requited it. And then, like a sullen 
cloud darkening the fair prospect, arose the figure of Guy 
Fawkes — the sombre enthusiast — who had unwittingly exercised 
such a baneful influence upon her fortunes. 

" Had he not crossed my path," she mentally ejaculated, " I 
might have been happy — might have loved Humphrey Chetham 
— might, perhaps, have wedded him !" 

These reflections were suddenly dispersed by the lieutenant, 
"who, in a stern tone, commenced his interrogations. 

As upon her previous examination, Viviana observed the 
utmost caution, and either refused to speak, or answered such 
•questions on]y as affected herself. At first, in spite of all her 
efforts, she trembled violently, and her tongue clove to the roof 
of her mouth. But after a while, she recovered her courage, and 
'regarded the lieutenant with a look as determined as his own. 

'' It is useless to urge me farther," she concluded. " I have 
•said all I will say." 

" Is it your pleasure, my lords," observed Sir William Waad 
to the others, " to prolong the examination ?" 

His companions replied in the negative, and the one nearest 
shim remarked, *' Is she aware what will follow ?" 



THE JAILER'S DAUGHTER. 205 

" I am," replied Viviana, resolutely, " and I am not to be 
intimidated." 

Sir William Waad then made a sign to Ipgreve, who imme- 
diately stepped forward and seized her arm. *' You will be 
taken to that recess," said the lieutenant, " where the question 
will be put to you. But, as we shall remain here, you have only 
to utter a cry if you are willing to avow the truth, and the 
torture shall be stayed. And it is our merciful hope that this 
may be the case." 

Summoning up all her resolution, and walking with a firm- 
footstep, Viviana passed with Ipgreve behind the curtain. She 
there beheld two men and a woman — the latter was the jailer's- 
wife, who instantly advanced to her, and besought her to 
confess. 

" There is no help for it, if you refuse," she urged; "not all 
your wealth can save you." 

" Mind 3'our own business, dame," interposed Ipgreve, angrily,, 
" and assist her to unrobe." 

Saying this, he stepped aside with the two men, one of whom 
was the chirurgeon, and the other the tormentor, while Dame 
Ipgreve helped to take off Viviana's gown. She then tied a. 
scarf over her shoulders, and informed her husband she was 
read}'. 

The recess was about twelve feet high, and ten wide. It was 
crossed near the roof, which was arched and vaulted, by a heavy 
beam, with pulleys and ropes at either extremity. But what 
chiefly attracted the unfortunate captive's attention was a couple 
of iron gauntlets attached to it, about a yard apart. Upon the 
ground under the beam, and immediately beneath that part of it 
where the gauntlets were fixed, were laid three pieces of wood, 
of a few inches in thickness, and piled one upon another. 

" What must I do ?" inquired Viviana, in a hollow voice, but 
with unaltered resolution, of the old woman. 

" Step upon those pieces of wood," replied Dame Ipgreve, 
leading her towards them. 

Viviana obeyed, and as soon as she had set foot upon the pile,, 
the tormentor placed a joint-stool beside her, and mounting it, 
desired her to place her right hand in one of the gauntlets. 
She did so, and the tormentor then turned a screw, which com- 
pressed the iron glove so tightly as to give her excruciating 
j)ain. He then got down, and Ipgreve demanded if he should 
proceed. 

A short pause ensued ; but, notwithstanding her agony,, 
Viviana made no answer. The tormentor then placed the stool 
on the left side, and fastened the hand which was still at liberty 
within the other gauntlet. The torture was dreadful— and the 
fingers appeared crushed by the pressure. Still Viviana uttered 
no cry. After another short pause, Ipgreve said, 



206 GUY FAWKES. 

" You had better let us stop here. This is mere child's play 
compared with wliat is to come." 

No answer being returned, the tormentor took a mallet and 
struck one of the ])ieces of wood from under Viviana's feet. The 
shock was dreadful, and seemed to dislocate her wrists, while the 
pressure on the hands was increased in a tenfold degree. The 
])oor sufferer, who was resting on the points of her feet, felt that 
the removal of the next piece of wood would occasion almost 
intolerable torture. Her constancy, however, did not desert 
her, and, after the question had been repeated by Ipgreve, the 
second block was struck away. She was now suspended by her 
hands, and the pain was so exquisite, that nature gave way, and 
littering a piercing scream, she fainted. 

On recovering, she found herself stretched upon a miserable 
pallet, with Ruth watching beside her. A glance round the 
chamber, which was of solid stone masonry, with a dee]) em- 
brasure on one side, convinced her that she had been removed 
to some other prison. 

" Where am I?" she asked, in a faint voice. 

"In the Well Tower, madam," replied Ruth: "one of the 
fortifications near the moat, and now used as a prison-lodging. 
My father dwells within it, and you are under his custody." 

"Your father," cried Viviana, shuddering as she recalled the 
sufferings she had recently undergone. " Will he torture me 
again ?" 

" Not if I can prevent it, dear lady," replied Ruth. " But 
•hush ! here comes my mother. Not a word before her." 

As Ruth spoke, Dame Ipgreve, who had been lingering at 
the door, entered the room. She affected the greatest solicitude 
for Viviana — felt her pulse — looked at the bandages fastened 
round her swollen and crippled fingers, and concluded by coun- 
selling her not to persist in refusing to speak. 

" I dare not tell you what tortures are in store for you," she 
said, " if you continue thus obstinate. But they will be a 
thousand times worse than what you endured last night." 

"When will my next interrogation take place?" in(piired 
Viviana. 

" A week hence, it may be, — or it may be sooner," returned 
the old woman. " It depends u{)on the state you are in — and 
somewhat upon the fees you give my husband, for he has a 
voice with the lieutenant." 

" I would give him all I possess, if he could save me from 
further torture," cried Viviana. 

"Alas! alas!" replied Dame Ipgreve, "you ask more than 
can be done. He would save you if he could. But you will 
not let him. However, we will do all we can to mitigate your 
sufferings — all we can — provided you pay us. Slav with her, 



THE JAILER'S DAUGHTER. 207 

child,'* she added, with a significant p;esture to her daughter, as 
she quitted the room, *' stay with her." 

*' My heart bleeds for you, madam," said Ruth, in accents of 
the deepest commiseration, as soon as they were alone. " You 
may depend upon my fidelity. If I can contrive your escape, 
I will, — at any risk to myself." 

'' On no account," replied Viviana. " Do not concern your- 
self about me more. My earthly sufferings, I feel, will have 
terminated before further cruelty can be practised upon me." 

" Oh ! say not so, madam," returned Ruth. " I hope — nay, 
I am sure you will live long and happily." 

Viviana shook her head, and Ruth, finding her very feeble, 
thought it better not to continue the conversation. She 
accordingly applied such restoratives as were at hand, and 
observing that the eyes of the sufferer closed as if in slumber, 
glided noiselessly out of the chamber, and left her. 

In this way a week passed. At the expiration of that time, 
the chirurgeon pronounced her in so precarious a state, that if 
the torture were repeated he would not answer for her life. The 
interrogation, therefore, was postponed for a few days, during 
which the chirurgeon constantly visited her, and by his care, 
and the restoratives she was compelled to take, she rapidly 
regained her strength. 

One day, after the chirurgeon had departed, Ruth cautiously 
closed the door, and observed to her, 

" You are now so far recovered, madam, as to be able to 
make an attempt to escape. I have devised a plan, which I 
will communicate to you to-morrow. It must not be delayed, 
or you will have to encounter a second and more dreadful 
examination." 

*' I will not attempt it if you are exposed to risk," replied 
Viviana. 

" Heed me not," returned Ruth. " One of your friends has 
found out your place of confinement, and has spoken to me 
about you." 

" What friend?" exclaimed Viviana, starting. " Gu}' Fawkes? 

— I mean " And she hesitated, while her pale cheeks were 

suffused with blushes. 

" He is named Humphrey Chetham," returned Ruth. " Like 
myself, he would risk his life to preserve you." 

" Tell him he must not do so," cried Viviana, eagerly. *' He 
has done enough — too much for me already. I will not cxposu 
him to further hazard. Tell him so, and entreat him to abandon 
the attempt." 

" But 1 shall not see him, dear lady," replied Ruth. "Be- 
sides, if I read him rightly, he is not likely to be turned aside 
by any selfish consideration." 



208 OUY FAWKES. 

*' You are rio;ht, he is not," groaned Viviana. " But this cmly 
adds to my affliction. Oh I if you sJiould see him, dear Kuth, 
try to dissuade him from his purpose." 

" I will ohey you, madam," repHed the jailer's daughter 
'* But I am well assured it will be of no avail." 

After some further conversation, Ruth retired, and Viviana 
was left alone for the night. Except the slumber procured by 
soporific potions, she had known no repose since she had been 
confined within the Tower ; and this night she felt more than 
usually restless. After ineffectually endeavouring to compose 
herself, she arose, and hastily robing herself — a task she per- 
formed with no little difficulty, her fingers being almost useless — 
continued to pace her narrow chamber. 

It has been mentioned that on one side of the cell there was 
a deep embrasure. It was terminated by a narrow and strongly- 
grated loophole, looking upon the moat. Pausing before it, 
Viviana gazed forth. The night was pitchy dark, and not even 
a solitary star could be discerned; but as she had no light in her 
chamber, the gloom outside was less profound than that within. 

While standing thus, buried in thought, and longing for day- 
break, Viviana fancied she heard a slight sound as of some one 
swimming across the moat. Thinking she might be deceived, 
•she listened more intently, and as the sound continued, she felt 
sure she was right in her conjecture. All at once the thought 
of Humphrey Chetham flashed upon her, and she had no doubt 
it must be him. Nor was she Avrong. The next moment, a 
noise was heard as of some one clambering up the wall ; a hand 
grasped the bars of the loophole, which was only two or three 
feet above the level of the water ; and a low voice, which she 
instantly recognised, pronounced her name. 

" Is it Humphrey Chetham ?" she asked, advancing as near as 
she could to the loophole. 

"It is," was the reply. "Do not despair. 1 will accomplish 
your liberation. I have passed three days within the Tower, 
and only ascertained your place of confinement a few hours ago. 
I have contrived a plan for your escape, with the jailer's daughter, 
which she will make known to you to-morrow." 

" I cannot thank you sufficiently for j'our devotion,*' replied 
Viviana, in accents of the deepest gratitude. " But I implore 
you to leave me to my fate. I am wretched enough now. 
Heaven knows, but if aught should happen to you, I shall be 
infinitely more so. If I possess any power over you, — and that 
I do so, I well know, — I entreat, nay, I command, you to desist 
from this attempt." 

" I have never yet disobeyed you, Viviana," replied the young 
merchant, passionately — " nor will I do so now. But if you bid 
me abandon you, 1 will plunge into this moat, never to rise 
again." 



THE JAILER'S DAUGHTER. 209 

His manner, notwithstanding the low tone in which he spoke, 
vras so determined, that Viviana felt certain he would carry his 
threat into execution ; she therefore rejoined in a mournful tone, 

" Well, be it as you will. It is in vain to resist our fate. I 
am destined to bring; misfortune to you." 

" Not so," replied Chetham. '* If I can save you, I would 
rather die than live. The jailer's daughter will explain her plan 
to you to-morrow. Promise me to accede to it." 

Viviana reluctantly assented. 

" I shall quit the Tower at daybreak," pursued Chetham ; 
" and when you are once out of it, hasten to the stairs beyond 
the wharf at Petty Wales. I will be there with a boat. Fare- 
well I" 

As he spoke, he let himself drop into the water, but his foot 
slipping, the plunge was louder than he intended, and attracted 
the attention of a sentinel on the ramparts, who immediately 
called out to know what was the matter, and not receiving any 
answer, discharged his caliver in the direction of the sound. 

Viviana, who heard the challenge and the shot, uttered aloud 
scream, and the next moment Ipgreve and his wife appeared. 
The jailer glanced suspiciously round the room ; but after satis- 
fying himself that all was right, and putting some questions to 
the captive, which she refused to answer, he departed with his 
wife, and carefully barred the door. 

It is impossible to imagine greater misery than Viviana 
endured the whole of the night. The uncertainty in which she 
was kept as to Chetham's fate was almost insupportable, and the 
bodily pain she had recently endured appeared light when com- 
pared with her present mental torture. Day at length dav/ned; 
but it brought with it no Ruth. Instead of this faithful friend. 
Dame Ipgreve entered the chamber with the morning meal, and 
her looks were so morose and distrustful, that Viviana feared she 
must have discovered her daughter's design. She did not, how- 
ever, venture to make a remark, but sufiered the old woman to 
depart in silence. 

Giving up all for lost, and concluding that Humphrey Chet- 
ham had either perished, or was, like herself, a prisoner, Viviana 
bitterly bewailed his fate, and reproached herself with being 
unintentionally the cause of it. Later in the day, Ruth entered 
the cell. To Viviana's eager inquiries she replied, that Hum- 
phrey Chetham had escaped. Owing to the darkness, the sen- 
tinel had missed his aim, and although the most rigorous search 
was instituted throughout the fortress, he had contrived to elude 
observation. 

" Our attempt," pursued Ruth, " must be made this evening. 

The lieutenant has informed my father that you are to be inter- 

ligated at midnight, the chirurgeon having declared that you are 

ftulficiently recovered to undergo the torture (if needful) a second 

P 



210 Gl^Y FAWKES. 

time. Now listen to me. The occurrence of last night has 
made my mother suspicious, and she Avatches my proceed ings 
with a jealous eye. She is at this moment with a iemale pri- 
soner in tiie IJeauchamp Tower, or I should not be able to visit 
you. Slie has consented, iiowever, to let me bring in your 
supper. You must then change dresses with me. Being about 
\ny height, you may easily pass lor me, and I will take care 
there is no light below, so that your features will not be distin- 
guislicd." 

Viviana would have checked her, but the other would not be 
interrupted. 

"As soon as you are ready," she continued, "you must lock 
the door upon me. You must then descend the short flight of 
steps before you, and pass as quickly as you can through the 
room where you will see my father and mother. As soon as you 
are out of the door, turn to the left, and go straight forward to 
the By-ward Tower. Show this pass to the warders. It is 
made out in my name, and they will suffer you to go forth. Do 
the same with the warders at the next gate, — the Middle 
Tower, — and again at the Bulwark Gate. That passed, you are 
free." 

" And what will become of you ?" asked Viviana, with a 
bewildered look. 

" Never mind me," rejoined Ruth : " I shall be sufficiently 
rewarded if I save you. And now, farewell. Be ready at the 
time appointed." 

" I cannot consent," returned Viviana. 

" You have no choice," replied Ruth, breaking from her, and 
hurrying out of the room. 

Time, as it ever does, when expectation is on the rack, 
appeared to pass with unusual slowness. But as the hour at 
length drew near, Viviana wished it farther off. It was with 
the utmost trepidation that she heard the key turn in the lock, 
and beheld Ruth enter the cell with the evening meal. 

Closing the door, and setting down the provisions, the jailer's 
daughter hastily divested herself of her dress, which was of brown 
serge, as well as of her coif and kerchief, while Viviana imitated 
her example. Without pausing to attire herself in the other's 
garments, Ruth then assisted Viviana to put on the dress she 
had just laid aside, and arranged her hair and the head-gear so 
skilfully, that the disguise was complete. 

Hastily whispering some further instructions to her, and 
explaining certain peculiarities in her gait and deportment, she 
then jM'essed her to her bosom, and led her to the door. Viviana 
would have remonstrated, but Ruth pushed her through it, and 
closed it. 

There was now no help, so Viviana, though with great pain to , 
herself, contrived to turn the key in the lock. Descending the 



THE jailer's daughter. Sll 

steps, she fonnd herself in a small circular chamber, in which 
Ipgreve and his wife were seated at a table, discussing their 
evening meal. The sole light was afforded by a few dyin"- 
embers on the hearth. 

" What I has she done, already?" demanded the old woman, 
as Viviana appeared. "Why hast thou not brought the jellv 
with thee, if she has not eaten it all, and those cates, which 
Master Pilchard, the chirurgeon, ordered her? Go and fetch 
them directly. They will finish our repast daintily ; and there 
are other matters too, which I dare say she has not touched. 
She will pay for them, and that will make them the sweeter. 
Go back, I say. What dost thou stand there for, as if thou wert 
thunderstruck ? Dost hear me, or not ?" 

" Let the wench alone, dame," growled Ipgreve. ** You 
frighten her." 

" So I mean to do," replied the old woman ; " she deserves to 
be frightened. Hark thee, girl, we must get an order from her 
on some wealthy Catholic family without delay — for I don't 
think she will stand the trial to-niiiht." 

" Nor I," added Ipgreve, " especially as she is to be placed oiv 
the rack." 

" She has a chain of gold round her throat, I have observed," 
said the old woman ; " we must get that." 

" I have it," said Viviana, in a low tone, and imitating as well 
as she could the accents of Ruth. " Here it is." 

" Did she give it thee ?" cried the old woman, getting up, and 
grasping Viviana's lacerated fingers with such force, that she had 
difficulty in repressing a scream. " Did she give it thee, I say?" 
*' She gave it me for you," gasped Viviana. " Take it." 
While the old woman held the chain to the fire, and called tO' 
her husband to light a lamp, that she might feast her greedy 
eyes upon it, Viviana flew to the door. 

Just as she reached it, the shrill voice of Dame Ipgreve 
arrested her. 

" Come back !" cried the dame. " Whither art thou going at 
this time of night ? I will not have thee stir forth. Come back, 
I say." 

" Pshaw I let her go," interposed Ipgreve. " I dare say she 
hath an appointment on the Green with young Nicholas 
Hardesty, the warder. Go, wench. Be careful of thyself, and 
return within the hour." 

" If she does not, she will rue it," added the dame. " Go, 
then, and I will see the prisoner." 

Viviana required no further permission. Starting off as she 
had been directed on the left, she ran as fast as her feet could 
carry her ; and, passing between two arched gateways, s(K)a 
reached the By-ward Tower. Showing the pass to the warder, 
he chucked her under the chin, and, drawing an immense bolt, 

P2 



212 GUY FAWKES. 

ojicncd the wicket, and jzallantly helped her to pass through it. 
Uhe like good success altendcd her at the Middle Tower, and 
at the Bulwark Gate. Scarcely able to credit her senses, and 
doubting whether she was indeed free, she hurried on till she 
came to the opening leading to the stairs at Petty Wales. As 
she hesitated, uncertain what to do, a man advanced towards and 
addressed her by name. It was Humphrey Chetham. Over- 
come by emotion, Viviana sank into his arms, and in another 
moment she was placed in a wherry, which was ordered to be 
rowed towards Westminster. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE COUNTERPLOT, 



Startled, but not dismayed — for he was a man of great courage 
• — by the sudden address and appearance of Guy Fawkes, Lord 
3iounteagle instantly sj)rang to his feet, and drawing his sword, 
put himself into a posture of defence. 

" You have betrayed me," he cried, seizing Tresham with his 
left hand ; " but if I fall, you shall fall with me." 

" You have betrayed yourself, my lord," rejoined Guy Fawkes; 
*' or rather. Heaven has placed you in our hands as an instru- 
ment for the liberation of Viviana Radcliffe, You must take an 
oath of secrecy — a binding oath, — such as, being a good Catholic, 
you cannot break, — not to divulge what has come to your know- 
ledge. Nay, you must join me and my confederates, or you 
quit not this spot with life." 

" I refuse your terms," i-eplicd Mounteagle, resolutely ; ** I will 
never conspire against the monarch to whom I have sworn alle- 
giance. I will not join you. I will not aid you in procuring 
Viviana Radcliffe 's release. Nor will I take the oath you pro- 
•pose. On the contrary, I arrest you as a traitor, and I connnand 
you, Tresham, in the King's name, to assist me in his ca])ture." 

But suddenly extricatinghiuiself from the grasp imposed upon 
him, and placing Guy Fawkes between him and the Earl, 
Tresham rejoined, — 

" It is time to throw off the mask, my good lord and brother. 
I can render you no assistance. I am sworn to this league, and 
must support it. Unless you assent to the conditions proposed, — 
and which for your own sake I would counsel you to do, — I 
must, despite our near relationshij), take part against you, — 
even," he added, significantly, "if your destruction should be 
resolved upon." 

** I will sell my life dearly, as you shall find," replied Mount- 



THE COUNTERPLOT, 213 

eagle. "And, but for the sake of my dear lady, your sister, I 
would stab you where you stand." 

" Your lordship will find resistance in vain," replied Guy 
Fawkes, keeping his eye steadily fixed upon him. " We seek 
not your life, but your co-operation. You are a prisoner." 

"A prisoner I" echoed Mounteagle, derisively. "You have 
not secured me yet." 

And as he spoke, he rushed towards the door, but his depar- 
ture was checked by Bates, who presented himself at the entrance 
of the passage with a drawn sword in his hand. At the same 
moment, Catesby and Keyes issued from the closet, while Garnet 
and the other conspirators likewise emerged from their hiding- 
places. Hearing the noise behind him, Lord Mounteagle 
turned, and beholding the group, uttered an exclamation of sur- 
prise and rage. 

" T am fairly entrapped," he said, sheathing his sword, and 
advancing towards them. " Fool that I was, to venture hither!" 

" These regrets are too late, my lord," replied Catesby. 
*'You came hither of your own accord. But being here, 
nothing, except compliance with our demands, can ensure your 
departure." 

"Yes, one thing else," thought Mounteagle, — "cunning. It 
shall go hard if I cannot outwit you. Tresham will act with 
me. I know his treacherous nature too well to doubt which way 
he will incline. Interest, as well as relationship, binds him 
to me. He will acquaint me with their plans. I need not, 
therefore, compromise myself by joining them. If I take the 
oath of secrecy, it will suffice — and I will find means of eluding 
the obligation I may thus make my own bargain with Salis- 
bury. But I must proceed cautiously. Too sudden a com- 
pliance might awaken their suspicions." 

" My lord," said Catesby, who had watched his countenance 
narrowly, and distrusted its expression, " we must have no 
double-dealing. Any attem{)t to play us false will prove fatal to 
yon." 

" I have not yet consented to your terms, Mr. Catesby," re- 
plied Mounteagle, " and I demand a few moments' reflection 
before I do so." 

" What say you, gentlemen ?" said Catesby. " Do you agree 
to his lordship's request ?" 

There was a general answer in the affirmative. 

"I would also confer for a moment alone with my brother 
Tresham," said Mounteagle. 

" That cannot be, my lord," rejoined Garnet, peremptorily. 
" And take heed you meditate no treachery towards us, or you 
will destroy yourself here and hercafier." 

" I have no desire to speak with him, father," observed 
Tresham. " Let him declare what he has to say before you all." 



214. GUY FAWKES. 

Mounteagle looked hard at him, but he made no remark. 

" In my opinion, we ought not to trust him," observed Ke3'e5?. 
*' It is plain lie is decidedly opposed to us. And if the oath is 
proj)oscd to him, he may lake it with some mental reservation." 

" / will guard against that," replied Garnet. 

" If I take the oath, I will keep it, father," rejoined Mount- 
oao-le. " But I have not vet decided." 

" You must do so, then, quickly, my lord," returned Catcsby. 
*'You shall have five minutes for reflection. But first, you 
must deliver up your sword." 

Tlie Earl started. 

" We mean ynu no treachery, my lord," observed Keycs, 
*'and expect to be dealt with with equal fairness." 

Surrendering his sword to Catesby, Mounteagle then walked 
to the farther end of the room, and leaning against the wall, 
with his back to the conspirators, appeared buried in thought. 

" Take Treshain aside," whispered Catesby to Wright. " I 
do not wish him to overhear our conference. Watch him 
narrowly, and see that no signal passes between him and Lord 
Mounteagle." 

Wright obeyed ; and the others gathering closely together, 
began to converse in a low tone. 

"It will not do to put him to death," observed Garnet. 
** From what he stated to Tresham, it appears that his servant 
was aware of his coming hither. If he disappears, therefore, 
search will be immediately made, and all will be discovered. 
We must either instantly secure ourselves by flight, and give up 
the enterprise, or trust him." 

" You are right, father," replied Rook wood. " The danger 



IS nnmment." 



" We are safe at present," observed Percy, "and may escape 
to France or Flanders before information can be given against 
us. Nay, we may carry off Mounteagle with us, for that matter. 
But I am loth to trust him." 

" So am I," rejoined Catcsby. " I do not like his looks." 

" There is no help," said Fawkes. " We mus^t trust him, or 
give up the enterprise. He may materially aid us, and has 
himsclt asserted that he can procure Viviana's liberation from 
the Tower." 

"Pshaw 1" exclaimed Catcsby, impatiently. " What has that 
to do with the aU-inqiortant question we are now considering?" 

" Much," returned Fawkes. " And I will not move further 
in the matter unless that ])()int is insisted on." 

"You have become strangely interested in Viviana of late,'* 
observed Catcsby, sarcastically. " Could I Guspect you of so 
light a passion, I should say you loved her." 

A deep flu.-h dyed Fawkcs's swarthy cheeks, but he answered 
'n a voice of constrained calnmcss. 



THE COUNTERPLOT. 215 

** I do love her, — as a daughter." 

*' Humph I" exclaimed the other, drily. 

" Catesby," rejoined Fawkes, sternly, " you know me well — ■ 
too well, to suppose I would resort to any paltry subterfuge. I 
am willing to let what you have said pass. But I counsel you 
not to jest thus in future." 

"Jest I" exclaimed Catesby. *'I was never more serious in 
my life.'* 

" Then you do me wrong," retorted Fawkes, fiercely ; " and 
you will repeat the insinuation at your peril." 

" My sons — my sons," interposed Garnet, " what means this 
sudden — this needless quarrel, at a moment when we require 
the utmost calmness to meet the danger that assails us ? Guy 
Fawkes is right. Viviana must be saved. If we desert her, our 
cause will never prosper. But let us proceed step by step, and 
first decide upon what is to be done with Lord Mounteagle." 

** I am filled with perplexity," replied Catesby. 

" Then 1 will decide for you," replied Percy. " Our project 
must be abandoned." 

" Never," replied Fawkes, energetically. " Fly, and secure 
your own safety. I will stay and accomplish it alone." 

" A brave resolution !" exclaimed Catesby, tendering him his 
hand, which the other cordially grasped. " I will stand by you 
to the last. No — we have advanced too far to retreat." 

" Additional caution will be needful," observed Ke3'es. " Can 
•^'e not make it a condition with Lord Mounteagle to retire, till 
the blow is struck, to his mansion at Hoxton ?" 

" That would be of no avail," replied Garnet. *' We must 
trust him whollv, or not at all." 

" There I agree with you, father," said Percy. " Let us pro- 
pose the oath of secrecy to him, and detain him here until we 
have found some secure retreat, utterly unknown to him, or to 
Tresham, whence we can correspond with our friends. A few 
days will show whether he has betrayed us or not. We need 
not visit this place again till the moment for action arrives." 

"You need not visit it again at all," rejoined Fawkes. 
*' Everything is prepared, and I will undertake to fire the train. 
Prepare for what is to follow the explosion, and leave the 
management of that to me." 

" I cannot consent to such a course, my son," said Garnet. 
*' The whole risk will thus be yours." 

" The whole glory will be mine, also, father," rejoined Fawkes, 
cnthusiasticall}'. "I pray you, let me have my own way." 

"Well, be it as you will, my son," returned Garnet, with 
affected reluctance. " I will not oppose the hand of Heaven, 
which clearly points you out as the chief agent in this mighty 
enterprise. In reference to what Percy has said about a retreat 
till Lord Mounteau;le's trust-worthiness can be ascertained," ho 



216 GUY FAWKE55. 

added to Catcsby, "I have just bethought me of a large retired 
liouse on the borders of Enfield Chase, called White Webbs. 
It has been recently taken by Mrs. Brooksby, and lier sister, 
Anne Vaux, and will afford us a safe asylum." 

" An excellent plan, father," cried Catesby. " Since Guj 
Fawkcs is willing to undertake the risk, we will leave Lord 
iVlounteagle in his charge, and go there at once." 

" What must be done with Tresham ?" asked Percy. " We 
fc-annot take him with us, nor must he know of our retreat." 

" Leave him with me," said Fawkcs. 

" You will be at a disadvantage,'"' observed Catesby, " should 
he take part, as there is reason to fear he may do, with Lord 
Mounteagle." 

" They are both unarmed," returned Fawkes ; " but were it 
otherwise, I would answer with my head for their detention." 

" All good saints guard you, my son I" exclaimed Garnet. 
*« Henceforth, we resign the custody of the powder to you." 

" It will be in safe keeping," replied Favvkes. 

The party then advanced towards Lord Mounteagle, who, 
hearing their approach, instantly faced them. 

" Your decision, my lord?" demanded Catesby. 

" You shall have it in a word, sir," replied Mounteagle, firmly. 

" I will not join you, but I v/ill take the required oath of 
secrecy." 

"Is this your final resolve, my lord?" rejoined Catesby. 

" It is," replied the Earl. 

" It nuist content us," observed Garnet ; " though we hoped 
you would have lent your active services to further a cause, 
having for its sole object the restoration of the church to which 
you belong." 

" I know not the means whereby you propose to restore it, 
father," replied Mounteagle, "and I do not desire to know them. 
But I guess that they are dark and bloody, and as such I can 
take no part in them." 

" And you refuse to give us any counsel or assistance ?'* 
pursued Garnet. 

" I will not betray you," replied Mounteagle. " I can say 
nothing further." 

" I would rather he promised too little, than too much," 
whispered Catesby to Garnet. " I begin to think him sincere." 

"1 am of the same opinion, my son," returned Garnet. 

" One thing you shall do, before / consent to set you free, en 
any terms, my lord," observed (niy Fawkcs. "You shall engage 
to procure the liberation of Viviana Iladclifre from the Tower. 
You told Tresham you could easily accomplish it." 

" I scarcely knew what I said," replied Mounteagle, with a 
look ot embarrassment. 

" You spoke confidently, my lord," rejoined Fawkcs. 



THE COUNTERPLOT. 217 

** Because I had no idea I should be compelled to make good 
my words," returned the Earl, " But as a Catholic, and related 
by marriage to Tresham, %Yho is a suspected person, any active 
exertions in her behalf on my part might place me in jeopardy.'" 

" This excuse shall not avail you, my lord," replied Fawkes. 
" You must weigh your own safety against hers. You stir not 
hence till you have sworn to free her." 

" I must perforce assent, since you will have no refusal," re- 
plied Mounteagle. " But I almost despair of success. If I ca» 
effect her deliverance, I swear to do so." 

" Enough," replied Fawkes. 

" And now, gentlemen," said Catesby, appealing to the othere^ 
*'are you willing to let Lord Mounteagle depart upon the pro- 
posed terms ?" 

" We are," they replied. 

"I will administer the oath at once," said Garnet ; " and yois 
will bear in mind, my son," he added, in a stern tone to the 
Earl, " that it will be one which cannot be violated without per» 
dition to yoin' soul." 

*' I am willing to lake it," replied Mounteagle. 

Producing a primer, and motioning the Earl to kneel before 
hifii, Garnet then proposed an oath of the most solemn and 
binding description. The other repeated it after him, and at 
its conclusion placed the book to his lips. 

'"' Are you satisfied ?" he asked, rising. 

"I am," replied Garnet. 

" And so am I," thought Tresham, who stood in the rear, 
^ — that he will perjure himself," 

" Am I now at liberty to depart ?" inquired the Earl. 

" Not yet, my lord," replied Catesby. " You must remain 
here till midnight." 

Lord Mounteagle looked uneasy, but seeing remonstrance 
would be useless, he preserved a sullen silence. 

" You need have no fear, my lord," said Catesby. " But we 
must take such precautions as will ensure our safety, in case you 
intend us any treachery." 

" You cannot doubt me, sir, after the oath I have tal<en,'* 
replied Mounteagle, haughtily. " But since you constitute your- 
self my jailer, I must abide your pleasure," 

"If 1 am }oar jailer, my lord," rejoined Catesby, "I will 
prove to you that I am not neglectful of my office. \s Ai it • 
please you to follow me ?" 

The Earl bowed in acquiescence; and Catesby, marching 
before him to a small room, the windows of which were carefully 
barred, pointed to a chair, and instantly retiring, locked the 
door upon him. He then returned to the others, and taking 
Guy Fawkes aside, observed in a low tone, 

"Wo shall set out instantly for White Webbs. You willl 



218 GUY FAWKES. 

remain on guard with Tresham, whom you will, of course, keep 
in ignorance of our proceedings. After you have set the Earl 
at liberty, you can follow us if you choose. But take heed you 
«ire not observed." 

" Fear nothing," replied Fawkes. 

Soon after this, Catesby, and the rest of the conspirators, with 
the exception of Guy Fawkes and Tresham, quitted the room, 
<md the former concluded they were about to leave the house. 
He made no remark, however, to his companion, but getting 
between him and the door, folded his arms upon his breast, 
<ind continued to pace backwards and forwards before it, 

"Am la prisoner, as well as Lord Mounteagle ?" asked Tre- 
sham, after a pause. 

" You must remain with me here till midnight," replied 
Fawkes. " We shall not be disturbed." 

" What ! are the others gone ?" cried Tresham. 

" They are," was the reply. 

Tresham's countenance fell, and he appeared to be meditating 
some project, which he could not muster courage to execiUe. 

" Be warned by the past, Tresham," said Fawkes, who had 
regarded him fixedly for some minutes. " If 1 find reason to 
<loubt you, I will put it out of your power to betray us a second 
time." 

" You have no reason to doubt me," replied Tresham, with 
apparent candour. *' I only wondered that our friends should 
leave me without any intimation of their purpose. It is for me, 
not you, to apprehend some ill design. Am 1 not to act with 
you further?" 

" That depends upon yourself, and on the proofs you give of 
jour sincerity," repiied Fawkes. " Answer me frankly. Do 
you think Lord iSIounteagle will keep his oath ?" 

" I will stake my life ujion it," replied Tresham. 

The conversation then dropped, and no attempt was made on 
either side to renew it. Li this way several hours passed, when 
at length the silence was broken by Tresham, who requested 
})ermission to go in search of some refreshment; and Guy 
Fawkes assenting, they descended to the lower room, and par- 
took of a slight repast. 

Nothing further worthy of note occiuTcd. On the arrival of 
the ajijiointed hour, Guy Fawkes signified to his companion that 
he might liberate Lord Mounteagle ; and immediately availing 
himself of tlie permission, Tresham repaired to ihe chamber, and 
threw open the door. The Earl immediately came forth, and 
they returned together to the room in which Guy Fawkes 
'■emaincd on guard. 

" You are now at libert}^ to depart, my lord," said the latter ; 
*' and Tresham can accompany you, if he thinks proper. Re- 
member that you have sworn to procure Viviana's liberation.* 



THE COUNTERPLOT. 219 



« 



I do,*' replied the Earl. 

And he then quitted the house with Tresham. 

" You have had a narrow escape, my lord," remarked the 
latter as they approached Whitehall, and paused for a moment 
under the postern of the great western gate. 

" True," replied the Earl ; " but I do not regret the risk I 
have run. They are now wholly in my power." 

*' You forget your oath, my lord," said Tresham. 

** If I do," replied the Earl, " I but follow your example. 
You have broken one equally solemn, equally binding, and 
would break a thousand more were they imposed upon you. 
But I will overthrow this conspiracy, and yet not violate mine." 

*' I see not how that can be, my lord," replied Tresham. 

" You shall learn in due season," replied the Earl. " I have 
had plenty of leisure for reflection in that dark hole, and have 
hit upon a plan which, I think, cannot fail." 

" I hope I am no party to it, my lord," rejoined Tresham. " I 
dare not hazard myself among them further." 

*' I cannot do without you," replied Mounteagle ; " but I will 
ensure you against all danger. It will be necessary for you, 
however, to act with the utmost discretion, and keep a constant 
guard upon every look and movement, as well as upon your 
words. You must fully regain the confidence of these men, and 
lull them into security." 

" I see your lordship's drift," replied Tresham. " You wish 
them to proceed to the last point, to enhance the value of the 
discovery." 

" Right," replied the Earl. " The plot must not be discovered 
till just before its outbreak, when its magnitude and danger will 
be the more apparent. The reward wili then be proportionate. 
Ps'ow, you understand me, Ti'esham.'" 

" Fully," replied the other. 

" Return to your own house," rejoined Mounteagle. " We 
need hold no further communication together till the time for 
action arrives." 

" And that will not be before the meeting of Parliament," 
replied Tresham ; " for they intend to whelm the King and all 
his nobles in one common destruction." 

" By Heaven I a brave design !" cried Mounteagle. " It Is a 
pity to mar it. I knew it was a des{>eratc and daring ])rojcct, 
but should never have conceived aught like this. Its discovery 
will indeed occasion universal consternation." 

" It may benefit you and me to divulge it, my lord," said 
Tresham; "but the disclosure will deeply and lastingly injure 
the Church of Home." 

" It would injure it more deeply if the plot succeeded," replied 
Mounteagle, " because all loyal Catholics must disapprove so 
horrible and sanguinary a design. But we will not discuss the 



220 GUY FAWKES. 

question further, though what you have said confirms my pur- 
pose, and removes any misgivino: I might have felt as to the 
betrayal. Farewell, Trcsham. Keep a watchful eye upon the 
conspirators, and communicate with me should any change take 

f»lace in their plans. We may not meet for some time. Par- 
lament, though summoned for the third of October, will, in all 
probability, be prorogued till November." 

" In that case," replied Trcsham, " you will postpone your 
disclosure likewise till November ?" 

*' Assuredly," replied Mounteagle. " The King must be con- 
vinced of his danger. If it were found out now, he would think 
lightly of it. But if he has actually set foot upon the mine which 
a single spark might kindle to his destruction, he will duly 
appreciate the service rendered him. Farewell I and do not 
neglect my counsel." 



CHAPTER X. 

WHITE WEBBS. 

Tarrying for a short time within the house after the departure 
of the others, Guy Fawkes lighted a lantern, and concealing it 
beneath his cloak, proceeded to the cellar, to ascertain that the 
magazine of powder was safe. Satisfied of this, he made all 
secure, and was about to return to the house, when he perceived 
a figure approaching him. Standing aside, but keeping on his 
guard for fear of a surprise, he would have allowed the person to 
pass, but the other halted, and after a moment's scrutinv 
addressed him by name in the tones of Humphrey Chetham. 

" You seem to haunt this spot, young sir," said P'awkes, in 
answer to the address. " This is the third time we have met 
hereabouts." 

" On the last occasion," replied Chetham, " I told you Viviana 
was a prisoner in the Tower. I have now better news for you. 
She is free." 

*' Free !" exclaimed Fawkes, joyfiilly. " By Lord Mount- 
eagle's instrumentality ? — But I forget. He has only just left 
me." 

" She has been freed by wt/ instrumentality," replied the 
young merchant. " She escaped from the Tower a few hours 
ago." 

'• Where is she ?" demanded Guy Fawkes, eagerly. 

" In a boat at the stairs near the Parliament House," replied 
Chetham. 

" Heaven and Our Lady be praised !" exclaimed Fawkes. 
" This is more than I hoped for. Your news is so good, young 
sir, that I can scarce credit it." 



WHITE WEBBS. 221 

" Come with me to the boat, and you shall soon be satisfied of 
the truth of my statement," rejoined Chetham. 

And followed by Guy Fawkes, he hurried to the river side, 
where a wherry w^as moored. Within it sat Viviana, covered by 
the tilt. 

Assisting her to land, and finding; she was too much exhausted 
to walk, Guy Fawkes took her in his arms, and carried her to 
the house he had just quitted. 

Humphrey Chetham followed as soon as he had dismissed the 
waterman. Placing his lovely burthen in a seat, Guy Fawkes 
instantly went in search of such restoratives as the place afforded. 
Viviana was extremely faint, but after she had swallowed a glass 
of wine, she revived, and, looking around her, inquired where 
she was. 

*' Do not ask," replied Fawkes ; " let it suffice you are in 
safety. And now," he added, " perhaps, Humphrey Chetham 
will inform me in what manner he contrived your escape. I am 
impatient to know." 

The young merchant then gave the required information, and 
Viviana added such particulars as were necessary to the full 
understanding of the story. Guy Fawkes could scarcely control 
himself when she related the tortures she had endured, nor was 
Chetham less indignant. 

"You rescued me just in time," said Viviana. "I should 
have sunk under the next application." 

" Thank Heaven ! you have escaped it," exclaimed Fawkes. 
*' You owe much to Humphrey Chetham, Viviana." 

" I do, indeed," she replied. 

*' And can you not requite it ?" he returned. *' Can you not 
make him happy ? — Can you not make me happy?" 

Viviana's pale cheek was instantly suffused with blushes, but 
she made no answer. 

" Oh, Viviana !" cried Humphrey Chetham, ** you hear what 
is said. If you could doubt my love before, you must be con- 
vinced of it now. A hope will make me happy. Have I that ?" 

" Alas ! no," she answered. " It would be the height of 
cruelty, after your kindness, to deceive you. You have not." 

The young merchant turned aside to hide his emotion. 

" Not even a hope I" exclaimed Guy Fawkes, " after what he 
has done. Viviana, I cannot understand you. Docs gratitude 
form no part of your nature ?" 

" I hope so," she replied, " nay, I am sure so, — for I feel the 
deepest gratitude towards IIum})hrey Chetham. But gratitude 
is not love, and must not be mistaken for it." 

" I understand the distinction too well," returned the young 
merchant, sadly. 

''*' It is more than I do," rejoined Guy Fawkes; "and I will 
frankly confess that I think the important services Humphrey 



222 GUY FAWKES. 

Chetham has rendered you entitle him to your hand. It is 
seldom — whatever poets may feip;n, — that love is so strongly 
proved as his has been ; and it ought to be adequately requited.'* 

" Say no more about it, I entreat," interposed Chetham. 

" But I will deliver my opinion," rejoined Guy Fawkes ; 
" because I am sure what I advise is for Viviana's happiness. 
No one can love her better than you. No one is more worthy 
of her. Nor is there any one to whom I so much desire to see 
her united." 

" Oh, Heaven I" exclaimed Viviana. " This is worse than 
the torture." 

" What mean you ?" exclaimed Fawkes, in astonishment. 

" She means," interposed Chetham, *' that this is not the 
fitting season to urge the subject — that she will never marry." 

" True — true," replied Viviana. " If I ever did marry — 1 
oucjlit to select you." 

" You ought," replied Fawkes. " And I know nothing of the 
female heart, if it can be insensible to youth, devotion, and 
manly appearance like that of Humphrey Chetham." 

" You do know nothing of it," rejoined Chetham, bitterly. 
** Women's fancies are unaccountable." 

*' Such is the received opinion," replied Fawkes ; " but as I 
am ignorant of the sex, I can only judge from report. You are 
the person I should imagine she would love — nay, to be frank, 
whom I thought she did love." 

" No more," said Humphrey Chetham. " It is painful both 
to Viviana and to me." 

" This is not a time for delicacy," rejoined Guy Fawkes. 
** Viviana has given me the privilege of a father with her. And 
where her happiness is so much concerned as in the present 
case, I should imperfectly discharge my duty if I did not speak 
out. It would sincerely rejoice me, and I am sure contribute 
materially to her own happiness, if she would unite herself 
to you." 

" I cannot — I cannot," she rejoined. " I will never marry." 

" You hear what she says," remarked Chetham. " Do not 
nrge the matter further." 

" I admire maiden delicacy and reserve," replied Fawkes ; 
" but when a man has acted as you have done, he deserves to be 
treated with frankness. I am sure Viviana loves you. Let her 
tell you so." 

" You are mistaken," replied Chetham; "and it is time you 
should be undeceived. She loves another." 

" Is this so ?" cried Fawkes, in astonishment. 

She made no answer. 

" Whom do you love ?" he asked. 

Still, no answer. 



WHITE WEBBS, 22.1 

** I will tell you whom she loves — and let her contradict me 
it I am wrong," said Chetham. 

" Oh, no ! — no ! — in pity spare me !" cried Viviana. 

« Speak !"— thundered Fawkes. " Who is it ?'* 

" Yourself," replied Chetham. 

"What!" exclaimed Fawkes, recoilinpi;, — "love me! I wilt 
not believe it. She loves me as a father — but nothins; more — 
nothing more. But you were right. Let us change the subject. 
A more fitting season may arrive for its discussion." 

After some further conversation, it was agreed that Viviana 
should be taken to White Webbs ; and leaving her in charge of 
Humphrey Chetham, Guy Fawkes went in seai'ch of a convey- 
ance to Enfield. 

Traversing the Strand, — every hostel in which was closed, — ' 
he turned up Wych-street, immediately on the right of which 
there was a large inn (still in existence), and entering the yard, 
discovered a knot of carriers moving about with lanterns in their 
hands. To his inquiries respecting a conveyance to Enfield, one 
of them answered, that he was about to return thither with his 
waggon at four o'clock, — it was then two, — and should be glad 
to lake him and his friends. Overjoyed at the intelligence, and 
at once agreeing to the man's terms, Guy Fawkes hurried back 
to his companions, and, with the assistance of Humphrey 
Chetham, contrived to carry Viviana (for she was utterly unable 
to support herself) to the inn-yard, where she was immediately 
placed in the waggon, on a heap of fresh straw. 

About an hour after this, but long before daybreak, the car- 
rier attached his horses to the wago-on, and set out. Guv 
Fawkes and Humphrey Chetham were seated near Viviana,. 
but little was said during the journey, which occupied about 
three hours. By this time it was broad daylight; and as tlie 
carrier stopped at the door of a small inn, Guy Fawkes alighted, 
and inquired the distance to White Webbs. 

"It is about a mile and a half off," replied the man. "If 
you pursue that lane, it will bring you to a small village about 
half a mile from this, where you are sure to find some one who 
will gladly guide you to the house, which is a little out of the 
road, on the borders of the forest." 

He then assisted Viviana to alight, and Humphrey Chetham 
descending at the same time, the party took the road indicated — 
a winding country lane with high hedges, broken by beautiful 
timber — and proceeding at a slow pace, they arrived in about 
half an hour at a little cluster of cottages, which Guy Fawkes 
guessed to be the village alluded to by the carrier. As they 
approached it, a rustic leaped a hedge, and was about to cross to 
another field, wlien Guy Fawkes calling to biin, inquired the 
way to White Webbs. 



2*24. (iVY FAWKES. 

*' I nin goinu in that direction," replied the man. " If you 
•desire it, 1 will show you the road." 

" I shall feel much indebted to you, friend," returned Fawkes, 
**and will reward you for your trouble." 

" I want no reward," returned the countryman, trudging 
forward. 

Following their guide, after a few minutes' brisk walking they 
reached the borders of the forest, and took their way along a 
patch of greensward that skirted it. In some places their track 
was impeded by gigantic thorns and brushwood, while at others 
avenues opened upon them, affording them peeps into the heart 
of the wood. It was a beautiful sylvan scene. And as at length 
they arrived at the head of a long glade, at the farther end of 
which a herd of deer were seen, with their branching antlers 
jiiingling with the overhanging boughs, Viviana could not help 
pausing to admire it. 

" King James often hunts within the forest," observed the 
countryman. " Indeed, I heard one of the rangers say it was 
not unlikely he might be here to-day. He is at Theobald's 
Palace now." 

" Indeed !" exclaimed Fawkes. " Let us proceed. We lose 
lime. Are we far from the house ?" 

" Not above a quarter of a mile," was the answer. "You will 
see it at the next turn of the road." 

As the countryman had intimated, they speedily perceived the 
roof and tall chimneys of an ancient house above the trees, 
.and as it was now impossible to mistake the road, Guy Fawkes 
thanked their guide for his trouble, and would have rewarded him, 
but he refused the gratuity, and leaping a hedge, disappeared. 

Pursuing the road, they shortly afterwards arrived at a gate 
leading to the house — a large building, erected probably at the 
beginning of Elizabeth's reign — and entering it, they passed 
xmder an avenue of trees. On approaching the mansion, they 
observed that many of the windows were closed, and the whole 
appearance of the place was melancholy and deserted. The 
garden w^as overgrown with weeds, and the door looked as if it 
was rarely opened. 

Not discouraged by these appearances, but rather satisfied by 
them of the security of the asylum, Guy Fawkes proceeded to 
the back of the house, and entering a court, the flags and stones 
of which were covered with moss, while the interstices were 
filled with long grass, Guy Fawkes knocked against a small door, 
and, after repeating the summons, it was answered by an old 
woman-servant, who popped her head out of an upper window, 
and demanded his business. 

Guy Fawkes was about to inquire for Mrs. Brooksby, when 
■another head, which proved to be that of Catesby, appeared at 
the window. On seeing Fawkes and his companions, Catesby 



WHITE WEBBS. ^^5 

instantly descended, and unfastened the door. The house 
proved far more comfortable within than its exterior promised; 
and the old female domestic having taken word to Anne Vaux 
that Viviana was below, the former lady, who had not yet risen, 
sent for her to her chamber, and provided everything for her 
comfort. 

Guy Fawkes and Humphrey Chetham, neither of whom had 
rested during the night, were glad to obtain a few hours' repose 
on the floor of the first room into which they were shown, 
and they were not disturbed until the day had considerably 
advanced, when Catesby thought fit to rouse them from their 
slumbers. 

Explanations were then given on both sides. Chetham de- 
tailed the manner of Viviana's escape from the Tower, and 
Oatesby in his turn acquainted them that Father Oldcorne was ia 
the house, having found his way thither after his escape from the 
dwelling at Lambeth. Guy Fawkes was greatly rejoiced at the in- 
telligence, and shortly afterwards had the satisfaction of meetinpj 
with the priest. At noon, the whole party assembled, with the 
exception of Viviana, who, by the advice of Anne Vaux, kept 
lier chamber, to recruit herself after the sufferings she had 
undergone. 

Humphrey Chetham, of whom no suspicions were now enter- 
tained, and of whom Catesby no longer felt any jealousy, waa 
invited to stay in the house ; and he was easily induced to pass 
his time near Viviana, although he might not be able to see her. 
Long and frequent consultations were held by the conspirators, 
and letters were despatched by Catesby to the elder Winter at 
his seat, Huddington, in Worcestershire, entreating him to make 
every preparation for the crisis, as well as to Sir Everard Digby, 
to desire him to assemble as many friends as he could muster 
against the meeting of Parliament, at Dunchurch, in Warwick- 
shire, under the plea of a grand hunting-party. 

Arrangements were next made as to the steps to be taken 
by the different parties after the explosion. Catesby undertook, 
with a sufficient force, to seize the Princess Elizabeth, the 
eldest daughter of James the First, who was then at the resi- 
dence of the Earl of Harrington, near Coventry, and to proclaim 
her queen, in case the others should fail in securing the jirinces. 
It was supposed that Henry, Prince of Wales, (who, it need 
scarcely be mentioned, died in his youth,) would be present 
with the King, his father, in the Parliament House, and would 
perish with him ; and in this case, as Charles, Duke of York, 
(afterwards Charles the First,) would become successor to the 
throne, it was resolved that he should be seized by Percy, and 
instantly proclaimed. Other resolutions were decided upon 
and the whole time of the conspirators was spent in maturing 
their projects. 



» 



226 GUY FAWKES. 

And thus weeks, and even months, stole on. Viviana had 
coin])lctcly regained her strength, and passed a Hfe of perfect 
seclusion, seldom, if ever, mixing with the others. Slie, how- 
ever, look a kindly farewell of Humphrey Chetham, before his 
departure for Manchester (for which place he set out about a 
fortnight after his arrival at White Webbs, having first soui^ht 
out his servant, Martin Heydocke) ; but though strongly urged 
by Guy Fawkes, she would hold out no hopes of a change in 
her sentiments towards the young merchant. Meetings were 
occasionally held by the conspirators elsewhere, and Catesby 
and Fawkes had more than one interview^ with Tresham — but 
never, except in places where they were secure from a surprise. 

The latter end of September had now arrived, and the 
meeting of Parliament was still fixed for the third of October. 
On the last day of the month, Guy Fawkes prepared to start for 
town ; but before doing so he desired to see Viviana. They 
had not met for some weeks ; nor, indeed, since Fawkes had 
discovered the secret of her heart, (and perhaps of his own,) had 
they ever met with the same freedom as heretofore. As she 
entered the room, in which he awaited her coming, a tremor 
agitated his frame, but he had nerved himself for the interview, 
and speedily subdued the feeling. 

" I am starting for London, Viviana," he said, in a voice of 
forced calmness. " You may guess for what purpose. But as I 
may never behold you again, I would not part with you without 
a confession of my weakness. I will not deny that what Hum- 
phrey Chetham stated, and which you have never contradicted — 
namely, that you loved me, for I must speak out — has produced 
a strong effect uj)on me. I have endeavoured to conquer it, but 
it will return. Till I knew you I never loved, Viviana." 

" Indeed I" she exclaimed. 

" Never," he replied. "The fairest had not power to move 
me. But I grieve to say — notwithstanding my struggles — I do 
not continue equally insensible." 

" Ah !" she ejaculated, becoming as pale as death. 

*' Why should I hesitate to declare my feelings ? Why should 
I not tell you that — though blinded to it so long — I have dis- 
covered that I do love you ? Why should I hesitate to tell you 
that I regret this, and lament that we ever met ?" 

" What mean you?" cried Viviana, with a terrified look. 

"I will tell you," replied Fawkes. "Till I saw you, my 
thoughts were removed from earth, and fixed on one object. 
Till I saw you, I asked not to live, but to die the death of a 
martyr." 

"Die so still," rejoined Viviana. "Forget me — oh I forget 
me." 

" I cannot," replied Fawkes. " I have striven against it. 
But your image is perpetually before me. Nay, at this very 



WHITE V/EBBS. Z'lJ 

moment, when I am about to set out on the enterprise, 3'ou alone 
detain me." 

"I am glad of it," exclaimed Viviana, fervently. " Oh that I 
could prevent you — could save you !" 

" Save me !" echoed Fawkes, bitterly. " You destroy me." 

« How ?" she asked. 

*' Because I am sworn to this project," he rejoined ; " and if 
I were turned from it, I would perish by my own hand," 

*' Oh ! say not so," replied Viviana, *' but listen to me. Aban- 
don it, and I will devote myself to you." 

Guy Fawkes gazed at her for a moment passionately, and 
then, covering his face with his bands, appeared torn by con- 
flicting emotions. 

Viviana approached him, and pressing his arm, asked in an 
entreating voice, "Are you still determined to pursue your 
dreadful project?" 

"I am," replied Fawkes, uncovering his face, and gazing at 
her; **but, if I remain here a moment longer, I shall not be 
able to do so." 

" I will detain you, then," she rejoined, "and exercise the 
power I possess over you for your benefit," 

" No !" he replied, vehemently. " It must not be. Farewell, 
for ever !" 

And breaking from her, he rushed out of the room. 

As he gained the passage, he encountered Catesby, who looked 
abashed at seeing him. 

" I have overheard what has passed," said the latter, " and 
applaud your resolution. Few men, similarly circumstanced, 
would have acted as you have done." 

" You would not," said Fawkes, coldly. 

" Perhaps not," rejoined Catesby. " But that does not lessen 
my admiration of your conduct." 

" I am devoted to one object," replied Fawkes, " and nothing 
shall turn me from it." 

*' Remove yourself instantly from temptation, then," replied 
Catesby, " I will meet you at the cellar beneath the Parliament 
House to-morrow night." 

With this, he accompanied Guy Fawkes to the door; and the 
latter, without hazarding a look behind him, set out for London, 
where he arrived at nightfall. 

On the following night, Fawkes examined the cellar, and 
found it in all respects as he had left it; and, apprehensive lest 
some difficulty might arise, he resolved to make every prepara- 
tion. He, accordingly, pierced the sides of several of the bar- 
rels piled against the walls with a gimlet, and inserted in the 
holes small pieces of slow-burning match. Not content wiih 
this, he staved in the tops of the uppermost tier, and scattered 
powder among them to secure their instantaneous ignition. 

Q 2 



This flone, he took a powdor-horn, with which he was pro- 
vidrd, and kneellnni; down, and holding; his lantern so as to throw 
a light upon the floor, laid a train to one of the lower barrel?; 
and broujiht it within a few inches of the door, intendins: to 
fire it from that point. His arrangements completed, he arose, 
and muttered, 

" A vessel is pi'ovided for my escape in the river, and my 
companions advise me to use a slow match, which will allow me 
to get out of harm's way. But I will see the deed done, and if 
the train fails, will hold a torch to the barrels myself." 

At this juncture, a slight tap was heard without. 

Guy Fawkes instantly masked his lantern, and cautiously 
opening the door, beheld Catesby. 

" I am come to tell 3'ou that Parliament is prorogued," said 
the latter. " The House does not meet till the fifth of November. 
We have another month to wait." 

" I am sorry for it," rejoined Fawkes. " I have just laid the 
train. The lucky moment will pass." 

And, locking the door, he proceeded with Catesby to the 
adjoining house. 

They had scarcely been gone more than a second, when two 
figures muffled in cloaks emerged from behind a wall. 

" The train is laid," observed the foremost, " and they are 
gone to the house. You might seize them now without danger," 

" That will not answer my purpose," replied the other. " I 
will give them another month." 

" Another month !" replied the first speaker. " Who knows 
vvhat may happen in that time ? They may abandon their 
project." 

" There is no fear of that," replied the other. " But you had 
better go and join them." 



CHAPTER XL 

THE SIARRIAGE IN THE FOREST. 

Tresiiam, for it will have been conjectured that he was one of 
the speakers mentioned in the preceding chapter, on separating 
from Lord Mountcagle, took the same direction as the conspira- 
tors. He hesitated for some time before venturing to knock at 
the garden-gate ; and when he had done so, felt half-disposed to 
take to his heels. But shame restrained him; and hearing foot- 
steps approach, he gave the customary signal, and was instantly 
admitted by Guy Fawkes. 

" What brings you here ?" demanded the latter, as thejr 
entered the house, and made fast the door behind them. 




Q^^^y r_y^aa^;!veif ^uz^<^€vi^/ ^>^- 



.^ 



"y"^ 



MARRIAGE IN THE FOREST. 229 

" I have ju»t heard that Parliament is prorogued to the fifth 
of November," replied Tresham, " and came to tell you so." 

"I already know it," returned Fawkes, gloomily; "and for 
the first time feel some misgiving as to the issue of our 
enterprise." 

" Why so ?" inquired Tresham. 

" November is unlucky to me," rejoined Fawkes, " and I can- 
not recollect a year in my life in which some ill has not befallen 
me during that month, especially on the fifth day. On the last 
fifth of November, I nearly died of a fever at Madrid. It is a 
strange and imfortunate coincidence that the meeting of the Par- 
liament should be appointed for that particular day." 

'• Shall I tell you what I think it portends ?" hesitated 
Tresham. 

" Do so," replied Fawkes, " and speak boldly. I am no child 
to be frightened at shadows." 

"You have more than once declared your intention of perish- 
ing with our foes," rejoined Tresham. " The design, though 
prosperous in itself, may be fatal to you." 

" You are right," replied Fawkes. " I have little doubt I 
shall })erish on that day. You are both aware of my superstitious 
nature, and are not ignorant that many mysterious occurrences 
have combined to strengthen the feeling, — such as the dying 
words of the prophetess, Elizabeth Orton, — her warning speech 
when she was raised from the dead by Doctor Dee, — and lastly, 
the vision at St. Winifred's Well. What if I tell you the saint 
has again appeared to me ?" 

" In a dream ?" inquired Catesby, in a slightly sceptical tone. 

" Ay, in a dream," returned Fawkes. " But I saw her as 
plainly as if I had been awake. It was the same vapour}^ figure 
— the same transparent robes, the same benign countenance, only 
far more pitying than before — that I beheld at Holywell. I 
heard no sound issue from her lips, but I felt that she warned 
me to desist." 

" Do you accept the warning ?" asked Tresham, eagerly. 

" It is needless to answer," replied Fawkes. " I have laid the 
train to-night." 

" You have infected me with your misgivings," observed 
Tresham. " Would the enterprise had never been undertaken !" 

" But being xindertaken, it must be gone through with," 
rejoined Catesby, sternly. " Ilark'e, Tresliam. You promised 
us two thousand ])ounds in aid of the project, but have con- 
stantly deferred payment of the sum on some plea or oilier." 

" Because I have not been able to raise it," rcj)lied Tresham, 
sullenly. " I have tried in vain to sell part of my estates at 
Rushton, in Northamptonshire. I cannot efftct impossihililics." 

" Tusli !" cried Catesby, fiercely, " You well know I ask no 
impossibility. I will no longer be trilled with. The money 



230 GUY FAWKES. 

must be forthcoming by the tenth of October, or you shall pay 
the penalty with your life." 

" This is the language of a cut-throat, Mr. Catesby," replied 
Tresham. 

" It is the only lanjiuage I will hold towards you," rejoined 
Catesby, contemptuously. " Look you disappoint me not, or 
take the consequences." 

" I must leave for Northamptonshire at once, then," said 
Tresham. 

" Do as you please," returned Catesby. " Play the cut-throat 
5'ourself, and ease some rich miser of his store, if you think fit. 
Bring us the money, and we will not ask how you came by it." 

" Before we separate," said Tresham, disregarding these 
sneers, " I wish to be resolved on one point. Who are to be 
saved from destruction ?" 

" Why do you ask ?" inquired Fawkes. 

" Because I must stipulate for the lives of my brothers-in-law, 
the Lords Mounteag;le and Stourton." 

" If anything detains them from the meeting, well and good," 
replied Catesby. *' But no warning must be given them. That 
would infallibly lead to a discovery of the plot." 

'' Some means might surely be adopted to put them on their 
guard without danger to ourselves ?" urged Tresham. 

'^ I know of none," replied Catesby. 

" Nor I," added Fawkes. " If I did, I would warn Lord 
Montague, and some others whom I shall grieve to destroy." 

" We are all similarly circumstanced, "replied Catesby. " Kcyes 
is anxious for the preservation of his patron and friend, Lord 
Mordaunt, — Percy, for the Earl of Northumberland. I, myself, 
would gladly save the young Earl of Arundel. But we must 
sacrifice our private feeling for the general good." 

" Wo must," acquiesced Fawkes. 

" We shall not meet again till the night of the tenth of 
October," said Catesby, " when take care you are in readiness 
with the money." 

U[)on this, the conversation dropped, and soon afterwards 
Tresham departed. 

When he found himself alone, he suffered his rage to find 
vent in words. " Perdition seize them !" he cried, "I shall now 
lose two thousand pounds, in addition to what I have already 
advanced ; and, as Mountcagle will not have the disclosure made 
till the beginning of November, there is no way of avoiding pay- 
ment. They would not fall into the snare I laid to throw the 
blame of the discovery, when it takes place, upon their own 
indiscretion. But 1 must devise some other plan. The warning 
shall proceed from an unknown (juarter. xV letter, written in a 
feigned hand, and giving some obscure intimation of danger, 
shall be delivered with an air of mystery to 3Iounteagle. This 



MARRIAGE IN THE FOREST. 231 

M'ill serve as a plea for its divulgement to the Earl of Salisburj'. 
Well, well, they shall have the money; but they shall pay me 
back in other coin." 

Early on the following day, Catesby and Fawkes proceeded 
to White Webbs. Garnet v/as greatly surprised to see them, 
and could not conceal his disappointment at the cause of their 
return. 

" This delay bodes no good," he observed. " Parliament has 
been so often prorogued, that I begin to think some suspicion is 
entertained of our design." 

" Make your mind easy, then," replied Catesby. " I have 
made due inquiries, and find the meeting is postponed to suit 
the King's convenience, who wishes to prolong his stay at 
Royston. He may probably have some secret motive for the 
delay, but I am sure it in no way concerns us." 

Everything being now fully arranged, the conspirators had 
only to wait patiently for the arrival of the expected fifth of 
November. Most of them decided upon passing the interval in 
the country. Ambrose Rookvvood departed for Clopton, near 
Stratford-upon-Avon, — a seat belonging to Lord Carew, where 
his family were staying. Keyes went to visit Lord Mordaunt at 
Turvey, in Bedfordshire ; and Percy and the two Wrights set 
out for Goihurst, in Buckinghamshire, to desire Si»' Everard 
Digb}' to postpone the grand hunting-party which he was to hold 
at Dunsmore Heath, as an excuse for mustering a strong party 
of Catholics, to the beginning of November. The tw'o Winters 
repaired to their family mansion, Huddington, in Worcestershire; 
while Fawkes and Catesby, together with the two priests, 
remained at White Webbs. The three latter held daily con- 
ferences together, but were seldom joined by Fawkes, who 
passed his time in the adjoining forest, selecting its densest and 
most intricate parts for his rambles. 

It was now the beginning of October, and, as is generally the 
case in the early part of this month, the weather was fine, and 
the air pure and bracing. The forest could scarcely have been 
seen to greater advantage. The leaves had assumed their 
gorgeous autumnal tints, and the masses of timber, variegated in 
colour, presented an inexpressibly beautiful appearance. Gu}"- 
Fawkes spent hours in the depths of the wood. His sole com- 
panions were the lordly stag and the timid hare, that occasionally 
started across his path. Since his return, he had sedulously 
avoided Viviana, and they had met only twice, and then no 
speech had passed between them. One day, when he had 
plunged even deeper than usual into the forest, and had seated 
limself on the stump of a decayed tree, with his eyes fixed on a 
mall clear rivulet weUing at his leet, he saw the reflection of a 
lemalc figure in the water; and, filled with the idea of the 
vision of Saint Winifred, at first imagined he was about to 



202 GUY FAWKES. 

receive another warnin"!;. Bat a voice that thrilled to his heart's 
core, soon undeceived him, and, turning;, he beheld Viviana. 
She was habited in a riding-dress, and appeared prepared to set 
out upon a journey. 

" So you have tracked me to my solitude," he observed, in a 
tone of forced coldness. " I thought I was secure from inter- 
ruption here." 

" You will forgive me, I am sure, when you know my errand,'^ 
she replied. "It is to take an eternal farewell of yon." 

"Indeed!" he exclaimed. "Are you about to quit White 
Webbs?" 

"lam," she mournfully rejoined. "I am about to set out 
^vith Father Oldcorne for Gothurst, where I shall remain till all 
is over." 

" I entirely approve your determination," returned Fawkes, 
after a short pause. 

"I knew you would do so, or I should have consulted yoii 
tipon it," she rejoined. " And as you apjjear to avoid me, I 
•would fain have departed without taking leave of you, but found 
it impossible to do so." 

" You well know my motive for avoiding you, Viviana," re- 
joined Fawkes. " We are no longer what we were to each 
other. A fearful struggle has taken place within me, though I 
have preserved an unmoved exterior, between passion and the 
sense of my high calling. I have told you I never loved before, 
and fancied my heart immoveable as adamant. But I now 
find out my error. It is a prey to a raging and constant flame. 
I have shunned yon," he continued, with increased excitement* 
** because the siglit of you shakes my firmness, — because I feel it 
sinful to think of you in })reference to holier objects, — and 
because, after I have quitted you, your image alone engrosses 
my thoughts. Here, in the depths of this wood, by tl)e side of 
this brook, I can comnnmc with uiy soul, — can abstract myself 
from the world and the thoughts of the world — from you — yes, 
you, who are all the world to me now, — and prepare to meet my 
end." 

" Then you are resolved to die ?" she cried. 

" I shall abide the explosion, and nothing but a miracle can 
save me," returned Fawkes. 

" And think not it will be exerted in your behalf," she- 
replied. " IJeaven does not approve your design, and you will 
assuredly incur its vengeance by your criminal conduct." 

" Viviana," replied Guy Fawkes^ rising, " man cannot read 
my heart, but Heaven can ; and the sincerity of my purpose 
will be recognised above. What I am about to do is for the 
regeneration of our holy religion ; and if the w^elfare of that reli- 
gion is dear to the Supreme Being, our cause must prosper. If 
the contrary, it deserves to fail, and will fail. I have ever told 



MARRIAGE IN THE FOREST. 235 

3'ou that I care not what becomes of myself. I am now more 
than ever indifierent to life, — or rather," he added, in a sombre 
tone, " I am anxious to die." 

" Your dreadful wish, I fear, will be accomplished," replied 
Viviana, sadly. "I have been constantl}^ haunted by frightful 
apprehensions respecting you, and my dead father has appeared 
to me in my dreams. His spirit, if such it were, seemed to gaze 
upon me with a mournful look, and, as I thought, pronounced 
your name in piteous accents." 

" These forebodings chime with my own," muttered Fawkes, 
repressing a shudder; "but nothing shall shake me. It will 
inflict a bitter pang upon me to part with you, Viviana, — the 
bitterest I can ever feel, — and T shall be glad when it is over." 

"1 echo your own wish," she returned, "and deeply lament 
that we ever met. But the fate that brounjlit us to";ether must 
for ever unite us." 

" What mean you?" he inquired, gazing fixedly at her. 

" There is one sad consolation which you can afford me, and 
which you owe me for the deep and lasting misery I shall endure 
on your account," replied Viviana ; — " a consolation that will 
enable me to bear your loss with fortitude, and to devote myself 
wholly to Heaven." 

" Whatever I can do that will not interfl^re with my purpose,, 
you may command," he rejoined. 

" What I have to propose will not interfere with it," she 
answered. " Now, hear me, and put the sole construction I 
deserve on my conduct. Father Garnet is at a short distance 
from us, behind those trees, waiting my summons. I have 
informed him of my design, and he approves of it. It is to unite 
us in marriage — solemnly unite us — that though I may never live 
with you as a wife, I may mourn you as a widow. Do you 
consent ?" 

Guy Fawkes returned an affirmative, in a voice broken by 
emotion. 

" The moment the ceremony is over," pursued Viviana, " I 
shall start with Father Oldcorne for Gothurst. We shall never 
meet again in this world." 

" Unless I succeed," said Fawkes. 

" You will not succeed," replied Viviana. " If I thought so, 
I should not take this step. 1 look upon it as an espousal with 
the dead." 

So saying, she hurried away, and disappearing beneath the 
covert, returned in a few seconds with Garnet. 

"I have a strange duty to perform for you, my son," said 
Garnet to Fawkes, who remained motionless and stupified; " but 
I am right willing to perform it, because 1 think it will lead to 
your future happiness with the fair creature wlio has bestowed 
her affections on you." 



-■"(■ GUY FAWKES. 

''Do not speculate on the future, father," cried Viviana. 
** You know xofnj I asked ;ou to perform this ceremony. You 
know, also, that I have made preparations for instant departure; 
and that I indulge no hope of seeinfr Guy Fawkes aijain." 

" All this I know, dear daup;hter," returned Garnet ; " but, in 
spile of your anticipations of ill, I still hope that your union may 
prove auspicious." 

" I take you to witness, father," said Viviana, " that in bestow- 
ing my hand upon Guy Fawkes, I bestow at the same time all 
my possessions upon him. He is free to use them as he thinks 
proper, — even in the furtherance of his design against the state, 
which, though I cannot approve it, seems good to him." 

" This must not be," cried Fawkes. 

" It shall he" rejoined Viviana. " Proceed with the cere- 
inony, father." 

" Let her have her own \/ay, my son," observed Garnet, in a 
low tone. " Under any circumstances, her estates must now be 
necessarily yours." 

He then took a breviary from his vest, and placing them near 
each other, began to read aloud the marriage-service appointed 
by the Romish Church. And there, in that secluded spot, and 
under such extraordinary circumstances, with no other witnesses 
than the ancient trees around them, and the brook rippling at 
their feet, were Guy Fawkes and Viviana united. The cere- 
mony over, Guy Fawkes pressed his bride to his breast, and 
imprinted a kiss upon her lips. 

" I liave broken my faith to Heaven, to which I was first 
espoused," he cried. 

'' No," she returned ; " you will now return to your first and 
holiest choice. Think of me onlv as I shall think of vou, — as 
of the dead." "^ 

With this, the party slowly and silently returned to the house, 
where they found a couple of steeds, with luggage strapped to 
the saddles, at the door. 

Father Oldcorne was already mounted, and in a few minutes 
Viviana was i)y his side. Before her departure, she bade Guy 
Fawkes a tender farewell; and at this trying juncture her firni- 
ness nearly deserted her. ]]ut rousing herself, she sprang upon 
her horse, and urging the animal into a quick pace, and followed 
by Oldcorne, she speedily disappeared from view. Guy Fawkes 
watched her out of sight, and shunning the regards of Catesb^ 
who formed one of the group, struck into the forest, and was not 
seen again till the following day. 

The tenth of October having arrived, Guy Fawkes and 
Oatesby rcjiaircd to the ])lace of rendezvous. But the night 
passed, and Tresham did not appear. Catesby was angry and 
disappointed, and could not conceal his apprehensions ol 
treachery. Fawkes took a different view of the matter, and 



MARRIAGE IN THE FOREST. 235 

thought it not improbable that their confederate's absence might 
be occasioned by the difficulty he found in complying with their 
demands; and this opinion was confirmed the next morning by 
the arrival of a letter from Tresham, stating that he had been 
utterly unable to effect the sales he contemplated, and could not, 
therefore, procure the money till the end of the month. 

" I will immediately go down to Rushton," said Catesby, 
" and if I find him disposed to palter with us, I will call him to 
instant account. But Garnet informs me that Viviana has 
bestowed all her wealth upon you. Are you willing to devote 
it to the good cause ?" 

" No I" replied Fawkes, in a tone so decisive that his com- 
panion felt it would be useless to urge the matter further. 
" I give my life to the cause, — that must suffice." 

The subject was never renewed. At night, Catesby, having 
procured a powerful steed, set out upon his journey to North- 
amptonshire, while Fawkes returned to White Webbs. 

About a fortnight passed unmarked by any event of import- 
ance. Despatches were received from Catesby, stating that he 
had received the money from Tresham, and had expended it in 
procuring horses and arms. He also added that he had raised 
numerous recruits on various pretences. This letter was dated 
from Ashby St. Leger's, the seat of his mother. Lady Catesby, 
but he expressed his intention of proceeding to Coughton Hall, 
near Alcester, in Warwickshire, the residence of Mr. Thomas 
Throckmorton (a wealthy Catholic gentleman), whither Sir 
Everard Digby had removed with his family, to be in readiness 
for the grand hunting-party to be held on the fifth of November 
on Dunsmore Heath. Here he expected to be joined by the 
two Wrights, the Winters, Rookwood, Keyes, and the rest of 
the conspirators, and undertook to bring them all up to White 
Webbs on Saturday the twenty-sixth of October. 

By this time, Guy Fawkes had in a great degree recovered 
his equanimit}', and left alone with Garnet, held long and 
frequent religious conferences with him ; it being evidently his 
desire to prepare himself for his expected fate. He spent the 
greater part of the nights in solitary vigils — fasted even more 
rigorously than he was enjoined to do — and prayed with such 
fervour and frequency, that, fearing an ill eifect upon his health, 
and almost upon his mind, which liad become exalted to the 
highest pitch of enthusiasm. Garnet thought it necessary to check 
him. The })riest did not fail to note that Viviana's name never 
passed his lips, and that in all their walks in the forest he care- 
fully shunned the scene of his espousals. 

And thus time ffew by. On the evening of the twenty-sixth 
of October, in accordance with Catesby's intimation, the con- 
spirators arrived. They were all assembled at supper, and wore 
relating the different arrangoincnts which had been made vx 



236 GUY FAWKES. 

anticipation of the important event, wlien Garnet observed with 
a look of" sudden uneasiness to Catesby, "You said in one of 
your letters that you would bring Treshani with you, my son. 
Wliy do I not see him ?" 

" He sent a message to Coughton to state, that having been 
attacked by a sudden illness, he was unable to join us," re])licd 
Catesby, " but as soon as he could leave his bed, he would 
hasten to London. This may be a subterfuge, but I shall 
speedily ascertain the truth, for I have sent my servant Bates tO' 
llushton, to investigate the matter. I ought to tell you," he 
added, " that he has given substantial proof of his devotion to 
the cause by sending another thousand pounds, to be expended 
in the purchase of arms and horses." 

" I hope it is not dust thrown into our eyes," returned Garnet. 
" I have always feared Tresham would deceive us at the last." 

" Tliis sudden illness looks suspicious, I must own," said 
Catesby. " Has aught been heard of Lord Mounteagle ?" 

" Guy Fawkes heard that he was at his residence at Southwark 
yesterday," returned Garnet. 

" So far, good," replied Catesby. *' Did you visit the cellar 
where the powder is deposited?" he added, turning to Fawkes. 

"I did," replied the other, "and found all secure. The 
powder is in excellent preservation. Before quitting the spot, I 
placed certain private marks against the door, by which I can 
tell whether it is opened during our absence." 

" A wise precaution," returned Catesby. " And now, gentle- 
men," he added, filling a goblet with wine, "success to our 
enterprise ! Everything is prepared," he continued, as the 
pledge was enthusiastically drunk; "I have got together a 
company of above two hiuidred men, all well armed and ap- 
pointed, who will follow me wherever T choose to lead them, 
riiey will be stationed near Dunsmore Heath on the fifth of 
next month, and as soon as the event of the explosion is known, 
I shall ride thither as fast as I can, and, hurrying with my 
troops to Coventry, seize the Princess Elizabeth. Percy and 
Keyes will secure the person of the Duke of York, and proclaim 
him King ; while u])on the rest will devolve the arduous duty 
of rousing our Catholic brethren in London to rise to arms." 

*' Trust to us to rouse them," shouted several voices. 

*' Let each man swear not to swerve from the fulfilment of his 
task," cried Catesby ; " swear it upon this cup of wine, in wliich 
we will all mix our blood." 

And as he spoke, he jiricked his arm with the point of his 
sword, and suffered a few drops of blood to fall into tlie goblet, 
while the others, roused to a state of frenzied enthusiasm, iiin- 
tated his example, and afterwards raised the horrible mixture to 
their li[)S, pronouncing at the same time the oath. 

Guv Fawkes was the last to take the pledge, and crying in a 



THE FIFTH OP NOVEMBER. 237 

loud voice, " 1 swear not to quit my post till the explosion is 
over," he drained the cup. 

After this, they adjourned to a room in another winor of 
the house, fitted up as a chapel, where mass was performed 
by Garnet, and the sacrament administered to the whole 
assemblage. They were about to retire for the night, when 
a sudden knocking was heard at the door. Reconnoitring the 
intruder through an upper window, overlooking the court, 
Catesby perceived it was Bates, who was holding a smoking and 
mud-bespattered steed by the bridle. 

" Well, what news do you bring ?" cried Catesby, as he 
admitted him. " Have you seen Tresham ?" 

" No," replied Bates. " His illness was a mere pretence. 
He has left Rushton secretly for London." 

*' I knew it," cried Garnet. " He has again betrayed us." 

" He shall die," said Catesby. 

And the determination was echoed by all the other con- 
spirators. 

Instead of retiring to rest, ihey passed the night in anxious 
deliberation, and it was at last proposed that Guy Fawkcs 
should proceed without loss of time to Southwark, to keep watch 
near the house of Lord Mounleagle, and if possible ascertain 
whether Tresham had visited it. 

To this he readily agreed. But before setting out, he took 
Catesby aside for a moment, and asked, " Did you see Viviana 
at Coughton ?" 

" Only for a moment, and that just before I left the place," 
was the answer. " She desired to be remembered to yon, and 
said you were never absent from her thoughts or prayers." 

Guy Fawkes turned away to hide his emotion, and mounting 
one of the horses brought by the conspirators, rode off towards 
London. 



CHAPTER XH. 

THE FIFTH OF NOVEMBER. 



On the same day as the occurrences last related, Lord Mount- 
eagle, who was then staying at South wark, suddenly intimated 
his intention of passing the night at his country mansion at 
Eloxton ; a change of place which, trivial as it seemed at the 
moment, afterwards assumed an importance, from the circum- 
stances that arose out of it. At the latter })art of the day, he 
accordingly proceeded to Iloxton, accon\panied by hi.s customary 
attendants, and all appeared to pass on as usual, until, just iis 
supper was over, one of his pages arrived from town, and (icsircd 
to see his lordship immediately. 



238 CUY FAWKES. 

Affecting to treat the matter with iiidili'crenco, Lord Mount- 
cagle carelessly ordered the youth to be ushered into his presence ; 
and when he appeared, he demanded his business. The page 
replied, that lie brought a letter for his lordship, which had been 
delivered under circumstances of great mystery. 

" I had left the house just as it grew dusk," he said, " on an 
errand of little importance, when a inan, muffled in a cloak, 
suddenly issued from behind a corner, and demanded whether I 
Avas one of your lordship's servants ? On my replying in the 
affirmative, he produced this letter, and enjoined me, as I 
valued my life and your lordship's safety, to deliver it into your 
own hands without delay." 

So saying, he delivered the letter to his lord, who, gazing at 
its address, which was, " To the Right Honourable the Lord 
Mounteagle," observed, " There is nothing very formidable in 
its appearance. What can it mean ?" 

Without even breaking the seal, which was secured with a 
silken thread, he gave it to one of his gentlemen, named Ward, 
who was standing near him, 

" Read it aloud, sir," said the Earl, with a slight smile. " I 
have no doubt it is some vapoui-ing effusion, which will afford us 
occasion for laughter. Before I hear what the writer has to say, 
I can promise him he shall not intimidate me." 

Thus exhorted. Ward broken open the letter, and read as 
follows : — 

'"' My lord, out of the love I bear to some of your friends, I 
have a care of your preservation. Therefore I would advise 
you, as you tender your life, to devise some excuse to shift from 
your attendance at this Parliament, for God and man have con- 
curred to punish the wickedness of this time. Think not 
slightingly of this advice, but retire into the country, where you 
may exjject the event in safety ; for, though there be no 
a[)pearance of any stir, yet I say they shall receive a terrible blow 
this Parliament, and yet they shall not know who hurts them. 
This counsel is not to be contemned. It may do you good, and 
can do you no harm, for the danger is passed as soon as you have 
burned the letter. (lod, I hope, will give you grace to make 
good use of it, to whose holy protection I commend you." 

" A singular letter!" exclaimed Mounteagle, as soon as Ward 
had fmished. " What is your opinion of it ?" 

" I think it hints at some dangerous plot, my lord," replied 
Ward, who had received his instructions, " some treason against 
the state. With submission, I would advise your lordship 
instantly to take it to tlie Earl of Salisbury." 

" I see nothing in it," replied the Earl. " What is your opinion, 
Mervyn?" he added, turning to another of his gentlemen, to 
whom he had likewise given liis lessoti. 

" I am of the same mind as Ward," replied the attendant. 



THE FIFTH OF NOVEMBER. 259 

*' Your lordship will hardly hold yourself excused, if voune"-lcct 
to give due warning, should aught occur hereafter." 

" Say you so, sirs ?" cried Lord Mounteagle. " Let me hear 
it once more." 

The letter was accordingly read again by Ward, and the Earl 
feigned to weigh over each passage. 

" I am advised not to attend the Parliament," he said, " ' for 
God and man have concurred to punish the wickedness of this 
time.' That is too vague to be regarded. Then I am urged to 
retire into the country. The recommendation must proceed 
from some discontented Catholic, who does not wish me to be 
present at the opening of the house. This is not the first 
time I have been so adjured. ' They shall receive a terrible 
blow this Parliament, and yet shall not know who hurts them.' 
That is mysterious enough, but it may mean nothing, — an}' 
more than what follows, namely, ' the danger is passed as soon 
as you have burnt the letter.' " 

" I do not think so, my lord," replied Ward ; " and though I 
cannot explain the riddle, I am sure it means mischief." 

" Well," said Lord Mounteagle, "since you are of this mind, 
I must lose no time in communicating the letter to the Secretary 
of State. It is better to err on the safe side." 

Accordingly, after some further consultation, he set out at that 
late hour for Whitehall, where he roused the Earl of Salisbury, 
and showed him the letter. It is almost needless to state that 
the whole was a preconcerted scheme between these two crafty 
statesmen ; but as the interview took place in the presence of 
their attendants, the utmost caution was observed. 

Salisbury pretended to be greatly alarmed at the communica- 
tion, and coupling it, he said, with previous intelligence which 
he had received, he could not help fearing, to adopt the words 
of the writer of the mysterious letter, that the Parliament was 
indeed threatened with some " terrible blow." Acting, appa- 
rently, upon this supposition, he caused such of the lords of the 
Privy Council as lodged at Whitehall to be summoned, and 
submitting the letter to them, they all concurred in the opinion 
that it referred to some dangerous plot, though none could give 
a guess at its precise nature. 

"It is clearly some Popish project," said Salisbury, "or Lord 
Mounteagle would not have been the party warned. We must 
keep a look-out upon the disaffected of his faith." 

" x\s I have been the means of revealing the plot to yoiu- 
lordship — if plot it be — I must pray you to deal gently with 
them," rejoined Mounteagle. 

"■ I will be as lenient as I can," returned Salisbury ; " but 
in a matter of this kind little favour can be shown. If join 
lordship will enable me to discover the principal actors in this 
affair, I will take care that no innocent party suffers." 



240 GUY FA^VKES. 

*' Vou ask an impossibility," replied Mountcagle. *' I know 
ntJthing beyond what can be gathered from that letter. But 
I pray yonr lordship not to make it a means of exercising 
ininecessary severity towards the members of my religion." 

" On that you may rely," returned the Earl. " His Majesty 
vill not return from the hunting expedition on which he is 
engaged at lloyston till Thursday next, the 30th. I think it 
scarcely worth while (considering his naturally timid nature, 
with which your lordships are well acquainted) to inform him of 
the threatened danger, until his arrival at the palace. It will 
then be time enough to take any needful steps, as Parliament 
will not meet for four or five days afterwards." 

In the policy of this coui'se the Privy Councillors agreed, and 
it was arranged that the matter should be kept perfectly secret 
until the King's opinion had been taken upon the letter. The 
assemblage then broke up, it being previously arranged that, for 
fear of some attempt upon his life, Lord Mounteagle should 
remain within the palace till full inquiries had been instituted 
into the affair. 

When the two confederate nobles were left alone, Salisbury 
•observed, with a slight laugh, to his companion, 

" Thus far we have proceeded well, and without suspicion, 
•and, rely upon it, none shall fall on you. As soon as all is 
over, the most important post the King has to bestow shall be 
yours." 

" But what of Tresham ?" asked Mounteagle. " He was the 
•deliverer of this letter, and I have little faith in him." 

"Hum!" said Salisbury, after a moment's reflection, "if you 
think it desirable, we can remove him to the Tower, where he 
■can be easily silenced." 

" It will be better so," replied Mounteagle. " He may else 
babble hereafter. I gave him a thousand pounds to send in his 
own name to the conspirators the other day to lure them into 
■our nets." 

" It shall be repaid you a hundred-fold," replied Salisbury. 
*' But we are observed, and must therefore separate." 

So saying, he withdrew to his own chamber, wdiile Lord 
Mounteagle was ushered to the apartments allotted to him. 

To return to Guy Fawkes. Arriving at Southwark, he 
stationed himself near Lord Mountcaglc's residence. But he 
observed nothing to awaken his suspicions, until early in the 
morning he perceived a page approaching the mansion, whom, 
from his livery, he knew to be one of Lord Mounteagle's house- 
hold, (it was, in fact, the very j-outh wOio had delivered the 
mysterious letter,) and from him he ascertained all that had 
occurred. Filled with alarm, and scarcely knowing what to do, 
he crossed the river, and proceeding to the cellar, examined the 
marks at the door, and finding all precisely as he had left it, felt 



THE FIFTH OF NOVEMBER. 5i H 

certain, that whatever discovery had been made, the magazine 
had not been visited. 

He next repaired to the house, ot" which he possessed the key, 
and was satisfied that no one had been there. Somewhat 
reUeved by this, he yet determined to keep watch during the day, 
and conceahng himself near the cellar, remained on the look-out 
till night. But no one came ; nor did anything occur to excite 
his suspicions. He would not, however, quit his post till about 
six o'clock on the following evening, when, thinking further 
delay might be attended with danger, he set out to White 
Webbs, to give his companions intelligence of the letter. 

His news was received by all with the greatest alarm, and not 
one, except Catesby, who strove to put a bold face upon the 
matter, though he was full of inward misgiving, but confessed 
that he thought all chance of success was at an end. While 
deliberating upon what should be done in this fearful emergency, 
they were greatly alarmed by a sudden knocking without. All 
the conspirators concealed themselves, except Guy Fawkes, whc 
opening the door, found, to his infinite surprise, that the sum- 
mons proceeded from Tresham. He said nothing till the other 
had entered the house, and then suddenly drawing his dagger, 
held it to his throat. 

" Make your shrift quickly, traitor," he cried in a furious tone, 
*' for your last hour is arrived. What ho !" he shouted to the 
others, who instantly issued from their hiding-places, " the fox 
has ventured into the lion's den." 

" You distrust me wrongfully," rejoined Tresham, with more 
confidence than he usually exhibited in time of danger ; " I am 
come to warn you, not betray you. Is this the return you make 
me for the service ?" 

" Villain I" cried Catesby, rushing up to him, and holding 
his drawn sword to his breast. " You have conveyed the letter 
to Lord Mounteagle." 

" It is false," replied Tresham ; "I have only just heard of it; 
and, in spite of the risk I knew I should run from your suspi- 
cions, I came to tell you what had happened." 

" Why did you feign illness, and depart secretly for town, 
instead of joining us at Coughton?" demanded Catesby. 

" I will instantly explain' my motive, which, though it may 
not be satisfactory to you on one point, will be so on another,' 
replied Tresham unhesitatingly, and with apparent frankness. 
"I was fearful you would make a further tool of mc, and 
resolved not to join you again till a few days before the outbreak 
of the plot. To this determination I should have adhered, had I 
not learnt to-night that a letter had been transmitted by some 
one to Lord Mounteagle, which he had conveyed to the Earl ol 
Salisbury. It may not convey any notion of the plot, but it is^ 
certain to occasion alarm, and'l thought it my duty, in spite of 

E 



ii4.2 GUY FAWKES. 

every personal consideration, to give yon wrirnlng. If you design 
to escape, there is yet time. A vessel lies in the river, in which 
we can all embark for Flanders." 

" Can he be innocent ?" said Catesby in a whisper to Garnet. 

" If I had betrayed you," ct-ntinued Tresham, " 1 should not 
have come hither. And I have no motive for such baseness, for 
I am in equal daufjer with yourselves. IJut though the alarm 
has been given, I do not think any discovery will be made. 
They are evidently on the wrong scent." 

" I hope so,*' replied Catesby ; " but I fear the contrary." 

" Shall I put him to death ?" demanded Fawkes of Garnet. 

"Do not sully your hands with his blood, my son," returned 
Garnet. " If he has betrayed us, he will reap the traitor's 
reward here and hereafter. If he has not, it would be to take 
away a life unjustly. Let him depart. We shall feel more 
secure without him." 

" Will it be safe to set him free, father ?" cried Fawkes. 

"I think so," replied Garnet. "We will not admit him to our 
further conferences ; but let us act mercifully." 

The major part of the conspirators concurring in this opinion, 
though Fawkes and Catesby were opposed to it, Tresham was 
suffered to depart. As soon as he was gone. Garnet avowed 
that the further prosecution of the design appeared so hazardous, 
that it ought to be abandoned, and that, in his opinion, each of 
the conspirators had better consult his own safety by flight. He 
added, that at some future period the design might be resumed, 
or another planned, which might be more securely carried out. 

After much discussion, all seemed disposed to acquiesce in the 
proposal, except Fawkes, who adhered doggedly to liis purpose, 
and treated the danger so slightingly, that he gradually broujiht 
the others round to his views. At length, it was resolved that 
Garnet should set out immediately for Coughton Hall, and place 
himself under the protection of Sir Everard Digby, and there 
await the result of the attempt, while the other conspirators de- 
cided upon remaining iri town, in some secure places of conceal- 
ment, until the event was known. Unmoved as ever, Guy 
Fawkes declared his intention of watching over the magazine of 
powder. 

** If anything happens to me," he said, " you will take care of 
yourselves. You well know nothing will be wrung from me." 

Catesby and the others, aware of his resolute nature, att'ected 
to remonstrate with him, but they willingly suffered him to take 
his own course. Attended by Bates, Garnet then set out for 
Warwickshire, and the rest of the conspirators proceeded to 
London, where they dispersed, after appointing Lincoln's Inn 
Walks as their place of midnight rendezvous. Each then made 
preparations for sudden flight, in case it should be necessary, and 
tiookwood provided relays of horses all the way to Dunchurch. 



THE FIFTH OF NOVE.MBER. 243 

Guy Fawkes alone remained at his post. He took up his 
abode in the cellar, resolved to blow up himself together with 
his foes, in case of a surprise. 

On Thursday, the 31st of October, the King returned to 
Whitehall, and the mysterious letter was laid before him in the 
presence of the Privy Council by the Earl of Salisbury. James 
perused it carefullj^ but could scarcely hide his perplexity. 

" Your Majesty will not fail to remark the expressions, * a 
terrible blow' to the Parliament, and * that the danger will be 
past as soon as you have burnt the letter,' evidently referring to 
combustion," observed the Earl. 

*' You are right, Salisbury," said James, snatching at the sug- 
gestion. " I should not wonder if these mischievous Papists 
mean to blow us all up with gunpowder." 

" Your Majesty has received a divine illumination," returned 
the Earl. *' Such an idea never occurred to me ; but it must be 
as you intimate." 

" Undoubted!}^ — undoubtedly," replied the monarch, pleased 
with the compliment to his sagacity, though alarmed by the 
danger; "but what desperate traitors they must be to imagine 
such a deed ! Blow us up ! God's mercy;, that were a dread- 
ful death ! And j^et that must evidently be the meaning of the 
passage. How else can it be construed, except by reference to 
the suddenness of the act, which might be as quickly performed 
as that paper would take to be consumed in the fire?" 

" Your Majesty's penetration has discovered the truth," re- 
plied Salisbury, " and by the help of your wisdom, I will fully 
develop this dark design. Where, think you, the powder mav 
lie hidden ?" 

" Are there any vaults beneath the Parliament House ?" 
demanded James, trembling. "Heaven save us! We have 
often walked there — perhaps, over a secret mine." 

" There are," replied Salisbury ; " and I am again indebted to 
3'our Majesty for a most important suggestion. Not a corner in 
the vaults shall be left unsearched. But, perhaps you will think 
with me, that, in order to catch these traitors in thc'.r own trap, 
it will be well to defer the search till the very night before the 
meeting of Parliament." 

" I was about to recommend such a course myself, Salisbury," 
replied James. 

" I was sure you would think so," returned the Earl ; " and 
now I must entreat you to dismiss the subject from your 
thoughts, and to sleep securely; for you may rely upon it 
(after your Majesty's discovery) tiiat the plot shall be fully 
unravelled." 

The significant tone in which the Earl uttered the latter part 
of this speech, convinced the King that he knew more of the 
matter than he cared to confess; and he contented himself with 

R2 



i"v4- GUV FAWKES. 

saying, *' Well, let it be so. I trust all to yoii. But I at once 
divined their purpose, — I at once divined it." 

The Council then broke up, and. James laufjhcd and chucliled 
to himself at the discernment he had displayed. Nor was he less 
pleased with his minister for the credit given him in the afliiir. 
But he took care not to enter the Parliament House. 

On the afternoon of Monday, the 4th of November, the Lord 
Chamberlain, accompanied by the Lords Salisbury and Mount- 
eagle, visited the cellars and vaults beneath the Parliament 
House. For some time, they discovered nothing to excite sus- 
picion. At length, probably at the suggestion of Lord Mount- 
eagle, who, as will be recollected, was acquainted with the 
situation of the magazine, they proceeded to the cellar, where 
they found the store of powder; but not meeting with any of the 
conspirators, as they expected, they disturbed nothing, and went 
away, reporting the result of their search to the King. 

By the recommendation of the Earl of Salisbury, James 
advised that a guard should be placed near the cellar during the 
whole of the night, consisting of Topcliffe and a certain number 
of attendants, and headed by Sir Tiiomas Knevet, a magistrate 
of Westminster, upon whose courage and discretion full reliance 
could be placed. Lord Mounteagle also requested permission 
to licep guard with them to witness the result of the aflair. To' 
ihis the King assented, and as soon as it grew dark, the party 
secretly took up their position at a point commanding the 
entrance of the magazine. 

Fawkes, who chanced to be absent at the time the search was 
made, returned a few minutes afterwards, and remained within 
the cellar, seated upon a barrel of gunpowder, the head of which 
he had staved in, with a lantern in one hand, and petronel in the 
other, till past midnight. 

The fifth of November was now at hand, and the clock of the- 
adjoining abbey had scarcely ceased tolling the hour that pro- 
claimed its arrival, when Fawkes, somewhat wearied with hi& 
solitary watching, determined to repair, for a short space, to the 
adjoining house. He accordingly quitted the cellar, leaving his 
lantern lighted within it in one corner. 

Opening the door, he gazed cautiously around, but perceiving 
nothing, after waiting a few seconds, he proceeded to lock the 
door. While thus cmploved, he thouiiht he heard a noise 
behind him, and turning suddenly, he beheld through the gloom 
several persons rushing towards him, evidently with hostile 
intent. Plis first impulse was to draw a petronel, and grasp his 
sword : but before he could effect his purpose, his arms were 
pinioned by a powerful grasp from behind, while the light of a 
lantern thrown full in his face revealed the barrel of a petrone 
levelled at his head, and an authoritative voice commanded hin> 
in the King's name to surrender. 



FLTOIIT OF THE CONSPIRATORS. 245 

CHAPTER XITT. 

THE FLIGHT OF THE CONSPIRATORS. 

On the same night, and at the same hour that Guy Fawkcs was 
captured, the other conspirators held their rendezvous in 
Lincoln's Inn Walks. A presentiment of the fate awaiting them 
filled the breasts of all, and even Catesby shared in the general 
depression. Plan after plan was proposed, and, as soon as pro- 
posed, rejected; and they seemed influenced only by alarm and 
irresolution. Feeling at length that nothing could be done, and 
that they were only increasing their risk by remaining together 
longer, they agreed to separate, appointing to meet at the same 
place on the following night, if their project should not, in the 
interim, be discovered. 

" Before daybreak," said Catesby, " I will proceed to the 
"Collar under the Parliament House, and ascertain whether an}'- 
thing has happened to Guy Fawkes. My heart misgives me 
about him, and 1 reproach myself that I have allowed him to 
incur this peril alone." 

" Guy Fawkes is arrested," said a voice near them, " and is at 
this moment under examination before the Kiufj." 

"It is Tresham who speaks," cried Catesby; "secure him!" 

The injimction was instantly obeyed. Tresham was seized, 
and several weapons pointed against his breast. He did not, 
however, appear to be dismayed, but, so far as could be dis- 
•cerned in the obscurity, seemed to maintain great boldness of 
<lemeanour. 

" I have again ventured among you, at the hazard of my life," 
he said, in a firm tone, " to give you this most important intel- 
ligence ; and am requited, as I have ever been of late, with 
menaces and violence. Stab me, and see whether my death will 
■civail vou in this extremity. I am in equal danger with your- 
selves ; and whether I perish by your hands, or by those of the 
executioner, is of little moment." 

" Let me question him before we avenge ourselves upon him," 
said Catesby to Kookwood. '* How do you know that Guy 
Fawkes is a prisoner?" 

"I saw him taken," replied Tresham, "and esteem myself sin- 
gularly fortunate that I escaped the same fate. Though ex- 
cluded from further share in the project, I could not divest 
myself of a strong desire to know how matters were going on, 
and I resolved to visit the cellar secretly at nnchiight. As I 
stealthily approached it, I remarked several armed figures 
beneath a gateway, and conjecturing their purpose, in>tantly 
concealed myself behind a j)rojectiuu of the wall. I had not 



£16 GUY FA^VKES. 

been in this situation many minutes, Avhen the cellar door 
opened, and Guy Fawkcs issued from it." 

" Well !" cried Catesby, breathlessly. 

*' The party I had noticed immediately rushed f(»r\vard, and 
secured him before he could offer any resistance," continued 
Trcsham. " After a brief strug;<2;le, certain of their number 
dragged him into the cellar, while others kept ■watch without 
I should now have Hown, but my limbs refused their office, and 
I was therefore compelled, however reluctantly, to see the end 
of it. In a short time Guy Fawkes was brought forth again, and 
I heard some one in authority give directions that he should be 
instantly taken to Whitehall, to be interrogated before the King 
and the Privy Council. He was then led away, and a guard 
placed at the door of the cellar. Feeling certain I should be 
discovered, I continued for some time in an agony of appre- 
hension, not daring to stir. But, at length, summoning up 
sufficient resolution, I crept cautiously along the side of the wall, 
and got off unperceived. My first object was to warn you." 

"How did you become acquainted with our place of rendez- 
vous?" demanded the elder Wright. 

"I overlieard you, at our last interview at White Webbs, 
appoint a midnight meeting in this place," replied Treshani, 
" and I hurried hither in the hope of finding you, and have not 
been disappointed." 

" When 1 give the word, plunge your swords into his breast," 
said Catesby, in a low tone. 

" Hold I" cried Percy, taking him aside. " If we put him to 
death in this spot, his body will be found, and his slaughter 
may awaken suspicions against us. Guy Fawlics will reveal 
nothing." 

"Of that I am well assured," said Catesby. " Shall we take 
the traitor with us to some secure retreat, where we can detain 
him till we learn what takes place at the palace, and if we find 
he has betrayed us, despatch him ?" 

" That would answer no good purj)ose," returned Percy 
" The sooner we are rid of him the better. Wc can then deli- 
berate as to what is best to be done." 

" You arc right," rejoined Catesby. " If he has betrayed us, 
life will be a burthen to him, and the greatest kindness we could 
render him would be to rid hiui of it. Let him go. Treshau)," 
he added, in a loud voice, "you are free. But we meet no 



more." 



" We have not parted yet," cried the traitor, springing back- 
wards, and uttering a loud cry. " I arrest you all in the King's 



name." 



The signal was answered by a band of soldiers, who emerged 
from behind the trees where they had hitherto been concealed, 
and instantly surrounded the conspirators. 



FLIGHT OF THE CONSPIRATORS. 247 

'* It is now my turn to threaten," laughed Tresham. 

Catesby replied by drawing a petronel, and firino- it in the 
supposed direction of the speaker. But he missed his mark. 
The ball lodged in the brain of a soldier who was standing 
beside him, and the ill-fated wretch fell to the ground. 

A desperate conflict now ensued. Topcliffe, who commanded 
the assailing party, ordered his followers to take the conspirators 
alive, and it was mainly owing to this injunction that the latter 
were indebted for their safety. Whispermg his directions to his 
companions, Catesby gave the word, and making a simultaneous 
rush forward, they broke through the opposing ranks, and instantly 
dispersing, and favoured by the gloom, they baffled pursuit. 

" We have failed in this [)art of our scheme," said Tresham to 
Topcliffe, as they met half an hour afterwards. " What is to be 
done ?" 

"We must take the Earl of Salisbury's advice upon it," returned 
Topcliffe. "I shall now hasten to Whitehall to see how Guy 
Fawkes's interrogation proceeds, and will communicate with his. 
lordship." 

Upon this, they separated. 

None of the conspirators met again that night. Each fled in 
a different direction, and, ignorant of what had happened to the 
rest, sought some secure retreat. Catesby ran towards Chancery- 
lane, and passing through a narrow alley, entered the large 
gardens which then lay between this thoroughfare and Fetter- 
lane. Listening to hear whether he was pursued, and finding 
nothing to alarm him, he threw himself on the sod beneath a 
tree, and was lost in painful reflection. 

"All my fair schemes are marred by that traitor, Tresham,'* 
he muttered. " I could forgive myself for being duped by him, 
if I had slain him when he was in my power. But that he 
should escape to exult in our ruin, and reap the reward of his 
perfidy, afl3icts me even more than failure." 

Tortured by thoughts like these, and in vain endeavouring to 
snatch such brief repose as would fit him for the fatigue he might 
have to endure on the morrow, he did not quit his position till 
late in the n)orning of a dull November da^' — it was, as will be 
recollected, the memorable Fifth — had arrived. 

lie then arose, and slouching his hat, and wrapping his cloak 
around him, shaped his course towards Fleet-street. From the 
knots of persons gathered together at different corners, — from 
their muttered discourse and mysterious looks, as well as from 
the general excitement that prevailed, — he felt sure that some 
rumour of the plot had gone abroad. Shunning observation as 
much as he C(juld, he entered a small tavern near Fleet Bridge, 
and called for a flask of wine and some food. While discussing 
these, he v/as attracted by the discourse of the landlord, who was 
conversing with his guests about the conspiracy. 



£4S GUY FAWKES. 

" I hear that all the Papists are to be hansicd, drawn, and 
quartered," cried the host; " and if it be true, as I have heard, 
that this plot is their contrivance, they deserve it. 1 hope I have 
no believer in that faith — no recusant in my house." 

" Don't insult us by any such suspicion," cried one of the 
guests. " We are all loyal men — all good Protestants." 

" Do you know whether the conspirators have been discovered, 
sir ?" asked the host of Catcsby. 

" I do not even know of tlie plot," replied the other. " What 
was its object ?" 

" What was its object !" cried the host. " You will scarcely 
credit me when I tell you. 1 tremble to speak of it. Its object 
was to blow up the Parliament House, and the King and all the 
nobles and prelates of the land along with it." 

" Horrible !" exclaimed the guests. 

" But how do you know it is a scheme of the Papists ?" 
asked Catesby. 

" Because I have been told so," rejoined the host. " But who 
else could devise such a monstrous plan ? It would never enter 
into the head or heart of a Protestant to conceive so detestable 
an action. We love our King too well for that, and would shed 
the last drop of our blood rather than a hair of his head should 
be injured. But these priest-ridden Papists think otherwise. 
They regard him as a usurper; and having received a dispensa- 
tion from the Pope to that effect, fancy it would be a pious act 
to remove him. There will be no tranquillity in the kingdom 
wliilc one of them is left alive; and I hope his Majesty will take 
advantage of the present ferment to order a general massacre of 
them, like that of the poor Protestants on Saint Bartholomew's 
day in Paris." 

" Ay, — massacre them," cried the guests ; " that's the way. 
BiuMi their houses and cut their throats. Will it be lawful to do 
so without further authority, mine lios-t? If so, we will set about 
it immediately." 

" I cannot resolve you on that point," replied the landlord. 
*' You had better wait a short time. I dare say their slaughter 
will be publicly conunandcd." 

" Heaven grant it may be so I" cried one of the guests. " I 
will bear my part in the business." 

Catesby arose, paid his reckoning, and strode out of the 
tavern. 

" Do you know, mine host," said the guest who had last 
spoken, " J half suspect that tall fellow, who lias just left us, is a 
Papist." 

" Perhaps a conspirator," said another. 

" Let us watch him," cried a third. 

" Sta}'," cried the host, " he has paid me doul)le my reckon- 
ing. I believe him to be an honest man and a good Protestant." 



FLIGHT OF THE CONSPIRATORS. 2v9 

" What yon sav confirms my suspicions," rejoined the first 
speaker. " We will follow him."' 

On reaching Temple Bar, Catesby found the gates closed, 
and a guard stationed at them, — no one being allowed to pass 
through without examination. Not willing to expose himself to 
this scrutiny, Catesby turned away, and in doing so, perceived 
three of the persons he had just left in the tavern. The expres- 
sion of their countenances satisfied him they were dogging him; 
hut affecting not to perceive it, he retraced his steps, gradually 
<]nickening his pace until he reached a narrow street leading into 
VV'hitefriars, down which he darted. The moment his pursuers 
saw this, they hurried after him, shouting, " A Papist — a Papist! 
— a conspirator !" 

But Catesby was now safe. Claiming the protection of cer- 
tain Alsatians who were lounging at the door of a tavern, and 
offering to reward them, they instantly drew their swords, and 
drove the others away, while Catesby, tossing a few pieces of 
money to his preservers, passed through a small doorway into 
the Temple, and making the best of his way to the stairs, leaped 
into a boat, and ordered the waterman to row to Westminster. 
The man obeyed, and plying his oars, soon gained the middle of 
the stream. Little way, however, had been made, when Catesby 
descried a large wherry, manned by several rowers, swiftly ap- 
proaching them, and instinctively coinprehentling whom it con- 
tained, ordered the man to rest on his oars till it had passed. 

In a few moments the wherry approached them. It was filled 
witii Serjeants of the guard and halberdiers, in the midst of whom 
sat Guy Fawkes. Catesby could not resist the ini[)ulse that 
prompted him to rise, and the movement attracted the attention 
of the prisoner. The momentary glance they exchanged con- 
vinced Catesby that Fawkes perceived him, though his motion- 
less features gave no token of recognition, and he immediately 
afterwards fixed his eyes towards heaven, as if to intimate, — at 
least Catesby so construed the gesture, — that his earthly career 
was well-nigh ended. Heaving a deep sigh, Catesby watched 
the v.herry sweep on towards the Tower, — its fatal destination, 
— until it was lost to view. 

" All is over, I fear, with the bravest of our band," he thought, 
as he tracked its course; "but some effort must be made to save 
him. At all events, we will die sword in hand, and like soldiers, 
and not as common malefactors." 

Abandoning his intention of proceeding to Westminster, ho 
desired the man to pull ashore, and landing at Arundel Stairs, 
hastened to the Strand. Here he found large crowds collected, 
the shops closed, and business completely at a stand. Nothing 
was talked of but the conspn-acy, and the most exagtierated and 
extraordinary accounts of it were circuhued and believed. Some 
would have it that the I'arliament House was already blown up. 



250 GUY FAWKES. 

and that the citv of London itself had hcen set fire to in several 
places by the Papists. It was also slated that mnnerous arrests 
had taken place, and it was certain that the houses of several 
Catholic nobles and wealthy gentlemen had been searched. To 
such a height was the popular indignation raised, that it rc(]uired 
the utmost efforts of the soldiery to prevent the mob from break- 
ing; into these houses, and using violence towards their inmates. 

Every gate and avenue to the palace was strictly guarded, and 
troops of horse were continually scouring the streets. Sentinels 
■were placed before suspected houses, and no one was suffered to 
enter them, or to go forth without special permission. Detach- 
ments of soldiery were also stationed at the end of all the main 
thoroughfares. Bars were thrown across the smaller streets and 
outlets, and proclamation was made that no one was to quit the 
city, however lU'gent his business, for three days. 

On hearing this announcement, Catesby saw at once that if he 
did not effect his escape inmiediately, it would be impracticable. 
Accordingly, he hurried towards Charing-cross, and turning uj> 
St. Martin's-lane, at the back of the King's Mews, contrived to 
elude the vigilance of the guard, and speeded along the lane, — 
for it was then literally so, and surrounded on either side by high 
hedges, — until he came to St. Giles's, — at this time nothing more 
than a few scattered houses, intermixed with trees. Here he 
encountered a man mounted on a powerful steed, and seeing this 
person look hard at him, would have drawn out of the way, if 
the other had not addressed him by name. He then regarded 
the equestrian more narrowly, and found it was Martin 
Heydocke. 

" I have heard what has happened, Mr. Catesby," said Martin, 
"and can imagine the desperate strait in which you nuist be 
placed. Take my horse, — it may aid your flight. I was sent to 
London by ni}' master, Mr. Humphrey Chetham, to bring him 
intelligence of the result of your attempt, and I am sure I am 
acting in accordance with his wishes in rendering you such a 
service. At all events, 1 will risk it. jNIount, sir, — mount, and 
make the best of your way hence." 

Catesby needed no further exhortation, but, springing into the 
saddle, hastily murmured his thanks, and striking into a lane on 
the right, rode off at a swift ])ace towards Highgate. 

On reachino; the brow of this beautiful hill, he drew in the 
bridle for a moment, and gazed towards the city he had just 
quitted. Dark and bitter were his thoughts as he fixed his eye 
ujxni Westminster Abbey, and fancied he could discern the 
neighbouring })ile, whose destruction he had meditated. Re- 
membering that from this very spot, when he had last approached 
the capital, in company with Guy Fawkes and Viviana Radcliffe, 
he had looked in the same direction, he could not help contrast- 
ing his present sensations with those he had then experienced. 



FLIGHT OF THE CONSPIRATORS. 251 

At that time he was full of ardour, and confident of success. 
Now, all was lost to him, and he was anxious for little more than 
self-preservation. Involuntarily, his eye wandered along the 
great city, until passing over the mighty fabric of Saint Paul's, 
it settled upon the Tower, — upon the place of Guy Fawkes's 
captivity. 

" And can nothing be done for his deliverance ?"' sighed 
Catesby, as he turned away, his eyes filling with moisture 
*' must that brave soldier die the death of a felon — must he be 
subjected to the torture — horror ! If he had died defending 
himself, I should scarcely have pitied him. And if he had de- 
stroyed himself, together with his foes, as he resolved to do, I 
should have envied him. But the idea of what he will have to 
suffer in that dreadful place — na}', what he is now, perhaps, 
suffering — makes the life-blood curdle in my veins. I will never 
fall alive into their hands." 

With this resolve, he struck spurs into his steed, and, urging 
him to a swift pace, dashed rapidl}' forward. He had ridden 
more than a mile, when hearing shouts behind him, he perceived 
two troopers galloping after him as fast as their horses could 
carry them. They shouted to him to stay, and as they were 
better mounted than he was, it was evident they would soon 
come up with him. Determined, however, to adhere to the 
resolution he had just formed, and not to yield himself with lite, 
he prepared for a conflict, and suddenly halting, he concealed a 
pctronel beneath his cloak, and waited till his foes drew near. 

*' I command you, in the King's name, to surrender," said 
the foremost trooper, riding up, " You are a rebel and a 
traitor." 

"Be this my answer," replied Catesby, aiming at the man, 
and firing with such certainty, that he fell from his horse mortally 
wounded. Unsheathing his sword, he then prepared to attack 
the other trooper. But, terrified at the fate of his comrade, the 
man turned his horse's head, and rode off. 

Without bestowing a thought on the dying man who lay 
groaning in the mire, Catesby caught hold of the bridle of his 
horse, and satisfied that the animal was better than his own, 
mounted him, and proceeded at the same headlong pace as 
before. 

In a short time he reached Finchlcy, where several persons 
rushed from their dwellings to inquire whether he brought any 
intelligence of the plot, rumours of which had already reached 
them. Without stopping, Catesby replied that most important 
discoveries had been made, and that he was carrying dcs[)atches 
from the King to Northampton. No opposition was tlicrctorc 
offered him, and he soon left all traces of habitation bchinil him. 
Urging his horse to its utmost, he arrived, in less than a (juarter 
of an hour, at Chipping Barnet. Here the same inquiries were 



252 GUY FAWKES. 

made as at Finclilcy, and returning the same answer — for he 
never relaxed his speed for a moment — he pursued liis course. 

In less than three quarters of an hour after this, he arrived at 
Saint Albans, and proceeding; direct to the ])ost-h()use, asked for 
a horse, liut instead of complying with the request, the land- 
lord of the Rose and Crown — such was the name of the hostel 
— instantly withdrew, and returned the next moment with an 
officer, who desired to speak with Catcsby before he proceeded 
ftn-ther. The latter, however, took no notice of the demand, but 
rode off. 

The clatter of horses' hoofs beliind him soon convinced hira 
he was again pursued, and he was just beginning to consider in 
•what way he should make a second defence, when he observed 
two horsemen cross a lane on the left, and make for the main 
road. Ilis situation now appeared highly ])crilous, especially as 
his pursuers, who had noticed the other iiorsemen at the samo 
time as himself, shouted to them. But he was speedily relieved. 
These persons, instead of stopping, accelerated their pace, and 
appeared as anxious as he was to avoid those behind him. 

They were now within a short distance of Dunstable, and 
were ascending the lovely downs which lie on the I^ondon side 
of this ancient town, when one of the horsemen in front chancing 
to turn round, Catesby perceived it was Kookwood. Overjoyed 
at the discovery, he shouted to him at the top of his voice, and 
the other, who it pi'csently appeared was accompanied by 
K(!yes, instantly stopped. In a few seconds Catesby w;is by 
their side, and a rapid explanation taking place, they all three 
drew up in order of battle. 

By this time their jun'suers had arrived within a hundred yards 
of them, and seeing how matters stood, and not wilHng to hazard 
an engagement, after a brief consuUation, retired. 'J'he three 
friends then pursued their route, passed through Dunstable, and 
without pausing a moment on the road, soon neared Fenny 
Stratford. Just before they arrived at this place, Catesby's 
horse fell from exhaustion. Instantly extricating himself from 
the fallen animal, he ran by the side of his companions till they 
got to the town, where Rookwood, who had placed relays on the 
road, changed his horse, and the others were fortunate enough 
to })rocure fresh steeds. 

Proceeding with unabated impetuosity, they soon cleared a 
few more miles, and had just left Stony Stratford behind them, 
when the}' overtook a solitary horseman, who ])rovcd to be John 
Wright, and a little further on they came up with Percy, and 
Christopher Wright. 

Though their numbers were thus increased, they did not 
consider themselves secure, but flinging their cloaks a\\ay to 
enable them to proceed with greater expedition, hurried on to 
Towcester. Here Keycs quilted his companions, and shaped 



FLIGHT OF THE CONSPIRATORS. 253 

jhis course into Warwickshire, wiiere he was afterwards taken, 
while the others, havin<^ procured fresh horses, made the best of 
their way to Ashby Saint Leger's. 

About six o'clock, Catesby and his companions arrived at his 
old family seat, which he had expected to approach in triumph, 
but which he now approached with feehngs of the deepest mor- 
tification and disappointment. They found the house filled with 
guests — among whom was Robert Winter — who were just sittinf^ 
down to supper. Catesby rushed into the room in which these 
persons were assembled, covered with mud and dirt, his haggard 
looks and dejected appearance proclaiming that his project had 
failed. His friends followed, and their appearance confirmed 
the impression that he had produced. Lady Catesby hastened 
to her son, and strove to comfort him ; but he rudely repulsed her. 

" What is the matter ?" she anxiously inquired. 

*•' What is the matter !" cried Catesby, in a furious tone, and 
stamping his foot to the ground. "All is lost! our scheme is 
discovered ; Guy Fawkes is a prisoner, and ere long we shall all 
be led to the block. Yes, all!" he repeated, gazing sternlj 
around. 

" I will never be led thither with life," said Robert Winter. 

" Nor I," added a young Catholic gentleman, named ActoD 
of Ribbesford, who had lately joined the conspiracy. " Though 
the great design has failed, we are yet free, and have swords to 
draw, and arms to wield them." 

" A}'," exclaimed Robert Winter, " all our friends are assembled 
at Dunchurch. Let us join them instantly, and we may yet stir 
up a rebellion which may accomplish all we can desire. I, 
myselfj accompanied Hinuphrey Littleton to Dunchurch this 
morning, and know we shall find everything in readiness." 

"Do not desp'iir," cried Lady Catesby; "all will yet be well. 
Every member >; our faith will join yon, and you will soon 
muster a formidable <n-my." 

" We must not yield without a blow," cried Percy, pouring 
out a bumper of wine, and swallowmg it at a draught. 

"You are right," said Rookwood, imitating his example^ 
*' We will sell our lives dearly." 

"If you will adiiere to this resolution, gentlemen," rejoined 
Catesby, "wc may yet retrieve our loss. With five hundred 
stanch followers, who will stand by me to the last, I will engage 
to raise such a rebellion in England as shall not be ci)cckcd, 
except by the acknowledgment of our rights, or the dethrone- 
ment of the king." 

" We will all stand by you," cried the others. 

" Swear it," cried Catesby, raising the glass to his lips. 

" We do," was liie rc|)ly. 

" Wearied as we arc," cried Catesby, " we must at once pro- 
ceed to Dunchurch, and urije our friends to rise in arms with us.** 



f>.'4. GUY FAWKKS. 

" Agreed," cried the others. 

Sunimoniiip; all his household, and armincf tlicm, Catesby 
then set out with the rest for Dunehurch, which lay about five 
miles from Ashby Saint Leger's. They arrived there in about 
three quarters of an hour, and found the mansion crowded with 
Catholic gentlemen and their servants. Enteiing the banquet 
hall, they found Sir Everard Digby at the head of the board, 
'with Garnet on his right hand. Upwards of sixty persons were 
seated at the table.- Their arrival was greeted with loud shouts, 
and several of the guests drew their swords and flourished them 
over their heads. 

"What news?" cried Sir Everard Digby. *'Is the blow 
struck ?" 

" No," replied Catesby ; " we have been betrayed." 

A deep silence prevailed. A change came over the coun- 
tenances of the guests. Significant glances w^ere exchanged, and 
it was evident that general uneasiness prevailed. 

" What is to be done ?" cried Sir Everard Digby, after a 
pause. 

" Our course is clear," returned Catesby. " We must stand 
by each other. In that case, we have nothing to fear, and shall 
accomplish our purpose, though not in the way originally 
intended." 

" I will have nothing further to do with the matter," said Sir 
Robert Digby of Coleshill, Sir Everard's uncle. And rising, he 
quitted the room with several of his followers, while his example 
was imitated by Humphrey Littleton and others, 

" All chance for the restoration of our faith in England is 
over," observed Garnet, in a tone of despondenc}'. 

" Not so, father," replied Catesby, " if we are true to each other. 
My friends," he cried, stopping those who were about to depart, 
" in the name of our holy religion I beseech you to pause. Much 
is against us now. But let us hold together, and all will speedily 
be righted. Every Catholic in this county, in Cheshire, in Lan- 
cashire, and Wales, must flock to our standard when it is once dis- 
played — do not desert us — do not desert 3'ourselves — for our cause 
is your cause. I have a large force at my command ; so has Sir 
Everard Digby, and together we can muster nearly five hundred 
adherents. With these, we can offer such a stand as will enable 
us to make conditions with our opponents, or even to engage 
with them with a reasonable prospect of success. I am well 
assured, moreover, if we lose no time, but proceed to the houses 
of our friends, we shall have a large army with us. Do not fall 
off, then. On you depends our success." 

This address was followed by loud acclamations ; and all who 
heard it agreed to stand by the cause in which they had em- 
barked to the last. 

As Catesby left the banqueting-hall with Sir Everard, to make 



THE EXAMINATION. 255 



!J 



preparations for their departure, they met Viviana and a fcmaie 
attendant. 

*' I hear the enterprise has failed,'' she cried, in a voice suffo- 
cated b}' emotion, "What has happened to my husband? Is 
he safe ? Is he with yon ?" 

" Alas ! no," replied Catesby ; " he is a prisoner." 
Viviana uttered a cry of anguish, and tell senseless into the 
arms of the attendant. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE EXAIMINATION. 



Disarmed by Sir Thomas Knevet and his followers, who found 
upon his person a packet of slow matches and touchwood, and 
bound hand and foot, Guy Fawkes was dragged into the collar 
by his captors, who instantly commenced their search. In a 
corner behind the door they discovered a dark lantern, with a 
light burning within it; and moving with the utmost caution — 
for they were afraid of bringing sudden destruction upon them- 
selves — they soon perceived the barrels of gunpowder ranged 
against the wall. Carefully removing the planks, billets, and 
iron bars with which they were covered, they remarked that two 
of the casks were staved in, while the hoops from a third were 
taken off, and the powder scattered around it. They also noticed 
that several trains were laid along the floor, — everything, in 
short, betokening that the preparations for the desperate deed 
were fully completed. 

While they were making this investigation, Guy Fawkes, who, 
seeing that further resistance was useless, had remained perfectly 
motionless up to this moment, suddenly made a struggle to free 
himself; and so desperate was the effort, that he burst the 
leathern thong that bound his hands, and seizing the soldier 
nearest to him, bore him to the ground. He then grasped the 
lower limbs of another, who held a lantern, and strove to over- 
throw him, and wrest the lantern from his grasp, evidently 
intending to apply the light to the powder. And he would 
unquestionably have executed his terrible design, if three of the 
most powerful of the soldiers had not thrown themselves upon 
him, and overpowered him. All this was the work of a moment ; 
but it was so startling, that Sir Thomas Knevet and Topcliffc, 
though both courageous men, and used to scenes of danger — 
especially the latter— rushed towards the door, expecting soiio 
dreadful catastrophe would take place. 

"Do him no harm," cried Knevet, as he returned to the 



16i) GUY FAWKES. 

eoUlicrs, who •were still strngglit)<r with Fawkes, — " do him no 
harm. It is not here he must die.'' 

" A moment more, and I had blown you all to perdition,'* 
cried Fawkes. *' But Heaven ordained it otherwise." 

" Heaven will never assist such danmable designs as yours," 
rejoined Knevet. *' Thrust him into that corner," he added to 
his rnen, who instantly obeyed his injunctions, and held down the 
prisoner so firmly that he could not move a limb. " Keep him 
there. I will question him presently." 

"You mai/ question me," replied Fawkes, sternly; "but you 
•will obtain no answer." 

" We shall see," returned Knevet. 

Pursuing the search with Topcliffe, he counted thirty-six 
hogsheads and casks of various sizes, all of which were afterwards 
found to be filled with powder. Though prepared for this dis- 
covery, Knevet could not repress his horror at it, and gave vent 
to execrations against the prisoner, to •v\'hich the other replied by 
a disdainful laugh. They then looked about, in the hope of 
fmdiny; some document or fragment of a letter, which mitiht 
serve as a clue to the other ])arties connected with the fell design, 
but without success. Nothing was found except a pile of arms; 
but though they examined them, no name or cipher could be 
traced on any of the weapons. 

" We will now examine the prisoner more narrowly," said 
Knevet. 

This was accordingly done. On removing Guy Fawkes's 
doublet, a horse-hair shirt appeared, and underneath it, next his 
iieart, suspended by a silken cord from his neck, was a small 
silver cross. When this was taken from him, Guy Fawkes could 
not repress a deep sigh. 

" There is some secret attached to that cross," •whispered 
Topcliffe, plucking Knevet's sleeve. 

Upon this, the other held it to the light, while Topcliffe kept 
his eye fixed upon the prisoner, and observed that, in spite of all 
his efforts to preserve an unmoved demeanour, he was slightly 
agitated. 

" Do you perceive anything ?" he asked. 

" Yes," replied Knevet, " there is a name. But the character 
is so small I cannot decipiier it." 

" Let me look at it," said Topcliffe. " This is most important," 
he added, after gazing at it fur a moment; "the words inscribed 
on it are, ' Viviana Radclijf'c, Ordsall Hall.'' You may remember 
that this young lady 'U'as examined a short time ago, on suspicion 
of being connected with some P(;])ish plot against the state, and 
committed to the Tower, whence she escaped in a very extraor- 
dinary manner. This cross, found upon the prisoner, proves 
her connexion with the present plot. Every effort must be used 
lo discover her retreat." 



THE EXAMINATION. 257 

Another deep sigh invohintarily broke from the breast of Guy 
Favvkes. 

" You hear how deeply interested he is in the matter," 
observed Topchffe, in a low tone. " This trinket will be of 
infinite service to us in future examinations, and may do more 
for us with this stubborn subject even than the rack itself." 

" You are right," returned Knevet. " I will now convey him 
to Whitehall, and acquaint the Earl of Salisbury with his capture." 

" Do so," replied Topcliffe. " I have a further duty to per- 
form. Before morning I hope to net the whole of this wolfish 
pack." 

" Indeed !" exclaimed Knevet. *' Have you any knowledge 
of the others ?" 

Topcliffe smiled significantly. 

" Time will show," he said. " But if you do not require me 
further, I will leave you." 

With this, he quitted the cellar, and joined the Earl of Mount- 
eagle and Tresham, who were waiting for him outside at a little 
distance from the cclhir. After a brief conference, it was arranged, 
in compliance with the Earl of Salisbury's wishes, that if they 
failed in entrapping the conspirators, nothing should be said 
about the matter. He then departed with Tresham. Their sub- 
sequent proceedings have already been related. 

By Sir Thomas Knevet's directions, Guy Fawkes was now 
raised by two of the soldiers, and led out of the cellar. As he 
passed through the door, he uttered a deep groan. 

" You groan for what you have done, villain," said one of the 
soldiers. 

" On the contrary," rejoined Fawkes, sternly, " I groan for 
what I have not done." 

He was then hurried along by his conductors, and conveyed 
through the great western gate, into the palace of Whitehall, 
where he was placed in a small room, the windows of which were 
strongly grated. 

Before quitting him, Sir Thomas Knevet put several questions 
to him, but he maintained a stern and obstinate silence. Com- 
mitting him to the custody of an officer of the guard, whom he 
enjoined to keep strict guard over him, as he valued his life, 
Knevet then went in search of the Earl of Salisbury. 

The Secretary, who had not retired to rest, and was anxiously 
awaiting his arrival, was delighted with the success of the scheme. 
They were presently joined by Lord Mountcagle ; and aher a 
brief conference it was resolved to summon the Privy Council 
immediately, to rouse the King, and acquaint him with what 
had occurred, and to interrogate the prisoner in his presence. 

"Nothing will be obtained from him, 1 fear," said KueveU 
" He is one of the most resolute and determined fellows 1 ever 
encountered,*' 

S 



258 GUY FAWKES. 

And lie then related the desperate attempt made by Fawkes 
in the vault to blow them all up. 

" Whether he will speak or not, the King must see him," said 
Salisbury. As soon as Knevct was gone, the Earl observed to 
Mounteagle, " You had now better leave the palace. You must 
not appear further in this matter, except as we have arranged. 
Before morning, I trust we shall have the whole of the conspi- 
rators in our power, with damning proofs of their guilt." 

" By this time, my lord, they are in Tresham's hands," replied 
Mounteagle. 

"If he fails, not a word must be said," observed Salisbury. 
" It must not be supposed we have moved in the matter. AH 
great statesmen have contrived treasons, that they might after- 
wards discover them ; and though I have not contrived this plot, 
I have known of its existence from the first, and could at any 
time have crushed it had I been so minded. But that would 
nut have answered my purpose. And I shall now use it as a 
pretext to crush the whole Catholic party, except those on whom, 
like yourself, I can confidently rely." 

" Your lordship must admit that I have well seconded your 
efforts," observed Mounteagle. 

*'I do so," replied Salisbury, "and you will not find me un- 
grateful. Farewell ! I hope soon to hear of our fiirther success." 

Mounteagle then took his departure, and Salisbury imme- 
diately caused all such members of the Privy Council as lodged 
in the palace to be aroused, desiring they might be informed 
that a terrible plot had been discovered, and a conspirator 
arrested. In a short time, the Duke of Lennox, the Earl of 
Marr, Lord Hume, the Earl of Southampton, Lord Henry 
Howard, Lord Mounljoy, Sir George Hume, and others, were 
assembled; and all eagerly inquired into the occasion of the 
sudden alarm. 

Meanv.hile, the Earl of Salisbury had himself repaired to the 
King's bedchamber, and acquainted him with what had hap- 
pened. James immediately roused himself, and desired the 
chamberlain, who accompanied the Earl, to quit the presence. 

" Will it be safe to interrogate tiie prisoner here ?" he asked. 

*•' I will take care your Majesty shall receive no injury," 
replied Salisbury; "and it is absolutely necessary you should 
examine him before he is committed to the Tower." 

" Let him be brought before me, then, directly," said the 
King. " I am impatient to behold a wretch who has conceived 
so atrocious — so infernal a design against me, and against my 
children. Hark 'e, Salisbury, one caution I wish to observe. 
Let a captain of the guard, with his drawn sword in hand, place 
himself between me and the ]irisoncr, and let two halberdiers 
stand beside him, and if the villain moves a step, bid them strike 
him dead. You understand ?" 



THE EXAMINATION. 259 

" Perfectly," replied Salisbur}', bowing. 

" In that case, you may take off his bonds — that is, if you 
think it prudent to do so — not otherwise," continued James. 
*' I would not have the knave suppose he can awe me." 

" Your Majesty's commands shall be fulfilled to the letter,** 
returned the Earl. 

" Lose no time, Salisbury," cried James, springing out of bed, 
and beginning to dress himself without the assistance of his 
chamberlain. 

The Earl hastily retired, and ordered the attendants to repair 
to their royal master. He next proceeded to the chamber where 
Guy Fawkes was detained, and ordered him to be unboiuid, and 
brought before the King. When the prisoner heard this man- 
date, a slight smile crossed his countenance, but he instantly 
resumed his former stern composure. The smile, however, did 
not escape the notice of Salisbury, and he commanded the hal- 
berdiers to keep near to the prisoner, and if he made the 
slightest movement in the King's presence, instantly to despatch 
him. 

Giving some further directions, the Earl then led the way 
across a court, and entering another wing of the palace, ascended 
a flight of steps, and traversed a magnificent corridor. Guy 
Fawkes followed, attended by the guard. They had now reached 
the antechamber leading to the royal sleeping apartment, and 
Salisbury ascertained from the officers in attendance that all was 
in readiness. Motioning the guard to remain where they were, 
he entered the inner room alone, and found James seated on a 
chair of state near the bed, surrounded by his council ; — the Earl 
of Marr standing on his right hand, and the Duke of Lennox on 
his left, all anxiously awaiting his arrival. Behind the King 
were stationed half a dozen halberdiers, 

"The prisoner is without," said Salisbury. "Is it your 
Majesty's pleasure that he be admitted ?" 

" Ay, let him come in forthwith," replied James. " Stand by 
me, my lords. And do you, varlets, keep a wary eye upon him. 
There is no sa^'ing what he may attempt." 

Salisbury then waved his hand. The door was thrown open, 
and an officer entered the room, followed by Guy Fawkes, who 
marched between two halberdiers. When within a couple of yanh 
of the King, the officer halted, and withdrew a litde on the right, 
so as to allow full view of the prisoner, while he extended his 
sword between him and the King. Nothing could be more 
undaunted than the looks and demeanour of Fawkes. He strode 
firmly into the room, and without making any reverence, folded 
his arms upon his breast, and looked sternly at James. 

" A bold villain !" cried the King, as he regarded him. with 
curiosity not unmixed with alarm, " Who, and what are you, 
traitor ?" 

S2 



£60 GUY FAWKES. 

" A conspirator." replied Fawkes. 

" That I kno^'/' rejoined James, sharply. *' But how are yoa 
called ?" 

" John Johnson," answered Fawkes. " I am servant to Mr. 
Thomas Percy." 

" That is false," cried Salisbury. " Take heed that you speak 
the truth, traitor, or the rack shall force it from you." 

*' The rack will force nothing from me," replied Fawkes, 
sternly; '^'neither will I answer any question asked by your 
lordship." 

-' Leave him to me, Salisbur}', — leave him to me," interposed 
James. " And it was your hellish design to blow us all up with 
gunpowder ?" he demanded. 

" It was," replied Fawkes. 

" And how could you resolve to destroy so many persons^, 
none of whom have injured you?" pursued James. 

" Dangerous diseases require desperate remedies," replied 
Fawkes. " Milder means have been tried, but without effect. 
It was God's pleasure that this scheme, which was for the benefit 
of his holy religion, should not prosper, and therefore I do not 
repine at the result." 

" And are you so blinded as to suppose that Heaven can 
approve the actions of him who raises his hand against the King 
— against the Lord's anointed ?" cried James. 

" He is no king who is excommunicated by the apostolic see,** 
replied Fawkes. 

" This to our face I" cried James, angrily. " Have you no 
remorse — no compunction for what you have done ?" 

" My sole regret is that I have failed," replied Fawkes. 

" You will not speak thus confidently on the rack," said 
James. 

" Try me," replied Fawkes. 

" What purpose did you hope to accomplish by this atrocious 
design ?"' demanded the Earl of Marr. 

" My main purpose was to blow back the beggarly Scots to 
their native mountains," returned Fawkes. 

" This audacity surpasses belief," said James. " Mutius 
Scaevola, wlien in the presence of Porsenna, was not more reso- 
lute. " Hark 'e, villain, if I give you your life, will you disclose 
the names of your associates ?" 

" No," replied Fawkes. 

" They shall be wrung from you," cried Salisbury. 

Fawkes smiled contemptuously. " You know me not," he 
said. 

" It is idle to interrogate him further," said James. " Let 
him be removed to the Tower." 

" Be it so," returned Salisbury; " and when next jour Majesty 




:h 



< ^^a^/.*/(-/i^ ^/n/^A/^/^y7/?^ ^ ., -u^iu c 



THE EXAMINATION. 2G1 

questions him, I trust it will be in the presence of his con- 
federates." 

" Despite the villain's horrible intent, I cannot help admiring; 
his courage," observed James, in a low tone ; " and were he as 
ioyal as he is brave, he should always be near our person." 

With this, he waved his hand, and Guy Fawkcs was led 
forth. He was detained by the Earl of Salisbury's orders till 
the morninor, — it beino; anticipated that before that time tlio 
other conspirators would be arrested. But as this was not the 
case, he was placed in a wherry, and conveyed, as before related, 
to the Tower. 



i:nd of the second look 



9i3ook tl)t 'Ef)ivti* 

THE CONSPIRATORS. 



The conclusion shall be from the admirable clemency and moderation of the 
king ; in that, howsoever the&e ti-aitors-have exceeded all others in mischief, yet 
neither will the king exceed the usual punishment of law, nor invent any new 
torture or torment for them, but is graciously pleased to afi'ord them as well an 
ordinary course of trial as an ordinary punishment much inferior to their ofi'ence. 
And surely worthy of observation is the punishment by law provided and appointed 
for high treason : for, first, after a traitor hath had his just trial, and is convicted 
and attainted, he shall have his judgment to be drawn to the place of execution 
from his prison, as being not worthy any more to tread upon the face of the earth 
whereof he was made ; also, for that he hath been retrograde to nature, therefore 
is he drawn backward at a horsetail. After, to have his head cut off which ha<l 
imagined the mischief. And, lastly, his body to be quartered, and the quarters set 
up in some high and eminent place, to the view and detestation of men, and to 
become a prey for the fowls of the air. And this is a reward due to traitors, whose 
hearts be hardened ; for that it is a physic of state and government to let out 
corrupt blood fiom the heart. — Sir Edward Cokes Speech on the Gunpowder Treason. 



CHAPTER I. 

HOW GUY FAWKES WAS PUT TO THE TORTURE. 

Intimation of the arrest of Guy Fawkes havinoi; been sent to 
the Tower, his arrival was anxiously expected by the warders 
aiid soldiers composing the garrison, a crowd of whom posted 
themselves at the entrance of Traitor's Gate, to obtain a sight 
of him. As the bark that conveyed the prisoner shot through 
London Bridge, and neared the fortress, notice of its approach 
was given to the lieutenant, who, scarcely less impatient, had 
stationed himself in a small circular chamber in one of the turrets 
of Saint Thomas's or Traitor's Tower, overlooking the river, 
lie hastily descended, and had scarcely reached the ])lace of dis- 
embarkation, when the boat passed beneath the gloomy archway > 
the immense wooden wicket closed behind it ; and the officer in 
commraid springing ashore, was followed more deliberately by 
Fav.kes, who mounted the slippery stairs with a firm footstep. 
As he gained the summit, the spectators pressed forward ; but 
Sir William. Waad, ordering them in an authoritative tone to 
stand back, fixed a stern and scrutinizing glance on the prisoner. 

" Many vile traitors have ascended those steps," he said, " but 
none so false-hearted, none so bloodthirsty as you." 

*' None ever ascended them with less misgiving, or with less 
self-reproach," replied Fawkes. 



THE TORTURE. 263 

" Miserable wretch I Do you glory in your villany ?" cried 
the lieutenant. " If anything could heighten my detestation of 
the pernicious creed you profess, it would be to witness its effects 
on such minds as yours. What a religion must that be, which 
can induce its followers to commit such monstrous actions, and 
delude them into the belief that they are pious and praise- 
worthy !" 

" It is a religion, at least, that supports them at seasons when 
they most require it," rejoined Fawkes. 

" Peace I" cried the lieutenant, fiercely, '* or I will have your 
viperous tongue torn out by the roots." 

Turning to the officer, he demanded his warrant, and glancing 
at it, gave some directions to one of the w^arders, and then re- 
sumed his scrutiny of Fawkes, who appeared wholly unmoved, 
and steadily returned his gaze. 

Meanwhile, several of the spectators, eager to prove their 
loyalty to the king, and abhorrence of the plot, loaded the 
prisoner with execrations, and finding these produced no effect, 
proceeded to personal outrage. Some spat upon his face and 
garments ; some threw mud, gathered from the slimy steps, upon 
him ; some pricked him with the points of their halberds; while 
others, if they had not been checked, would have resorted to 
greater violence. Only one bystander expressed the slightest 
commiseration for him. It was Ruth Ipgreve, who, witli her 
parents, formed part of the assemblage. 

A few kindly words pronounced by this girl moved the prisoner 
more than all the insults he had just experienced. He said 
nothing, but a slight and almost imperceptible quivering of the lip 
told what was passing within. The jailer was extremely in- 
dignant at his daughter's conduct, fearing it might prejudice him 
in the eyes of the lieutenant, 

"Get' hence, girl," he cried, "and stir not from thy room for 
the rest of the day. I am sorry I allowed thee to come lorlh." 

"You must look to her, Jasper Ipgreve," said Sir William 
Waad, sternly. " No man shall hold an office in the Tower who 
is a favourer of papacy. If you were a good Protestant, and a 
faithful servant of King James, your daughter could never have 
acted thus unbecomingly. Look to her, I say, — and to 
yourself." 

" I will, honourable sir," replied Jasper, in great confiision. 
*' Take her home directly," he added, in an under tone to his wife. 
" Lock her up till I return, and scourge her if thou wilt. She will 
ruin us by her indiscretion." 

In obedience to this injunction, Dame I])greve seized her 
daughter's hand, and dragged her away. Ruth turned for a 
moment to take a last look at the prisoner, and saw that ins gaze 
followed her, and was fraught with an expression of the deepest 
gratitude. By way of showing hio disapproval of his daughter s 



2c 4 GUY FAWKES. 

conduct, tlic jailer now joined the bitterest of Guy Fawkes's 
assailants ; and ere long the asscinbhige became infuriated to 
such an ungovernable ])itch, that the lieutenant, who had allowed 
matters to proceed thus far in the hope of shaking the prisoner's 
constancy, finding his design fruitless, ordered him to be taken 
awiiy. Escorted by a dozen soldiers with calivers on their 
shoulders, Guy Fawkcs was led through the archway of the 
Bloody Tower, and across the Green to the Beauchamp Tower. 
He was placed in the spacious chamber on the first floor of that 
fortification, now used as a mess-room by the Guards. Sir 
William Waad followed him, and seating himself at a table, 
referred to the warrant. 

" You are here called John Johnson. Is that your name ?" 
he demanded. 

" If you find it thus written, you need make no further inquiry 
from n;e," replied Fawkes. " I am the person so described. 
That is sufficient for yon." 

" Not so," replied the lieutenant; " and if you persist in this 
stubborn demeanour, the severest measures will be adopted 
towards vou. Your sole chance of avoiding the torture is in 
making a full confession." 

" I do not desire to avoid the torture," replied Fawkes. " It 
will wrest nothing from me." 

" So all think till they have experienced it," replied the lieu- 
tenant ; " but greater fortitude than yours has given way before 
our engines." 

Fawkes smiled disdainfidly, but made no answer. 

The lieutenant then gave directions that he should be placed 
within a small cell adjoining the larger chamber, and that two of 
the guard should remain constantly beside him, to prevent him 
from doing himself any violence. 

" You need have no fear," observed Fawkes. " I shall not 
destroy my chance of martyrdom." 

At this juncture a messenger arrived, bearing a despatch from 
the Earl of Salisbury. The lieutenant broke the seal, and after 
hurriedly perusing it, drew his sword, and desiring the guard to 
station themselves outside the door, approached Fawkes. 

" Notwithstanding the enormity of your offence," he observed, 
" I find his Majesty will graciously spare your life, provided you 
will reveal the names of all your associates, and disclose every 
particular connected with the plot." 

Guy Fawkes appeared lost in reflection, and the lieutenant, 
conceiving he had made an impression upon him, repeated the 
offer. 

" How am I to be assured of this ?" asked the prisoner. 

" My promise must suffice," rejoined Waad. 

" It will not suffice to me," returned Fawkes. "I must have 
a pardon signed by the King." 



THE TORTURE. ?65 

'•■ Yoii shall have it on one condition," replied Waad. " You 
are evidently troubled with few scrny)les. It is tlie Earl of Salis- 
l)uvv's conviction that the heads of n^.any important Catholic 
families are connected with this plot. If they should prove to 
he so, — or, to be plain, if" you will accuse certain persons whom 
I will specify, you shall have the pardon you require." 

" Is this the purport of the Earl of Salisbury's despatch?" 
nsked Guy Fawkes. 

The lieutenant nodded. 

" Let me look at it," continued Fawkes. " You may be 
practising upon me." 

" Your own perfidious nature makes yon suspicious of treachery 
in others," cried the lieutenant. " Will this satisfy you?" 

And he held the letter towards Guy Fawkes, who instantly 
snatched it from his grasp. 

" What ho !" he shouted in a loud voice ; " what ho !" and the 
guards instantly rushed into the room. "You shall learn why 
you were sent away. Sir William Waad has offered me my life, 
on the part of the Earl of Salisbury, provided I will accuse 
certain innocent parties — innocent, exce})t that they are Catholics 
— of being leagued with me in my design. Read this letter, and 
see whether I speak not the truth." 

And he threw it among them. But no one stirred, except a 
warder, who, picking it up, delivered it to the lieutenant. 

" You will now understand whom you have to deal with," 
pursued Fawkes. 

" I do," replied Waad. *' But were you as unyielding as the 
walls of this prison, I would shake your obdin-acy." 

" I pray you not to delay the experiment," said Fawkes. 
"Have a little patience," retorted Waad. "I will not balk 
your humour, depend upon it." 

With this, he departed, and repairing to his lodgings, wrote a 
hasty despatch to the Earl, detailing all that had passed, and re- 
<iuesting a warrant for the torture, as he was a})[)rehensivc, if tho 
prisoner expired under the severe application that would be 
necessary to force the truth from him, he might be called to 
account. Two hours afterwards the messenger returned with 
the warrant. It was in the handwriting of the King, and con- 
tained a list of interrogations to be j)ut to the prisoner, con- 
cluding by directing him *' to use the gentler torture fust, ct sic 
per gradus ad ima tenditur. And so God speed you in your 
good work !" 

Thus armed, and fearless of the consequences, the lieutenant 
summoned Jasper Ipgreve. 

*' We have a very "refractory prisoner to deal with," he .>^aid, 
as the jailer appeared. " But I have just received the royal 
authority to put him through all the degrees of toilure it he con- 
tinues obstinate. How shall we begin ?" 



266 GUY FAWKES. 

" With the Scavenger's Daughter and the Little Ease, if ii 
please yon, honourable sir," replied Ipgreve. " If these fail, we 
can try the gauntlets and the rack ; and lastly, the dungeon 
among the rats, and the hot stone." 

" A good progression," said the lieutenant, smiling. " I will 
now repair to the torture-chamber. Let the prisoner be brought 
there without delay. He is in the Beauchamp Tower." 

Ipgreve bowed and departed, while the lieutenant, calling to 
an attendant to bring a torch, proceeded along a narrow passage 
communicating with the Bell Tower. Opening a secret door 
within it, he descended a flight of stone steps, and traversing a 
number of intricate passages, at length stopped before a strong 
door, which he pushed aside, and entered the chamber he had 
mentioned to Ipgreve. This dismal apartment has already been 
described. It was that in which Viviana's constancy was so fear- 
fully approved. Two officials in the peculiar garb of the place — 
a sable livery — were occupied in polishing the various steel 
implements. Besides these, there was the chirurgcon, who was 
seated at a side table, reading by the light of a brazen lamp. 
He instantly arose on seeing the lieutenant, and began, with the 
other officials, to make preparations for the prisoner's arrival. 
The two latter concealed their features by drawing a large black 
capoch, or hood, attached to their gowns over them, and this 
disguise added materially to their lugubrious appearance. One 
of them then took down abroad iron hoop, opening in the centre 
■with a hinge, and held it in readiness. Their preparations were 
scarcely completed when heavy footsteps announced the approach 
of Fawkes and his attendants. Jasper Ipgreve ushered theni 
into the chamber, and fastened the door behind them. All tiie 
subsequent proceedings were conducted with the utmost deli- 
beration, and were therefore doubly impressive. No undue 
haste occurred, and the officials, who might have been mistaken 
for phantoms or evil spirits, spoke only in whispers. Guy 
Fav>'kes watched their movements with imaltercd composure. 
At length, Jasper Ipgreve signified to the lieutenant that all was 
ready. 

" The opportunity you desired of having your courage put to 
the test is now arrived," said the latter to the prisoner. 

*' What am I to do ?" was the reply. 

*' Remove your doublet, and prostrate yourself," subjoined 
Ipgreve. 

Guy Fawkes obeyed, and when in this posture began audibly 
to recite a prayer to the Virgin. 

"Be silent,'^ cried the lieutenant, "or a gag shall be thrust 
into your mouth." 

Kneelini?; upon the prisoner's shoulders, and passing the hoop 
under his legs, Ipgreve then succeeded, with the help of his 
assiiitantSi who added their weight to his own, in fastening the 



THE TORTURE. 267 

hoop with an iron button. This done, they left the prisoner 
with his Hmbs and body so tightly compressed together that he 
was scarcely able to breathe. In this state he was allowed to 
remain for an hour and a half. The chirurgeon then found on 
examination that the blood had burst profusely from his mouth 
and nostrils, and in a slighter degree from the extremities of his 
hands and feet, 

" He must be released," he observed in an under tone to the 
lieutenant. " Further continuance might be fatal." 

Accordingly, the hoop was removed, and it Wtis at this moment 
that the prisoner underwent the sevei'cst trial. Despite his 
efforts to conti'ol himself, a sharp convulsion passed across his 
frame, and the restoration of impeded circulation and respiration 
occasioned him the most acute agony. 

The chirurgeon bathed his temples with vinegar, and his limbs 
being chafed by the officials, he was placed on a bench. 

" My warrant directs me to begin with the ' gentler tortures/ 
and to proceed by degrees to extremities," observed the lieu- 
tenant, significantly. " You have now had a taste of the milder 
sort, and may form some conjecture what the worst are like. Do 
you still continue contumacious?" 

"I am in the same mind as before," replied Fawkes, in a 
hoarse but firm voice. 

"Take him to the Little Ease, and let him pass the night 
there," said the lieutenant. " To-morrow I will continue the 
investigation." 

Fawkes was then led out by Ipgrevc and the offici:jls, and 
conveyed along a narrow passage, until arriving at a low door,, 
in which there was an iron grating, it was opened, and disclosed 
a narrow cell about four feet high, one and a few inches wide, and 
two deep. Into this narrow receptacle, which seemed wholly 
inadequate to contain a tall and strongly-built man like himself,, 
the prisoner was with some difficulty thrust, and the dour locked 
upon him. 

In this miserable plight, with his head bent upon his breast, — 
the cell being so contrived that its wretched inmate could neither 
sit, nor recline at full length within it, — Guy Fawkes ])rayed 
long and fervently ; and no longer troubled by the uneasy feelings 
which had for some time haunted him, he felt happier in his 
present forlorn condition than he had been when anticipating tlie 
full success of his project. 

" At least," he thought, "I shall now win myself a crown of 
^ martyrdom, and whatever my present sufferings may be, they 
^ will be speedily effaced by the happiness I shall enjoy hercaltcr." 

Overcome, at length, by weariness and exhaustion, he fell into 
a sort of doze — it could scarcely be called sleej) — and while iu 
this state, fancied he was visited by Saint Wiuifrid, who, 
approaching the door of the cell, touched it, and it iustanlly 



^nS GUY FAWKES. 

opened. She then ])lacc:d her hand npon his limbs, and the 
pain he had hitherto felt in them subsided. 

" Your troubles will soon be over," imn-innred the saint, "and 
you will be at rest. Do not hesitate to confess. Your silence 
will neither serve your companions nor yourself." With these 
words the vision disappeared, and Guy Fawkes awoke. Whether 
it was the effect of imatrination, or that his robust constitution 
had in reality shaken off the effects of the torture, it is impos- 
sible to sav, but it is certain that he felt his strength restored to 
him, and attributing his recovery entirely to the marvellous 
interposition of the saint, he addressed a prayer of gratitude to 
her. While thus occupied, he heard — for it was so dark he 
could distinguish nothing — a sweet low voice at the grating of 
the cell, and imagining it was the same benign presence as 
before, paused and listened. 

" Do you hear me ?" asked the voice. 

" I do," replied Fawkes. " Is it the blessed Winifred, who 
again vouchsafes to address me ?" 

" Alas, no !" replied the voice ; " it is one of mortal mould. 
I am Ruth Ipgreve, the jailer's daughter. You may remember 
that I expressed some symj)athy in your behalf at your landing 
<\t Traitor's Gate to-day, for which I incurred my father's dis- 
pleasure. But you will be quite sure I am a friend, when I tell 
you I assisted Viviana Radcliffe to escape." 

*' lla!" exclaimed Guy Fawkes, in a tone of great emotion. 

*• I was in some degree in her confidence," pursued Ruth ; 
■*' and, if I am not mistaken, you are the object of her warmest 
regard." 

The prisoner could not repress a groan. 

*'You are Guy Fawkes," pursued Ruth. *' Nay, you need 
liave no fear of me. I have risked my life for Viviana, and 
would risk it for you." 

'* I will disguise nothing from you," replied Fawkes, "I am 
he you have named. As the husband of Viviana — for such I 
am — I feel the deepest gratitude to you for the service you 
rendered her. She bitterly reproached herself with having 
placed you in so much danger. How did 3'ou escape?" 

"I was screened by my parents," ro])lied Ruth. "It was 
given out by them that Viviana escaped through the window of 
her prison, and I was thus preserved from punishment. Where 
is she now^ ?" 

" In safety, I trust," replied Fawkes. "Alas! I shall never 
behold her again." 

" Do not despair," returned Ruth. "I will try to eflcct your 
liberation; and though I have but slender hope of accomplishing 
it, still there is a chance." 

" I do not desire it," returned Fawkes. *' I am content to 
perish. All I lived for is at an end." 



THE TORTURE. 2C,9 

" This shall not deter me from tryinj^ to save you/* replied 
Ruth ; " and 1 still trust there is happiness in store for you with 
Viv'iana. Amid all your sufferings, rest certain there is one who 
will ever watch over you. I dare not remain here longer, for 
fear of a surprise. Farewell !" 

She then departed, and it afiorded Guy Fawkes some solace 
to ponder on the interview during the rest of the night. 

On the following morning Jasper Ipgreve appeared, and 
placed before him a loaf of the coarsest bread, and a jug of dirty 
water. His scanty meal ended, he left him, but returned in two 
hours afterwards with a party of halberdiers, and desiring him 
to follow him, led the way to the torture-chamber. Sir WilHam 
"Waad was there when he arrived, and demanding in a stern tone 
whether he still continued obstinate, and receiving no answer^ 
ordered him to be placed in the gauntlets. Upon this, he was 
suspended from a beaui by his hands, and endured five hours of 
the most excruciating agony — his fingers being so crushed and 
lacerated that he could not move them. 

He was then taken down, and still refusing to confess, was 
conveyed to a horrible pit, adjoining the river, called, trom the 
loathsome animals infesting it, " the dungeon among the rats." 
It was about twenty feet wide and twelve deep, and at high tide 
was generally more than two feet deep in water. 

Into this dreadful chasm was Guy Fawkes lowered by his 
attendants, who, warning him of the probable fate that awaited 
him, left him in total darkness. At this time the pit was free 
from water ; but he had not been there more than an hour, 
when a bubblino; and hissing sound proclaimed that the tide 
was rising, while frequent plashes convinced hnn that the rats 
were at hand. Stooping down, he felt that the water was alive 
with them — that they were all around him — and would not, 
probably, delay their attack. Prepared as he was for the worst, 
he could not repress a shudder at the prospect of the horrible 
death with which he was menaced. 

At this juncture, he was surprised by the appearance of a 
light, and perceived at the edge of the pit a female figure bearing 
a lantern. Not doubting it was his visitant of the former night, 
he called out to her, and was answered in the voice of Ruth 
Ipgreve. 

" I dare not remain here many minutes," she said, " because 
my father suspects me. But I could not let you perish thus. 
I will let down this lantern to you, and the light will keep away 
the rats. When the tide retires you can extinguish it." 

So saying, she tore her kerchief into shreds, and tymg the 
shps together, lowered the lantern to the prisoner, and without 
waiting to receive his thanks, hurried away. 

Thus aided, Guy Fawkes defended himself as well as he could 
against his loathsoaie assailants. The light showed that the 



270 GUY FAWKES. 

water was swarniinp; witli them — that they were creeping by 
hundreils up the sides of the pit, and preparing to make a 
general attack u])on liim. 

At one time, Fawkes determined not to oppose them, but to 
let them work their will upon him ; but the contact of the 
noxious animals made him change his resolution, and he instinc- 
tively drove them off. They were not, however, to be easily 
repulsed, and returned to the charge with greater fury than 
before. The desire of self preservation now got the belter of 
every other feeling, and the dread of being devoured alive giving 
new vigour to his crippled limbs, he rushed to the other side of 
the pit. His persecutors, however, followed him in myriads, 
springing upon him, and making their sharp teeth meet in his 
flesh in a thousand places. 

In this wav the contest continued for some time, Guy Fawkes 
speeding round the pit, and his assailants never for one moment 
relaxing in the pursuit, until he fell from exhaustion, and his 
lantern being extinguished, the whole host darted upon him. 

Thinking all over, he could not repress a loud cry, and it was 
scarcely uttered, when lights appeared, and several gloomy 
figures bearing torches were seen at the edge of the pit. Among 
these he distinguished Sir William Waad, who offered instantly 
to release him if he would confess. 

" I will rather perish," replied Fawkes, " and I will make no 
further effort to defend myself. I shall soon be out of the reach 
of your malice." 

" This must not be," observed the lieutenant to Jasper Ipgreve, 
■who stood b}-. " The Eari of Salisbury will never forgive me if 
he perishes." 

" Then not a moment must be lost, or those ravenous brutes 
will assuredly devour him," replied Tpgreve. " They are so fierce, 
that I scarcely like to venture among them." 

A ladder was then let down into the pit, and the jailer and the 
two officials descended. They were just in time. Fawkes had 
ceased to struggle, and the rats were attacking him with such 
fury that his words would have been speedily verified, but for 
Ipfireve's timely interposition. 

On being taken out of the pit, he fainted from exhaustion and 
loss of blood ; and when he came to himself, found he was 
stretched upon a couch in the torture-chamber, with the chirur- 
geon and Jasper Ipgreve in attendance. Strong broths and 
otlier restoratives were then administered ; and his strength being 
sufficiently restored to enable him to converse, the lieutenant 
again visited him, and questioning him as before, received a 
similar answer. 

In ihe course of that day and the next, he underwent at 
jjurcrvals various kinds of torture, each more excruciating than 
the preceding, all of which he bore with unabated fortitude. 



THE TORTURE. 271 

Among other applications, the rack was employed with such 
rigour, that his joints started from their sockets, and his frame 
seen)ed torn asunder. 

On the fourth day he was removed to another and yet ploomior 
chamber, devoted to the same dreadful objects as the first. It 
had an arched stone ceiling, and at the further extremity 3'awned 
a deep recess. Within this there was a small furnace, in ^Yhich 
fuel was placed, ready to be kindled ; and over the furnace lay a 
large black flag, at either end of which were stout leathern 
straps. After being subjected to the customary interroo-ations 
of the lieutenant, Fawkes was stripped of his attire, and bound to 
the flag. The fire was then lighted, and the stone gradually 
heated. The writhing frame of the miserable man ere long 
showed the extremity of his suffering ; but as he did not even 
utter a groan, his tormentors were compelled to release him. 

On this occasion, there were two personages present who had 
never attended any previous interrogation. They were wrapped 
in large cloaks, and stood aloof during the proceedings. Both 
were treated with the most ceremonious respect by Sir William 
Waad, who consulted them as to the extent to which he should 
•continue the torture. When the prisoner was taken off" the 
heated stone, one of those persons advanced towards him, and 
gazed curiously at him. 

Fawkes, upon whose brow thick drops were standing, and who 
was sinking; into the oblivion broufjht on bv overwroutrht endu- 
ranee, exclaimed, " It is the King ;" and fainted. 

" The traitor knew your Majesty," said the lieutenant. "But 
you see it is in vain to attempt to extort anything from him." 

" So it seems," replied James ; " and I am greatl}' disappointed, 
for I was led to believe that I should iiear a full confession of the 
conspiracy from his own lips. How say you, good Master 
chirurgeon, will he endure further torture ?" 

"Not without danger of life, your Majesty, unless he has some 
days' repose," replied the chirurgeon, " even if he can endure it 
then." 

" It will not be necessary to apply it further," replied Salis- 
bury. " I am now in full possession of the names of all the prin- 
cipal conspirators ; and when the prisoner finds further conceal- 
ment useless, he will change his tone. To-morrow, the com- 
missioners appointed by 3'our Majesty for the examination of all 
those concerned in this dreadful j)roject, will interrogate him in 
the lieutenant's lodgings, and I will answer with my life that the 
result will be satisfactory." 

"Enough," said James. "It has been a painful spectacle 
which we have just witnessed, and yet we would not have misled 
it. The wretch possesses undaunted resolution, and we can 
never be sufficiently grateful to the beneficent Providence that 
prevented hiui from working his ruthless purpose upon us. Th.e 



272 GUY FAWKES. 

day oil which we were preserved from this Gunpowder Treason 
bhall ever hereafter l)c kept sacred in our church, and thanks 
shall be returned to Heaven for our wonderful deliverance." 

"Your Majesty will act wisely," replied Salisbur3\ "The 
Ordinance will impress the nation with a salutary horror of all 
Papists and traitors, — for they are one and the same thing, — and 
keep alive a proper feeling of enmity against them. Such a fear- 
ful example shall be made of these n-iiscreants as shall, it is to be 
hoped, deter all others from following their cause. Not only 
shall they perish infamously, but their names shall for ever be 
held in execration." 

"Be it so," rejoined James. "It is a good legal maxim — 
Crescente malitid, crescere dehuit et poena.'''' 

Upon this, he left the chamber, and, traversing a number of 
subterranean passages with his attendants, crossed the drawbridge 
near the Byward Tower to the wharf, where his barge was waiting 
for him, and returned in it to Whitehall. 

At an early hour on the following day, the commissioners 
appointed to the examination of the prisoner, met together in a 
large room on the second floor of the lieutenant's lodgings, after- 
wards denominated, from its use on this occasion, the Council 
Cliamber. Affixed to the walls of this room may be seen at the 
present dav a piece of marble sculpture, with an inscription com- 
memorative of the event. The coiiunissioncrs were nine in 
number, and included the Earls of Salisbury, Northampton, 
Nottingham, Suffolk, Worcester, Devon, Marr, and Dunbar, and 
Sir John Popham, Lord Chief Justice. With these were asso- 
ciated Sir Edward Coke, attorney-general, and Sir William 
Waad. 

The apartment in which the examination took place is still a 
spacious one, but at the period in question it was much larger 
and loftier. The walls were panelled with dark lustrous oak, 
covered in some places with tapestry, and adorned in others with 
paintings. Over the chimney-piece hung a portrait of the late 
sovereign, Elizabeth. The commissioners were grouped round 
a large heavil}^ carved oak table, and, after some deliberation 
together, it was agreed that the prisoner should be introduced. 

Sir William Waad then motioned to Topcliffe, who vias in 
attendance with half a dozen halberdiers, and a few moments 
afterwards a panel was ]nished aside, and Guy Fawkes was 
brought through it. lie was su]i]i()rtcd by Topcliffe and Ipgreve, 
and it was with the greatest difficulty he could drag himself 
along. So severe had been the sufferings to which he iiad been 
subjected, that they had done the work of time, and placed more 
than twenty years on his head. His features were thin and 
€harp, and of a ghastly whiteness, and his eyes hollow and blood- 
shot. A large cloak was thrown over him, which partially con- 
cealed his shattered frame and crippled limbs ; but his bent 



THE TORTURE. 273 

shoulders, and the difficulty with which he moved, told how 
much he had undergone. 

On seeing the presence in which he stood, a flush for a moment 
rose to his pallid cheek, his eye glowed with its wonted fire, and 
he tried to stand erect — but his limbs refused tlicir office — and 
the effi)rt was so painful, that he fell back into the arms of his 
attendants. He was thus borne forward by them, and supported 
during his examination. The Earl of Salisbur}' then addressed 
him, and enlarging on the magnitude and horrible nature of his 
treason, concluded by saying that the only reparation he could 
offi.'r was to disclose not only all his own criminal intentions, but 
the names of his associates. 

"I will hide nothing concerning myself," replied Fawkes; 
*' but I shall be for ever silent respecting others." 

The Earl then glanced at Sir Edward Coke, who proceeded 
to take down minutes of the examination. 

" You have hitherto falsely represented yourself," said the 
Earl. " What is your real name ?" 

" Guy Fawkes," replied the prisoner. 

" And do you confess your guilt ?" pursued the Earl. 

" I admit that it was my intention to blow up the King and 
the whole of the lords spiritual and temporal assembled in the 
Parliament House with gunpowder," replied Fawkes. 

" And you placed the combustibles in the vault where they 
were discovered ?" demanded Salisbury. 

The prisoner answered in the affirmative. 

" You are a Papist ?" continued the Earl. 

" I am a member of the Church of Rome," returned Fawkes. 

" And you regard this monstrous design as righteous and 
laudable — as consistent with the religion you profess, and as 
(ikely to uphold it ?" said the Earl. 

" I did so," replied Fawkes. " But I am now convinced that 
Heaven did not approve it, and I lament that it was ever under- 
taken." 

" Still, you refuse to make the only reparation in your power 
— 3'ou refuse to disclose your associates ?" said Salisbury. 

" I cannot betray them," replied Fawkes. 

*' Traitor I it is needless," cried the Earl ; " they are known to 
us — nay, they have betrayed themselves. They have risen in 
open and armed rebellion against the King; but a sufficient 
power has been sent against them ; and if the}' are not ore this 
defeated and captured, many days will not elapse before they 
will be lodged in the Tower." 

" If this is the case, you require no information from me,** 
rejoined Fawkes. " But I pray you name them to me." 

" I will do so," replied Salisbury; " and if I have omitted anj, 
you can supply the deficiency. I will begin with Robert Caiesby, 
die chief contriver of this hell-engendered plot, — 1 will next pro- 

T 



274! GUY FAWKES. 

ceed to the superior of the Jesuits, Father Garnet, — next, to 
another Jesuit priest, Father Oldcorne, — next, to Sir Everard 
I3igbv, — then, to Thonins Winter and Robert Winter, — then, to 
John Wright and Christopher Wriglit, — then, to Ambrose Rook- 
wood, Thomas Percy, and John Grant, and lastly, to Robert Keyes.*' 

" Are these all ?" demanded Fawkes, 

" All we are acquainted with," said Salisbury. 

" Then add to tliem the names of Francis Tresham, and of his 
brother-in-law, Lord Mounteaglc," rejoined Fawkes. " I charge 
ooth with being privy to the plot." 

" I have forgotten another name," said Salisbury, in some con- 
fusion, " that of Viviana Radcliffe, of Ordsall Hall. I have 
received certain information that she was wedded to you while 
you were resident at White Webbs, near Epping Forest, and 
was cognisant of the plot. If captured, she will share your fate." 

Fawkes could not repress a groan. 

Salisbury pursued his interrogations, but it was evident, from 
the increasing feebleness of the prisoner, that he would sink 
vHider it if the examination was further protracted. He was 
therefore ordered to attach his signature to the minutes taken by 
Sir Edward Coke, and was placed in a chair for that purpose. 
A pen was then given him, but for some time his shattered 
fingers refused to grasp it. By a great effort, and with acute 
pain, he succeeded in tracing his Clnistian name thus: — 




While endeavouring to write his surname, the pen fell from his 
hand, and he became insensible. 



CHAPTER II. 

SHOWING THE TROUBLES i)F VIVIANA. 

On coming to herself, Viviana inquired for Garnet; and being 
told that he was in his chamber alone, she repaired thither, and 
found him pacing to and fro in the greatest ])erturbation. 

" If you come to me for consolation, daughter," he said, *'you 
come to one who cannot offer it. I am completely prostrated in 
spirit by the disastrous issue of our entcr})ri.ie ; and though I 
tried to prepare myself for what has taken place, I now find my- 
self utterly unable to cope with it." 

" If such is your condition, father," replied Viviana, " what 





U/yU •ya^CA^ ^/(iW^l-6^^^ -^^ uz^/^^-^^ 



TROUBLES OF VIVIANA. 275 

must be that of my husband, upon whose devoted head all the 
weight of this dreadful calamity row falls? You are still at 
liberty — still able to save yourself — still able, at least, to resist 
unto the death, if you are so minded. But he is a captive in 
the Tower, exposed to every torment that human inj^cnuity can 
invent, and with nothing but the prospect of a hngering death 
before his eyes. What is your condition, compared with his?" 

" Happy — most happy, daughter," replied Garnet, " and I 
have been selfish and unreasonable. I have given way to the 
weakness of humanity, and I thank you from the bottom of ray 
heart for enabling me to shake it off?' 

" You have indulged false hopes, father," said Viviana, 
" whereas I have indulged none, or rather, all has come to })ass 
as I desired. The dreadful crime with which I feared my hus- 
band's soul would have been loaded is now uncommitted, and I 
have firm hope of his salvation. If I might counsel you, I would 
advise you to surrender yourself to justice, and by pouring out 
your blood on the scaffold, wash out your offence. Such will be 
my own course. I have been involuntarily led into connexion 
with this plot; and though I have ever disapproved of it, since I 
have not revealed it I am as guilty as if I had been its contriver. 
I shall not shun my punishment. Fate has dealt hardly with 
me, and my path on earth has been strewn with thorns, and cast 
in grief and trouble. But I humbly trust that my portion here- 
after will be with the blessed." 

" I cannot doubt it, daughter," replied Garnet ; " and though 
I do not view our design in the light that you do, but regard it 
as justifiable, if not necessary, yet, with your feelings, I cannot 
sufficiently admire your conduct. Your devotion and self-sacri- 
fice is wholly without parallel. At the same time, I would try 
to dissuade you from surrendering yourself to our relentless 
enemies. Believe me, it will add the severest pang to your hus- 
band's torture to know that you are in their power. His nature 
is stern and unyielding, and, persuaded as he is of the justice of 
his cause, he will die happy in that conviction, certain that his 
name, though despised by our heretical persecutors, will be held 
in reverence by all true professors of our faith. No, daughter, 
fly and conceal yourself till pursuit is relinquished, and [lass the 
rest of your life in prayer for the repose of your husband's souL" 

" I will pass it in endeavouring to bring him to repentance,'* 
replied Viviana. "The sole boon I shall seek from my judges 
will be permission to attempt this." 

" It will be refused, daughter," replied Garnet, "and you will 
only destroy yourself, not aid him. Rest satisfied that the Great 
Power who judges the hearts of men, and implants certain 
impulses within them, for his own wise but inscrutable purposes, 
well knows that Guy Fawkes, however culpable his conduct may 
appear in your eyes, acted according to the dictates of liis con- 

T 2 



27A GUY FAWKES. 

t;cience, and in the full confidence that the design would restore 
the true worship of God in tliis kingdom. The faihirc of the 
enterprise proves that he was mistaken — that we were all mis- 
taken, — and that Heaven was unfavourable to the means adopted, 
— but it docs not prove his insincerity." 

" Tliese arguments have no weight with me, father," replied 
Viviana; "I will leave nothing undone to save his soul, and 
whatever may be the result, I will surrender myself to justice." 

" I shall not seek to move you from your purpose, daughter," 
replied Garuet, "and can only lament it. Before, however, you 
finally decide, let us pray together for directions from on high." 

Tims exhorted, Viviana knelt down with the priot before a 
small silver ima^e of the ^'ir<!:in, which stood in a niche in the 
wall, and they both prayed long and earnestly. Garnet was the 
first to conclude his devotions; and as he gazed at the upturned 
countenance and streaming eyes of his companion, his heart was 
filled with admiration and ]nty. 

At this juncture the door opened, and Catesby and Sir Everard 
])igby entered. On hearing them, Viviana innnediately arose. 

"The urgency of our business must plead an excuse for the 
interruption, if any is needed," said Catesby ; " but do not 
retire, madam. We have no secrets from you now. Sir Everard 
and I have fully completed our preparations," he added, to 
Garnet. " Our men are all armed and mounted in the court, 
and are in high spirits for the enterprise. As the service, how- 
ever, will be one of the greatest danger and difficulty, you had 
better seek a safe asylum, father, till the first decisive blow is 
struck." 

" I would go with you, my son," rejoined Garnet, "if I did 
not think my jn-esence might be an hinderance. I can only aid 
you with my prayers, and those can be more efficaciously uttered 
in some secure retreat, than during a rapid march or dangerous 
encounter." 

"You had better retire to Coughton with Lady Digby and 
Viviana," said Sir Everard. " I have provided a sufficient escort 
to guard you thither, — and, as you are aware, there are many 
hiding-places in the house, where you can remain undiscovered 
in case of search." 

" I place myself at your disposal," replied Garnet. " But 
Viviana is resolved to surrender herself." 

*• Tills must not be," returned Catesby. " Such an act at this 
juncture would be madness, and would materially injure our 
cause. Whatever your inclinations may prompt, you must con- 
sent to remain in safety, madam." 

" I have ac(juiesced in your proceedings thus fiir," replied 
Viviana, " because I could not o[)posc them without injury to 
those dear to me. But I will take no further share in them. My 
mind is made up as to the course I shall pursue." 



TROUBLES OF VIVIANA. 277 

" Since you are bent upon your own destruction, — for it is 
nothing less, — it is the duty of your friends to save you," rejoined 
vJatesby. " You shtill not do what you propose, and when yon 
are yourself again, and have recovered from the shock your feel- 
ings have sustained, you will thank me for my interference." 

" You are right, Catesby," observed Sir Everard ; " it would 
be worse than insanity to allow her to destroy herself thus." 

"lam glad you are of this opinion," said Garnet. "I tried 
to reason her out of her design, but without avail." 

" Catesby," cried Viviana, throwing herself at his feet, " by 
the love you once professed for me, — by the friendship you 
entertained for him who unhesitatingly ofiered himself for you, 
and your cause, I implore you not to oppose me now I" 

" I shall best serve you, and most act in accordance with the 
wishes of my friend, by doing so/' replied Catesby. " There- 
fore, you plead in vain." 

" Alas !" cried Viviana. " My purposes are ever thwarted. 
You will have to answer for my life." 

"I should, indeed, have it to answer for, if I permitted you to 
act as you desire," rejoined Catesby. "I repeat you will thank 
me ere many days are passed." 

" Sir Everard," exclaimed Viviana, appealing to the knight, 
" I entrea': you to have pity upon me." 

"I do sincerely sympathise with your distress," replied Digby, 
in a tone of the deepest conuniseration ; "hut I am sure what 
Catesby advises is for the best. I could not reconcile it to my 
conscience to allow you to sacrifice yourself thus. Be governed 
by prudence." 

" Oh no — no !" cried Viviana, distractedly. *' I will not be 
stayed. I command you not to detain me." 

" Viviana," said Catesby, taking her arm, "this is no season 
for the display of silly weakness either on our part or yours. If 
you cannot control yourself, you must be controlled. Lather 
Garnet, I intrust her to your care. Iwo of my troop shall 
attend you, together with your own servant, Nicholas Owen. 
You shall have stout horses, able to accomplish the journey with 
the greatest expedition, and I shoidd wish you to convey her 
to her own mansion, Ordsall IJall, and to remain there with 
her till you hear tidings of us." 

" It shall be as you direct, my son," said Garnet. " I am pre- 
pared to set out at once." 

" That is well," replied Catesby. 

" You will not do me this violence, sir," cried Viviana, " I 
appeal against it, to you. Sir Everard." 

" I cannot heli) you, madam," replied the knight, " indeed, I 
cannot." 

" Then Heaven, I trust, will help me," cried Viviana, " for 1 
am wholly abandoned of man." 



273 GUY FAWKES. 

" I beseech you, madam, put some constraint upon yourself," 
said Catesby. " If, after your arrival at Ordsall, you are still 
bent upon your rash and fatal design, Father Garnet shall not 
oppose its execution. But give yourself time for reflection." 

" Since it may not be otherwise, I assent," replied Viviana. 
" If I must go, I will start at once." 

'' Wisely resolved," replied Sir Everard. 

Viviana then retired, and soon afterwards appeared equipped 
for her journey. The two attendants and Nicholas Owen were 
in the court-yard, and Catesby assisted her into the saddle. 

"Do not lose sight of her," he said to Garnet, as the latter 
mounted. 

" Rest assured I will not," replied the other. 

And taking the direction of Coventry, the party rode off at a 
brisk pace. 

Catesby then joined the other conspirators, while Sir Everard 
sent off Lady Digby and his household, attended by a strong 
escort, to Coughton. Tliisdonc, the whole party repaired to the 
court-yard, where they called over the nmster-roll of their men, 
to ascertain that none were missing, — examined their arms and 
ammunition, — and finding all in order, sprang to their steeds, 
and putting themselves at the head of the band, rode towards 
Southani and Warwick. 



CHAPTER III. 

HUDDINGTON. 



About six o'clock in the morning the conspirators reached 
Leamington Priors, at that time an inconsiderable village ; and 
having ridden nearly twenty miles over heavy and mirj^ roads, — 
for a good deal of rain had fallen in the night, — they stood in 
need of some refreshment. Accordingly, they entered the first 
farm-yard they came to, and proceeding to the cow-houses and 
sheepfolds, turned out the animals within them, and fastening up 
their own steeds in their places, set before them whatever pro- 
vender they could find. Those, and they were by far the greater 
number, who could not find better accommodation, fed their 
horses in the yard, which was strewn with trusses of hay and 
great iieaps of corn. The whole scene formed a curious picture. 
Here was one party driving away the sheep and cattle, which 
were bleating and lowing, — there, another rifling a hen-roost, 
and slaughtering its cackling inmates. On this hand, by the 
direction of Catesby, two stout horses were being harnessed with 
ropes to a cart, which he intended to use as a baggage- waggon ; 



HUDDINGTON. £79 

on that, Sir Everard Digby was interposing his authority to pre- 
vent the destruction of a fine porker. 

Their horses fed, the next care of the conspirators was to 
obtain something for tbemselves: and ordering the master of the 
house, who was terrified almost out of his senses, to open his 
doors, they entered the dwelling, and causing a fire to be lighted 
in the chief room, began to boil a large kettle of broth upon it, 
and to cook other provisions. Finding a good store of eatables 
in the larder, rations were served out to the band. Two casks 
of strong ale were likewise broached, and their contents dis- 
tributed ; and a small keg of strong waters being also discovered, 
it was disposed of in the same way. 

This, however, was the extent of the mischief done. All the 
conspirators, but chiefly Catesby and Sir Everard Digby, dis* 
persed themselves amongst the band, and checked any disposition 
to plunder. The only articles taken away from the house were 
a couple of old rusty swords and a caliver. Catesby proposed 
to the farmer to join their expedition. But having now regained 
his courage, the sturdy churl obstinately refused to stir a foot 
with them, and even ventured to utter a wish that the enterprise 
might falL 

" I am a good Protestant, and a faithful subject of King 
James, and will never abet Popery and treason," he said. 

This bold sally would have been answered by a bullet from 
one of the troopers, if Catesby had not interfered. 

"You shall do as you please, friend," he said, in a conciliatory 
tone. " We will not compel any man to act against his con- 
science, and we claim the same right ourselves. Will you join 
us, good fellows ?" he added, to two farming men, who were 
standing near their master. 

" Must I confess to a priest ?" asked one of them. 

" Certainly not," replied Catesby. *'' You shall have no con- 
straint whatever put upon you. All I require is obedience to 
my commands in the field." 

'* Then I am with you," replied the fellow. 

" Thou'rt a traitor and rebel, Sam Morrell," cried the other 
hind, " and wilt come to a traitor's end. I will never fight 
against King James. And if I must take up arms, it shall be 
against his enemies, and in defence of our religion. No priests, 
— no papistry for me." 

" Well said, Hugh," cried his master; " we'll die in that cause, 
if need be." 

Catesby turned angrily away, and giving the word to his men 
to prepare to set forth, in a few minutes ail were in the saddle ; 
but on incpiiring for the new recruit, Sam Morrell, it was found 
he had disap])carcd. The cart was laden with arms, amnuinition, 
and SI few sacks of corn ; and the line being formed, they com- 
menced their march. 



280 GUY FAWKES. 

The morninp; was dark and misty, and all looked dull and 
dispiritini^. The conspirators, however, were full of confidence, 
and their men, exhilarated and refreshed hy their meal, appeared 
anxious for an ojiportunity of distinjjjnishing; themselves. 
Arrived within half a mile of Warwick, whence the lofty spire 
of the clmrcli of Saint Nicholas, the tower of Saint Mary's, and 
the ancient gates of this beautiful old town could just be discerned 
through the mist, a short consultation was held bv the rebel 

... 1 * 

leaders as to the expediency of attackinti; the castle, and carrying 
off the horses with which they had learnt its stables were filled. 

Deciding upon making the attempt, their resolution was com- 
municated to their fjllowcrs, and received with loud acclama- 
tions. Catesby then put himself at the head of the band, and 
they all rode forward at a brisk pace. Crossing the bridge over 
the Avon, whence the castle burst upon them in all its grandeur 
and beaut}', Catesby dashed forward to an embattled gate com- 
manding the approach to the structure, and knocking furiously 
against it, a wicket was opened by an old porter, who started 
back on beholdino; the intruders. He would have closed the 
wicket, but Catesby was too (juick for him, and springing from 
his steed, dashed aside the feeble op[)osition of the old man, and 
unbarred the gate. Instantly mounting again, he galloped alof.g 
a broad and winding path cut so deeply in the rock, that the 
mighty })ile they were approaching was completely hidden from 
view. A few seconds, however, brought them to a point, from 
which its three towers reared themselves full before them. 
Another moment brought them to the edge of the moat, at this 
time crossed by a stone bridge, but then filled with water, and 
defended by a drawbridge. 

As no attack like the present was apprehended, and as the 
owner of the castle, the celebrated Fulke Greville, afterwards 
Lord Brooke, to whom it had been recently granted by the 
reigning monarch, was then in the capital, the drawbridge was 
down, and though several retainers rushed forth on hearing the 
approach of so many horsemen, the}' were too late to raise it. 
Threatening these persons with destruction if any resistance was 
offered, Catesby passed through the great entrance, and rode 
into the court, where he drew up his band. 

By this time, the whole of the inmates of the castle had col- 
lected on the ramparts, armed with calivers and partisans, and 
whatever weapons they could find, and though their force was 
utterly disproportioned to that of their ojijionents, they seemed 
disposed to give them battle. Paying no attention to them, 
Catesby proceeded to the stables, where he found upwards of 
twenty horses, which he exchanged for the worst and most jaded 
of his own, and was about to enter the castle in search of arms, 
when he was startled by hearing the alarm-bell rung. This was 
Bucceeded by the discharge of a culverin on the summit of the 



HUDDINGTON. 1>81 

tower, named after the redoubted Guy, Earl of Warwick ; and 
though the bell was instantly silenced, Rookwood, who had dis- 
lodged the party from the ramparts, brought word that the 
inhabitants of Warwick were assembling, that drums were 
beating at the gates, and that an attack might be speedily ex- 
pected. Not desiring to hazard an engagement at this juncture, 
Catesby gave up the idea of ransacking the castle, and ordered 
ids men to their horses. 

Some delay, however, occurred before they could all be got 
together, and, meanwhile, the ringing of bells and other alarming 
sounds continued. At one time, it occurred to Catesby to- 
attempt to maintain possession of the castle ; but this design was 
overruled by the other conspirators, who represented to him the 
impracticability of the design. At length, the whole troop being 
assembled, they crossed the drawbridge, and speeded along the 
rocky path. Before the outer gate they found a large body of 
men, some on horseback, and some on foot, drawn up. These 
persons, however, struck with terror at their a[>pearance, re- 
treated, and allowed them a free passage. 

On turning to cross the bridge, they found it occupied by a 
strong and well-armed body of men, headed by the Sheriff" of 
Warwickshire, who showed no disposition to give wa}'. While 
the rebel party were preparing to force a passage, a trumpet was 
sounded, and the Sheriff, riding towards them, commanded 
them in the King's name to yield themselves prisoners. 

" We do not acknowledge the supremacy of James Stuart^ 
whom yon call king," rejoined Catesby, sternly. " We fight for 
our libei-ties, and for the restoration of the holy Catholic religion 
which we profess. Do not oppose us, or you will have cause to- 
rue your temerity." 

" Hear me," cried the Sheriff, turning from him to his men : 
" I promise you all a free pardon in the King's nauic, if you will 
throw down your arms, and deliver up your leaders. But, if 
after this warning, you continue in open rebellion against your 
sovereign, you will all suffer the vilest death." 

" Rejoin your men, sir," said Catesby, in a significant tone, 
and drawing a petronel. 

"A free pardon and a hundred pounds to him who will bring 
me the head of Robert Catesby," said the Sheriff, disregarding 
the menace. 

" Your own is not worth half the sum," rejoined ("atesby ; and 
levelling the petronel, he shot him dead. 

The Sheriff's fall was the ngnal for a general engagement. 
Exasperated by the death of their leader, the royalist party 
assailed the rebels with the greatest f(ny, and as tiie latter were 
attacked at the same time in the rear, their situation began to 
appear perilous. But n.othinn: could withstand the vigour and 
determination of Catesby. Cheering on his men. he soon cut 



t!82 GUY FAWKES. 

a way across the bridge, and would have made good his retreat, 
if he had not })erceivcd, to his infinite dismay, that Percy and 
Kookwood had been captured. 

Regardless of any risk lie might run, he shouted to those near 
to follow him, and made such a desperate charge upon the 
roy-ilists that in a few minutes he was by the side of his friends, 
«nd had liberated them. In trying, however, to follow up his 
advantage he got separated from his companions, and was so 
hotly jircssed on all sides, that his destruction seemed inevitable. 
Mis petronels had botii brought down their mark ; and in striking 
a blow against a stalwart trooper his sword had shivered close to 
the handle. In this defenceless state his enemies made sure of 
liim, but they miscalculated his resources. 

He was then close to the side of the bridge, and, before his 
purpose could be divined, struck spurs deeply into his horse, and 
cleared the parapet with a single bound. A shout of astonish- 
ment and admiration arose alike from friend and foe, and there 
was a general rush towards the side of the bridge. The noble 
aniujal that had borne him out of danger was seen swimming 
towards the bank, and, though several shots were fired at him, 
he reached it in safet}'. This gallant action so raised Catcsby 
in the estimation of his followers, that they welcomed him with 
the utmost enthusiasm, and rallying round him, fought with 
such vigour, that they drove their opponents over the bridge 
and compelled them to flee towards the town, 

Catcsby now mustered his men, and finding his loss slighter 
than he expected, though several were so severely wounded, that 
he was compelled to leave them behind; rode off at a quick pace. 
After proceeding for about four miles along the Stratford road, 
they turned off on the right into a narrow lane leading to Snit- 
terfield, with the intention of visiting Norbrook, the family resi- 
dence of John Grant. On arriving there, they put the house 
into a state of defence, and then assembled in the hall, while 
their foUov.ers recruited themselves in the court-yard. 

" So far, well," observed Catesby, flinging himself into a chair; 
*' the first battle has been won." 

*' True," replied Grant ; " but it will not do to tarry here long. 
This house cannot hold out against a prolonged attack." 

" We will not remain here more than a couple of hours," 
replied Catcsby : " but where shall we go next ? I am for 
making some desperate attempt, which shall strike terror into 
■our foes." 

" Are we strong enough to march to the Earl of Harrington's 
mansion near Coventry, and carry ofl" the Princess Elizabeth ?" 
asked Percy. 

" Siie were indeed a glorious prize," replied Catcsby; "but I 
have no doubt, on the first alarm of our rising, she has been con- 
veyed to a place of safety. And even if she were there, we 



HUDDINGTON. 283 

should have the whole armed force of Coventry to contend with. 
No — no, it will not do to attempt that." 

" Nothing venture, nothing have !" cried Sir Everard Digby. 
*' We ought, in my opinion, to run any risk to secure her." 

" You know me too well, Digby," rejoined Catesby, " to doubt 
my readiness to undertake any project, however hazardous, which 
would offer the remotest chance of success. But in this I see 
none, unless, indeed, it could be accomplished by stratagem. 
Let us first ascertain what support we can obtain, and then 
decide upon the measures to be adopted." 

" I am content," returned Digby. 

" Old Mr. Talbot of Grafton is a friend of yours, is he not ?" 
continued Catesby, addressing Thomas Winter. " Can you 
induce him to join us?" 

" I will try," replied Thomas Winter; " but I have some mis- 
givings." 

" Be not faint-hearted," rejoined Catesby. " You and Stephen 
Littleton shall go to him at once, and join us at your own 
mansion of Huddington, uhither we will proceed as soon as our 
men are thoroughly recruited. Use every argument you can 
devise with Talbot, — tell him that the welfere of the Catholic 
cause depends on our success, — and that neither his years nor 
infirmities can excuse his absence at this juncture. If he will 
not, or cannot come himself, cause him to write letters to all his 
Catholic neighbours, urging them to join us, and bid him send 
all his retainers and servants to us." 

**I will not neglect a single plea," replied Thomas Winter, 
*'and I will further urge comj)liance by his long friendship 
towards myself But, as I have just said, I despair of success." 

Soon after this, he and Stephen Littleton, with two of the 
troopers well-mounted and well-armed, rode across the country 
through lanes and by-roads, with which they were well acquainted, 
to Grafton. At the same time, Catesby repaired to the court- 
yard, and assembling his men, foimd there were t\venty-f»vc 
missing. More than half of these it was known had been killed 
or wounded at Warwick ; but the rest, it was suspected, had 
deserted. 

Whatever elfect this scrutiny might secretly have ujion 
Catesby, he maintained a cheerful and confident demeanour, 
and mounting a flight of steps, harangued the band in energetic 
and exciting terms. Displaying a suiall image of the virgin to 
them, he assured them they were under the special protection 
of heaven, whose cause they were fighting — and concluded by 
reciting a prayer, in winch the whole assemblage heartily joined. 
This done, they filled the baggage-cart with provisions and 
further amnuniition, and forming themselves into good ordiT. 
took the road to Alcestcr. 

They had not gone far, when torrents of rain fell, and the 



284 GUY FAWKES. 

roads beinp; in a sliocT<in<i; condition, and ploiifrhcd up with nits, 
they turned into the fields wherever it was practicable, and 
continued their march very slowly, and under excessively dis- 
heartening circumstances. Oa arriving at the ford across the 
Avon, near Bishopston, they found the stream so swollen that 
it was impossible to get across it. Sir Everard Digby, who 
made the attempt, was nearly carried off by the current. They 
were therefore compelled to proceed to Stratford, and cross the 
bridge. 

" My friends," said Catesby, commanding a halt at a short 
distance of the town, " I know not what reception we may meet 
with here. Probably much the same as at Warwick. But I 
command you not to strike a blow, except in self-defence." 

Those injunctions given, attended by the other conspirators, 
except Percy and Rookwood, who brought up the rear, he rode 
slowly into Stratford, and proceeding to the market-place, 
ordered a trumpet to be sounded. On the first ap])earance of 
the troop, most of the inhabitants fled to their houses, and 
fastened the doors, but some few courageous persons followed 
them at a wary distance. These were harangued at some length 
by Catesby, who called upon them to join the ex})edition, and 
held out promises, which only excited the derision of the 
hearers. 

Indeed, the dejected looks of most of the band, and the 
drenched and muddy state of their apparel, made them objects 
of pity and contempt, rather than of serious apprehension : and 
nothing but their numbers prevented an attack being made upon 
them. Catesbv's address concluded amid gnjans of dissatis- 
faction; and finding he was wasting time, and injuring his own, 
cause, he gave the word to march, and moved slowly through 
the main street, but not a single recruit joir.ed him. 

Another unpropitious circumstance occurred just as they were 
leaving Stratford. Two or three of his followers tried to slink 
away, when Catesby, riding after them, called to them to return, 
and no attention being paid to his orders, he shot the man 
nearest him, and compelled the others, by threats of the same 
punishment, to return to their ranks. This occurrence, v.hile it 
occasioned much discontent and ill-will among the band, gave 
great uneasiness to their leaders. Catesby and Percy now 
brought up tiie rear, and kept a sharp look-out to check any 
further attem])t at desertion. 

Digby and Winter, being well acquainted with all the Catholic 
gentry in the neighbourhood, they proceeded to their different 
residences, and were uniformly coldly received, and in souie 
cases dismissed with reproaches and menaces. In spite of all 
their efforts, too, repeated desertions took place ; and long before 
they reached Alcester, their force was diminished by a dozers 
men. Not thinking it prudent to pass through the town, they 



HUDDINGTON. 285 

Etrucl: into a lane on the right, and fording the Arrow near 
Ragley, skirted that extensive park, and crossing the hills near 
Weethly and Stoney Moreton, arrived in ahout an hour and a 
half, in a very jaded condition, at Haddington, the seat of 
Robert Winter. Affairs seemed to wear so unpromisint; an 
aspect, that Catesby, on entering the house, immediately called 
a council of his friends, and asked them what they proposed 
to do. 

"For my own part," he said, "I am resolved to fight it out. 
I will continue my march as long as I can get a man to follow 
me, and when they are all gone, will proceed alone. But I will 
never yield." 

" We will all die together, if need be," said Sir Everard 
Digby. " Let us rest here to-night, and in the morning proceed 
to Lord Windsor's mansion, Hewel Grange, which 1 know to 
be well stocked with arms, and, after carrying off all we can, 
we will fortify Stephen Littleton's house at Holbeach, and 
maintain it for a few days against our enemies." 

This proposal agreed to, they repaired to the court-yard, and 
busied themselves in seeing the wants of their followers attended 
to ; and such a change was effected by good fare and a few 
hours' repose, that the spirits of the whole party revived, and 
confidence was once more restored. A slight damp, however, 
was again thrown upon the satisfaction of the leaders, by the 
return of Thomas Winter and Stephen Littleton from Grafton. 
Their mission had proved wholly unsuccessful Mr. Talbot had 
not merely refused to join them, but had threatened to detain 
them. 

" He says we deserve the worst of deaths," observed Thomas 
Winter, in conclusion, " and that we have irretrievably injured 
the Catholic cause." 

" And I begin to fear he speaks the truth," rejoined Christo- 
pher Wright. " However, for us there is no retreat." 

" None whatever," rejoined Catesby, in a sombre tone. " We 
must choose between death upon the battle-field or on the 
scaffold." 

" The former be my fate," cried Percy. 

" And mine," added Catesby. 

An anxious and perturbed night was passed by the con- 
spirators, and many a plan was proposed and abandoned. It 
had been arranged among them that they should each in suc- 
cession make the rounds of the place, to see that the sentinels 
were at their posts — strict orders having been given to the 
latter to fire upon whomsoever might attempt to fly — but, as 
Catesby, despite his great ])revious fatigue, was unable to rest, 
he took this duty chiefly upon himself 

Returning at midnight from an examination of the court- 
yard, he was about to enter the house, when he perceived before 



286 GUY FAWKES. 

him a tall figure, with a cloak muffled about its face, standing 
in his path. It was perfectly motionless, and Catesby, who 
carried a lantern in his hand, threw the light upon it, but it 
neither moved forward, nor altered its position. Catesby would 
have challenged it, but an undefinable terror seized him, and 
his tongue clove to the roof of his mouth. An idea rose to his 
mind that it was the spirit of Guy Fawkes, and, by a powerful 
effort, he compelled himself to address it. 

" Are you come to warn me ?" he demanded. 

The figure moved in acquiescence, and withdrawing the cloak, 
revealed features of ghastly paleness, but resembling those of 
Fawkes. 

" Have I long to live ?" demanded Catesby. 

The figure shook its head. 

" Shall I fall to-morrow ?" pursued Catesby, 

The figure again made a gesture in the negative. 

" The next day ?" 

Solemnly inclining its head, the figure once more muffled its 
ghastly visage in its cloak, and melted from his view. 

For some time Catesby remained in a state almost of stupe- 
faction. He then summoned up all the resolution of his nature, 
and instead of returning to the house, continued to pace to and 
fro in the court, and at last walked forth into the garden. It 
was profoundly dark ; and he had not advanced many steps 
when he suddenly encountered a man. Repressing the excla- 
mation that rose to his lips, he drew a petronel from his belt, 
and waited till the person addressed him. 

"Is it you, Sir John Foliot?" asked a voice, which he in- 
stantly recognised as that of Topclifife. 

" Ay," replied Catesby, in a low tone. 

" Did you manage to get into the house ?" pursued Topcliffe. 

" I did," returned Catesby ; " but speak lower. There is a 
sentinel within a few paces of us. Come this way." 

And grasping the other's arm he drew him further down the 
walk. 

" Do you think we may venture to surprise them ?" demanded 
Topcliffe. 

" Hum I" exclaimed Catesby, hesitating, in the hope of in- 
ducing the other to betray his design. 

" Or shall we wait the arrival of Sir Richard Walsh, the 
Sheriff of Worcestershire, and the posse comitatus P pursued 
Topcliffe. 

" How soon do you think the Sheriff will arrive ?" asked 
Catesby, scarcely able to disguise his anxiety. 

" He cannot be here before daybreak — if so soon," returned 
TopcHffe, " and then we shall have to besiege the house ; and 
though I have no fear of the result, j'et some of the conspirators 
may fall in the skirmish; and my orders from the Earl of 



HUDDINGTON. 2^7 

Salisbury, as I have already apprised you, are, to take them 
alive." 

" True," replied Catesby. 

" I would not, for twice the reward I shall receive for the 
capture of the whole party, that that desperate traitor, Catesby, 
should be slain," continued Topclifie. "The plot was contrived 
by him, and the extent of its ramifications can alone be ascer- 
tained through him." 

" I think 1 can contrive their capture," observed Catesby ; " but 
the utmost caution must be used. I will return to the house, 
and find out where the chief conspirators are lodged. I will 
then throw open the door, and will return to this place, where 
you can have our men assembled. If we can seize and secure 
the leaders, the rest will be easy." 

" You will run great risk. Sir John," said Topcliffe, with 
affected concern. 

" Heed not that," replied Catesby. " You may expect me in 
a few minutes. Get together your men as noiselessly as you can." 

With this he hastily withdrew. 

On returning to the house, he instantly roused his companions, 
and acquainted them with what had occurred. 

" My object," he said, " is to make Topcliffe a prisoner. We 
may obtain much useful information from him. As to the 
others, if they offer resistance, we will put them to dcnth." 

" What force have they ?" asked Sir Everard Digby, with 
some uneasiness. 

"It is impossible to say precisely," replied Catesby; "but 
not more than a handful of men, I should imagine, as they are 
waiting for Sir Richard Walsh." 

" I know not what may be the issue of this matter," observed 
Robert Winter, whose looks were unusually haggard; "but 1 
have had a strange and ominous dream, which fills me with 
apprehension." 

" Indeed !" exclaimed Catesby, upon whose mind the recollec- 
tion of the apparition he had beheld rushed. 

" Catesby," pursued Robert Winter, taking him aside, " it 
you have any sin unrcpented of, I counsel you to make your 
peace with Heaven, for I fear you are not long for this world.' 

" It may be so," rejoined Catesby, firmly; " and I have many 
dark and damning sins upon my soul, but I will die as I have 
lived, firm and unshaken to the last. And now, let us prepare 
for our foes." 

So saying, he proceeded to call up the trustiest of his men, 
and enjoining profound silence upon them, disposed them in 
various places, that they might instantly appear at his signal. 
After giving them other directions, he returned to the garden, 
and coughed slightly. He was answered by a quickly -approach- 
ing footstep, and a voice demanded, 



2B3 OUY FAWKES. 

" Are you there, Sir John ?" 

Catesby answered in a low tone in the afRnnative. 

*' Come forward, then," rejoined Topclifle, 

As he spoke there was a rush of persons towards the spot, and 
seizing Catesby, he cried, in a triumphant tone, while he un- 
masked a lantern, and threw its light full upon his face, 

" You are caught in your own trap, Mr. Catesby. You are 
my prisoner." 

" Not so, villain," cried Catesby, disengaging himself by a 
powerful effort. 

Springing backwards, he drew his sword, and making the 
blade describe a circle round his body, eff^ected his retreat in 
safety, though a dozen shots were fired at him. Leaping the 
garden wall, he was instantly surrounded by the other conspi- 
rators, and the greater part of the band, who, hearing the reports 
of the fire-arms, had hurried to the spot. Instantly putting liim- 
self at their head, Catesby returned to the garden ; but Topcliffe 
and his party had taken the alarm and fled. Torches were 
brought, and, by Catesby's directions, a large heap of dry 
stubble was set on fire. But, though the flames revealed every 
object for a considerable distance around them, no traces of the 
hostile party could be discerned. 

After continuing their ineffectual search for some time, the 
conspirators returned to the house, and abandoning all idea of 
retiring to rest, kept strict watch during the remainder of the 
night. Little conversation took place. All were deeply 
depressed; and Catesby paced backwards and forwards within 
4i passage leading from the hall to the dining-chamber. His 
thouiihts were "-loomy enough, and he retraced the whole of his 

!• ' ^ I'll 

wild and turbulent career, pondering upon its close, which he 
•could not disguise from himself was at hand. 

"It matters not," he mentally ejacuhucd ; "I shall not die 
ignominiously, and I would rather ])erish in the vigour of man- 
hood than linger out a miserable old age. I have striven hard 
to achieve a great enterprise, and having failed, have little else 
to live for. This band cannot hold together two days longer. 
Our men will desert us, or turn upon us to obtain the price set 
upon our heads. And, were they true, I have little reliance 
upon my companions. They have no longer the confidence that 
can alone insure success, and I expect each moment some one 
will propose a surrender. Surrender ! I will never do so with life. 
Something umst be done — something worthy of me — and then 
let me perish. 1 have ever prayed to die a soldier's death." 

As he uttered these words unconsciously aloud, he became 
aware of the presence of Robert Winter, who stood at the end of 
the passage, watching him. 

" Your prayer will not be granted, Catesby," said the latter. 
■" Some dreadful doom, I fear, is reserved for you and all of us." 



HUDDINGTON. 289 



(( 



What mean you?" demanded the other, uneasily. 

" Listen to me," replied Robert Winter. " I told you I had 
a strange and appalling dream to-night, and I will now relate it. 
I thought I was in a boat upon the river Thames, when all at 
once the day, which had been bright and smiling, became dark 
and overcast, — not dark like the shades of night, but gloomy and 
ominous, as when the sun is shrouded by an eclipse. I looked 
around, and every object was altered. The tower of Saint Paul's 
stood awry, and seemed ready to topple down, — so did the spires 
and towers of all the surrounding fanes. The houses on London 
Bridge leaned frightfully over the river, and the habitations 
lining its banks on either side, seemed shaken to their founda- 
tions. I fancied some terrible earthquake must have occurred, 
or that the end of the world was at hand." 

" Go on," said Catesby, who had listened with profound atten- 
tion to the relation. 

" The stream, too, changed its colour," continued Robert 
Winter, " and became red as blood, and the man who rowed my 
boat was gone, and his place occupied by a figure masked and 
habited like an executioner. I commanded him to row me 
ashore, and in an instant the bark shot to land, and I sprang out, 
glad to be liberated from my mysterious conductor. My steps 
involuntarily led me toward the cathedral, and on entering it, I 
found its pillars, shrines, monuments, and roof hung with black. 
The throng that ever haunt Paul's Walk had disappeared, and 
a few dismal figures alone traversed the aisles. On approaching 
them, I recognised in their swollen, death-like, and blackened 
lineaments, some resemblance to you and our friends. I was 
about to interrogate them, when I was awakened by yourself." 

" A strange dream, truly," observed Catesby, musingly, " and 
coupled with what I myself have seen to-night, would seem to 
bode evil." 

And he then proceeded to describe the supernatural appear- 
ance he had beheld to his companion. 

" All is over with us," rejoined Robert Winter. " We must 
prepare to meet our fate." 

" We must meet it like men, — like brave men, Robert," 
replied Catesby. *' We must not disgrace ourselves and our 



cause." 



" You are right," rejoined Robert Winter; "but these visions 
are more terrible than the contemplation of death itself. 

" If you require further rest, take it," returned Catesby. " In 
an hour I siiall call up our men, and march to Ilewel Grange. 

" I am wearied enough," replied Robert Winter, " but I dare 
not close my eyes again." 

" Then recommend your soul to Heaven," said Catesby. " I 
would be alone. Mclaucholy thoughts press upon nic, and I 
desire to unburden my heart to God." 

II 



290 GUY FAWKES. 

Robert Winter then left him, and he withdrew into a closet 
^vhere there was an imafje of the Virgin, and kncchng before it, 
prayed \on^ and fervently. Arising in a calmer frame of mind, 
he returned to the hall, and summoning his companions and fol- 
lowers, their horses were brought forth, and they commenced 
their march. 

It was about four o'clock when they started, and so dark, that 
they had some difficulty in finding the road. They proceeded 
at a slow pace, and with the utmost caution ; but notwithstand- 
ing this, and though the two Winters and Grant, who were well 
acquainted \vith the country, led the way, many trilling delays 
anil disasters occurred. Their baggage-cart frequently stuck 
fast in the deep ruts, while the men missing their way, got into 
the trenches skirting the lane, and were not unfrequently thrown 
from their horses. More than once, too, the alarm was given 
that they were pursued, and a sudden halt ordered ; but these 
apprehensions proved groundless, and, after a most fatiguing ride, 
they found themselves at Stoke Prior, and within two miles of 
Hevvel Granoie. 

Originally built in the early part of the reign of Henry the 
Eighth, and granted by that monarch to an ancestor of its pre- 
sent possessor. Lord Windsor, this ancient mansion was quadran- 
gular in form, and surrounded by a broad deep fosse. Situated 
in the heart of an extensive park, at the foot of a gentle hill, it 
was now approached from the brow of the latter beautiful 
eminence by the rebel party. But at this season, and at this 
hour, both park and mansion had a forlorn look. The weather 
still continued foggy? with drizzling showers, and though the 
trees were not yet entirely stripped of their foliage, their glories 
had altogether departed. The turf was damp and plashy, and in 
£ome places partook so much of the character of a swamp, that 
the horsemen were obliged to alter their course. 

But all obstacles were eventually overcome, and in ten minutes 
after their entrance into the park, they were within gunshot ot 
the mansion. Tliere were no symptoms of defence apparent, 
but the drawbridge being raised, it was Catesby's opinion, not- 
withstanding appearances, that their arrival was expected. He 
was further confirmed in this idea when, sounding a trumpet, 
and calling to the porter to let down the drawbridge, no answer 
was returned. 

The entrance to the mansion was through a lofty and machio- 
lated gateway, strengthened at each side by an embattled turret. 
Perceiving a man at one of the loopholes, Catesby discharged 
his petronel at him, and it was evident from the cry that followed 
that the person was wounded. An instant afterwards calivers 
were thrust through the other loopholes, and several siiots fired 
upon the rebels, while some dozen armed men apr)eared upou 
the summit of the tower, and likewise commenced tirintj. 



HUDDINGTON. 291 

Perceiving Topcliffe among the latter, and enrarjed ai tlic 
sight, Catesby discharged another petronel at him, but without 
effect. He then called to some of his men to break down the 
door of an adjoining barn, and to place it in the moat. The 
order was instantly obeyed, and the door afloat in the fosse, and 
springing upon it, he impelled himself with a pike towards the 
opposite bank. Several shots were fired at him, and thoufrh 
more than one struck the door, he crossed the moat uninjured. 
So suddenly was this daring passage effected, that before any of 
the defenders of the mansion could prevent him, Catesby had 
severed the links of the chain fastening the drawbridge, and it 
fell clattering down. 

With a loud shout, his companions then crossed it. But thcv 
had still a difficulty to encounter. The gates, which were ot 
great strength, and covered with plates of iron, were barred. 
But a ladder having been found in the barn, it was brought fbr- 
%vard, and Catesby mounting it sword in hand, drove back all 
who opposed him, and got upon the wall. He was followed by 
Sir Everard Digby, Percy, and several others, and driving the 
royalists before them, they made their way down a flight of stone 
steps, and proceeding to the gateway, threw it open, and admitted 
the others. All this was the work of a few minutes. 

Committing the ransacking of the mansion to Digby and 
Percy, and commanding a dozen men to follow him, Catesby 
entered a small arched doorway, and ascended a winding stone 
staircase in search of Topcliffe. His progress was ojiposcd bv 
the soldiers, but beating aside all opposition, he gained the roof. 
Topcliffe, however, was gone. Anticipating the result of the 
attack, he had l&t himself drop from the summit of the tower iw 
the walls, and descending by the ladder, had made good his retreai. 

Disarming the soldiers, Catesby then descended to the court- 
yard, where in a short time a large store of arms, consisting ol' 
corslets, demi-lances, pikes, calivers, and two falconets, were 
brought forth. These, together with a cask of })owder, were 
placed in the baggage-waggon. ^Meanwhile, the larder and 
cellar had been explored, and provisions of all kinds, together 
with a barrel of mead, and another of strong ale, being found, 
they were distributed among the men. 

AVhile this took place, Catesby searched the mansion, and, 
partly by threats, partly by persuasion, induced about twenty 
persons to join them. This unlooked-for success so encouniged 
the conspirators, that their drooping spirits began to revive. 
Catesby appeared as much elated as the others, but at heart h<: 
was full of misgiving. 

Soon afterwards, the rebel party quitted Hcwel Grange, 
taking with tiiem every wca])on they could find, 'i'he forced 
recruits were pUiccd in the midst of the band, so that escape wajj 
impracticable. 

U2 



292 GUY FAWKES. 

CHAPTER IV. 

HOLBEACH. 

Avoiding the high road, and traversing an unfrequented part of 
tlie country, the cons])irat()rs shaped their course towards Stour- 
bridge. As they reached Forfield Green, they perceived a large 
party descending the hilly ground near Bromsgrove, and 
evidently in pursuit of them. An immediate halt was ordered, 
and taking possession of a farm-house, they prepared for defence. 

Seeing these preparations, their pursuers, who proved to be 
Sir Richard Walsh the Sheriff of Worcestershire, Sir John Foliot, 
three gentlemen named Ketelbye, Salwaye, and Conyers, at- 
tended by a large posse of men, all tolerably well armed, drew 
up at some distance from the farm, and appeared to be consulting; 
as to the prudence of nuiking an attack. TopclifTe was with 
them ; and Catcsby, who reconnoitered their proceedings from a 
window of the dwelling, inferred from his gestures that he was 
against the assault. And so it proved. The royalist party 
remained where they were, and as one or two of their number 
occasionally disappeared, Catesby judged, and correctly, that 
they were despatched for a reinforcement. 

Not willing to wait for this, he determined to continue his 
march, and, accordingly, forming his men into a close line, and 
bringing up the rear himself, they again set forward. Sir Richard 
Walsh and his party followed them, and whenever they were in 
a difficult part of the road, harassed them with a sudden attack. 
In this way, several stragglers were cut off, and a few prisoners 
made. So exasperated did Catesby become by these annoyances, 
that, though desirous to push forward as fast as possible, he 
halted at the entrance of a common, and prepared for an engage- 
ment. But his purpose w-as defeated, for the royalist party 
took another course, nor did he see anything more of them for 
some time. 

In about an hour the rebels arrived at the banks of the river 
Stour, not far from the little village of Churchill, and here, just 
as they were preparing to ford the stream, the sheriff and his 
followers again made their appearance. By this time, also, the 
forces of their opponents were considerably augmented, and as 
more than a third of their own party were engaged in crossing 
the stream, which was greatly swollen by the recent rains, and 
extremely dangerous, their position was one of no slight peril. 

Nothing daunted, Catesby instantly drew up his men on the 
bank, and, after a short skirmish, drove away the enemy, and 
afterwards contrived to cross the river without much loss. He 
found, however, that the baggage-cart had got immersed in the 
stream, and it was feared that the powder would be damaged. 



nOLBEACH. 295 

They remained on the opposite bank for some time ; but as their 
enemies did not attempt to follow them, they took the way to 
Holbeach, a large and strongly built mansion belonging, as has 
been already stated, to Stephen Littleton. Here they arrived 
without further molestation, and their first business was to put it 
into a complete state of defence. 

After a long and anxious consultation. Sir Everard Digby 
quitted them, undertaking to return on the following day with 
guccours. Stephen Littleton also disappeared on the same 
evening. His flight produced a strong impression on Catesby, 
and he besought the others not to abandon the good cause, but 
to stand by it, as he himself meant to do, to the last. They all 
earnestly assured him that they would do so, except Robert 
Winter, who sat apart, and took no share in their discourse. 

Catesby then examined the powder that had been plunged in 
the water in crossino; the Stour, and found it so much wetted as 
to be nearly useless. A sufficient stock of powder being of the 
utmost consequence to them, he caused all the contents of the 
barrel, not dissolved by the immersion, to be poured into a large 
platter, and proceeded to dry it before a fire which had been 
kindled in the hall. A bag or powder, which had likewise been 
slightly wetted, was also placed at what was considered a safe 
distance from the fire. 

" Heaven grant this may prove more destructive to our enemies 
than the combustibles we placed in the mine beneath the Par- 
liauient House I" observed Percy. 

" Heaven grant so, indeed !" rejoined Catesby, with a moody 
smile. " They would call it retribution, where we to perish by 
the same means which we designed for others." 

" Jest not on so serious a matter, Catesby," observed Robert 
Winter. " For my own part, I dread the sight of powder, and 
shall walk forth till you have dried this, and put it away." 

" You are not going to leave us, like Stephen Littleton ?" 
rejoined Catesby, suspiciously. 

" I will go with him," said Christopher Wright ; " so you need 
be under no apprehension." 

Accordingly, he quitted the hall with Robert Winter, and 
they proceeded to the court-yard and were conversing together 
en the dismal prospects of the party, when a tremendous explo- 
sion took place. The roof of the building seemed rent in twain, 
and amidst a shower of tiles, ])laster, bricks, and broken wood 
falHng around, the bag of powder dropped untouched at their 
feet. 

" Mother of mercy 1" exclaimed Ciiristopher Wright, picking 
it up. " Here is a providential occurrence. Had this exploded, 
we must all have been destroyed." 

" Let us see what has happened," cried Robert Winter. 

And, followed by Christopher Wright, he rushed towards the 



294 GUY FAWKES. 

hall, and bursting open the door, beheld Catesby enveloped In a 
cloud of smoke, and pressing his hand to his face, which was 
scorched and blackened by the explosion. Rookwood was 
stretched on the floor in a state of insensibility, and it at first 
appeared that life was extinct, Percy was extinguishing the 
flames, which had caught his dress, and John Grant was similarly 
occupied. 

" Those are the very laces I beheld in my dream," cried 
Robert Winter, gazing at them with affright. " It was a true 
warning." 

Rushing up to Catesby, Christopher Wright clasped him it» 
his arms, and extinfruishing his flaming apparel, cried, " Wretch 
that I am I that I should live to see this day !" 

" Be not alarmed I" gasped Catesby. " It is nothing — it was 
a mere accident." 

" It is no accident, Catesby," replied Robert Winter. "Heaven 
is ajrainst us and our dcsijin." 

And he quitted the room, and left the house. Nor did he 
return to it. 

"I will pray for forgiveness!" cried John Grant, whose vision 
■was so much injured b}' the explosion that he could as yet see 
nothing. And dragging himself before an image of the Virgin, 
he prayed aloud, acknowledging that the act he had designed 
was so bloody that it called for the vengeance of Heaven, and 
expressing his sincere repentance. 

*' No more of this," cried Catesby, staggering up to him, and 
snatching the image from him. " It was a mere accident, I tell 
you. We are all alive, and shall yet succeed." 

On inquiry, Christopher Wright learnt that a blazing coal had 
shot out of the fire, and falling into the platter containing the 
powder, had occasioned the disastrous accident above described. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE CLOSE OF THE REBELLION. 



Unable longer to endure the agony occasioned by his scorched 
visage, Catesby called for a bucket of water, and plunged his 
head into it. Somewhat relieved by the immersion, he turned 
to inquire after his fellow-sufferers. Rookwood having been 
carried into the open air, had by this time regained his conscious- 
ness ; Percy was shockingly injured, his hair and eyebrows burnt, 
his skin blackened and swollen with unseemly blisters, and the 
sight of one eye entirely destroyed ; while John Grant, though 
a degree less hurt than his companions, ])resentcd a griiu and 
ghastly appearance. In fact, the four suflerers looked as if they 




.■^> :; 



;^^ 



f^c^-f^Pty a^ 



CLOSE OF THE REBELLIOX. 295 

had just escaped from some unearthly place of torment, and 
were doomed henceforth to bear the brand of Divine wrath on 
their countenances. Seeing the effect produced on the others, 
Catesby rallied all his force, and treating the accident as a matter 
of no moment, and which ought not to disturb the equanimity 
of brave men, called for wine, and quaffed a full goblet. 
Injured as he was, and smarting with pain, Percy followed his 
example, but both John Grant and Rookwood refused the cup. 
" Hark 'e, gentlemen," cried Catesby, fiercely, "you may drink 
or not, as you see fit. But I will not have you assume a deport- 
ment calculated to depress our followers. Stephen Littleton and 
Robert Winter have basely deserted us. If you have any inten- 
tion of following them, go at once. We are better without you 
than with you." 

" I have no thought of deserting you, Catesby," rejoined 
Rookwood, mournfully ; " and when the time arrives for action, 
you will find I shall not be idle. But I am now assured that we 
have sold ourselves to perdition." 

"Pshaw !" cried Catesby, with a laugh that communicated an 
almost fiendish expression to his grim features; " because a little 
powder has accidentally exploded and blackened our faces, are 
we to see in the occurrence the retributive justice of Heaven ? 
Are we to be cast down by such a trifle ? Be a man, and rouse 
yourself Recollect that the eyes of all England are upon us ; 
"and if we must fall, let us perish in a manner that becomes us. 
No real mischief has been done. My hand is as able to wield 
a blade, and my sight to direct a shot, as heretofore. If Heaven 
had meant to destroy us, the bag of powder which has been taken 
up in the yard, and which was sufficient not only to annihilate 
us, but to lay this house in ruins, would have been suffered to 
explode." 

" Would it had exploded ?" exclaimed John Wright. " All 
would then have been over." 

" Are you, too, fainthearted, John ?" cried Catesby. ** Well, 
well, leave me one and all of you. I will fight it out alone." 

" You wrong me by the suspicion, Catesby," returned John 
Wright. " I am as true to the cause as yourself. But I perceive 
that our last hour is at hand, and I would it were past." 

" The indulgence of such a wish at such a moment is a weak- 
ness," rejoined Catesby. " I care not wlicn death comes, pro- 
vided it comes gloriously; and such should be your feeling. On 
the manner in which we meet our fate will depend the effect 
which our insiurection will produce throughout the country. 
We nuist set a brave example to our brethren. Heaven be praised, 
we shall not perish on the scaffold !"' 

" Be not too sure of that," said Grant, gloomily. ** It may 
yet be our fate." 

" It shall never be mine," cried Catesby. 



296 GUY FAWKES. 

" Nor mine," added Percy. " I am so far from rejjardinf; the 
recent disaster as a punishment, though I am the severest sulierer 
by it, that I think we ought to return thanks to Heaven for our 
preservation." 

" In whatever light the accident is viewed," observed John 
Wriglit, " we cannot too soon address ourselves to Heaven. We 
know not how long it may be in our power to do so." 

"Again desponding," cried (^atesby. " But no matter. You 
will recover your spirits anon." 

John Wright shook his jiead, and Catcsby, pulling his hat over 
his brows to hide his features, walked forth into the court-3'ard. 
He found, as he expected, that general consternation prevailed 
.nmongst the band. The men were gathered together in little 
knots, and, though they became silent as he a})proached, he 
perceived they were discussing the necessity of a surrender. 
Nothing daunted by these unfavourable appearances, Catesby 
harangued them in such bold terms that he soon inspired them 
with some of his own confidence, and completely rcsteadied 
their wavering feelings. 

Elated with his success, he caused a cup of strong ale to be 
given to each man, and proposed as a pledge, the restoration of 
the Romish Church. He then returned to the house; and sum- 
moning the other conspirators to attend him in a chamber on the 
ground-floor, they all prayed long and fervently, and concluded 
by administering the sacrament to each other. 

It was now thought necessary to have the damage done by the 
explosion repaired, and a few hours were employed in the opera- 
tion. Evening was fast approaching, and Catesby, who was 
anxiously expecting the return of Sir Everard Digby, stationed 
himself on the turreted walls of the mansion to look out for him. 
But he came not; and, fearing some mischance must have 
befallen him, Catesby descended. Desirous of concealing his 
misgivings from his companions, he put on a cheerful manner as 
he joined them. 

" I am surprised ere this that we have not been attacked," 
iremarked Percy. " Our enemies may be waiting for the dark- 
ness, to take us by surprise. But they will be disappointed." 

" I can only account for the delay by supposing they have 
encountered Sir Everard Digby, and the force he is bringing to 
us," remarked Christopher Wright. 

" It may be so," returned Catesuy, " and if so, we shall soon 
learn the result." 

In spile of all Catesby's efforts he failed to engage his com- 
panions in conversation, and feeling it would best suit his present 
frame of mind, and contribute n)ost to their safety, to kee]) in 
constant motion, he proceeded to the court-yard, saw that all the 
defences were secure, that the drawbridge was raised, the senti- 
nels at their posts, and everything prepared for the anticipated 



CLOSE OF THE REBELLION. 297 

attack. Every half hour he thus made his rounds, and when 
towards midnight he was going forth, Percy said to him, 

*' Do yon not mean to take any rest, Catesby ?" 

" Not till I am in my grave," was the moody reply. 

Catesby's untiring energy was in fact a marvel to all his 
followers. His iron frame seemed wholly unsusceptible of 
fatigue ; and even when he returned to the house, he continued 
to pace to and fro in the passage in preference to lying down. 

" Rest tranquilly," he said to Christopher Wright, who offered 
to take his place. *' I will rouse you on the slightest approach 
of danger." 

But though he preserved this stoical exterior, Catesby's breast 
was torn by the keenest pangs. He could not hide from himself 
that, to serve his own ambitious purposes, he had involved many 
loyal and worthy (till he had deluded them) persons in a treason- 
able project, which must now terminate in their destruction; 
and their blood, he feared, would rest upon his head. But what 
weighed heaviest of all upon his soul was the probable fate of 
Viviana. 

" If I were assured she would escape," he thought, " I should 
care little for all the rest, even for Fawkes. Thev say it is never 
too late to repent. But my re])entancc shall lie between mj* 
Maker and myself Man shall never know it." 

The night was dark, and the gloom was rendered more pro- 
found by a dense fog. Fearing an attack might now be attempted, 
Catesby renewed his vigilance. Marchino; round the edo;e of 
the moat, he listened to every sound that might betray the 
approach of a foe. For some time, nothing occurred to excite 
his suspicions, until about an hour after midnight, as he was 
standing at the back of the house, he fancied he detected a 
stealthy tread on the other side of the fosse, and soon became 
convinced that a party of men were there. Determined to ascer- 
tain their movements before giving the alarm, he held his 
breath, and drawing a pctronel, remained perfectly motionless. 
Presently, though he could discern no object, he distinctly heard 
a plank pushed across the moat, and could distinguish in the 
whispered accents of one of the party the voice of Topcliffe. A 
thrill of savage joy agitated his bosom, and he internally con- 
gratulated himself that revenge was in his power. 

A footstep, though so noiseless as to be inaudible to any car 
less acute than his own, was now heard crossing the plank, 
and feeling certain it was 'i'opcliffe, Catesby allowed him to 
land, and then suddenly advancing, kicked the plank, on which 
Vfere two other persons, into the water, and unmasking a dark 
lantern, threw its light upon the face of a man near him, who 
proved, as he suspected, to be Topclif^b. 

Aware of the advantage of making a prisoner of im[)ortance, 
Catesby controlled the impulse that prompted him to sacrifice 



298 GUY FAWKES. 

Topcliffe to his vonpjcancc, and firing his pctronel in the air as a 
signal, he drew his sword, and sprang upon him, Topcliffe 
attempted to defend himself, but he was no match for the skill 
and impetuosity of Catcsby, and was instantly overpowered and 
thrown to the ground, liy this time, Percy and several of the 
band had come uj>, and delivering Topcliffe to the charge of two 
of the stoutest of them, Catesby turned his attention to the other 
assailants. One of them got across the moat; but the otlier, 
encumbered by his arms, was floundering about, when Catesby 
pointing a petronel at his head, he was fain to surrender, and 
was dragged out. 

A volley of musketry was now fired by the rebels in the sup- 
posed direction of their opponents, but it could not be ascer- 
tained what execution was done. After waiting for some time, 
in expectation of a further attack, Catesby placed a guard upon 
the spot, and proceeded to examine Topcliffe. lie had been 
thrown into a cellar beneath the kitchen, and the two men were 
on guard over him. He refused to answer any of Catesby's* 
questions, though enforced by threats of instant death. On 
searching him some letters were found upon him, and thrusting 
them into his doublet, Catesby left him, with the strictest 
injunctions to the men as to his safe custody. 

He then proceeded to examine the other captive, and found 
him somewhat more tractable. This man informed him that 
Topcliffe had intended to steal into the house with the design 
of capturing the conspirators, or, failing in that, of setting fire 
to the premises. He also ascertained that Topclif^e's force 
consisted only of a dozen men, so that no further attack need be 
apprehended. 

Notwithstanding this information, Catesby determined to be 
on the safe side, and doubling the sentinels, he stationed one of 
the conspirators, ail of whom had sprung to arms at his signal, 
at each of the exposed points. He then withdrew to the man- 
sion, and examined Topcliffe's papers. The first despatch he 
opened was from the Earl of Salisbury, bearing date about the 
early part of Fawkes's confinement in the Tower, in which the 
Earl expressed his determination of wringing a full confession 
from the prisoner. A bitter smile curled Catesby's lip as he read 
this, but his brow darkened as he proceeded, and found that a 
magnificent reward was offered for his own arrest. 

" J must have Catesby captured," ran the missive, — " so see 
you sjjare no pains to take him. I would rather all escaped than 
he did. His confession is of the last importance in the matter, 
and I rely upon your bringing him to me alive." 

" I will at least balk him of that satisfaction," muttered 
Catesby. " But what is this of Viviana ?" 

Reading further, he found that the Eurl had issued the same 



CLOSE OF THE REBELLION. 209 

orders respecting Viviana, and that she would be rigorously dealt 
with it" ca])tured. 

" Alas !" groaned Catesby; " I hope she will escape these 
inhuman butchers." 

The next despatch he opened was from Tresham, and with a 
savage satisfaction he found that the traitor was apprehensive of 
double-dealing on the part of Salisbury and Mounteagle. He 
stated that he had been put under arrest, and was detained a 
prisoner in his own house ; and fearing he should be sent to the 
Tower, besought Topcliffe to use his influence with the Earl of 
Salisbury not to deal unfairly with him. 

" He is rightly sei-ved I" cried Catesby, with a bitter smile. 
*' Heaven grant they may deal with him as he dealt with us !" , 

The consideration of these letters furnished Catesby with food 
for much bitter reflection. Pacing the room to and fro with 
uncertain footsteps, he remained more than an hour by himself, 
and at last yielding to the promptings of vengeance, repaired to 
the cellar in which he had placed Topcliffe, with the intention 
of putting him to death. What was his rage and mortification 
to find both the guard and the prisoner gone ! A door was^ 
open, and it was evident that the fugitives had stolen to the 
moat, and, swimming noiselessly across it in the darkness, had 
securely effected their retreat. 

Fearful of exciting the alarm of his followers, Catesby con- 
trolled his indignation, and said nothing of the escape of the 
prisoner to any but his confederates, who entirely approved of 
the policy of silence. They continued on the alert during the 
remainder of the night, and no one thought of seeking repose 
till it was fully light, and all danger of a surprise at an end. 

Day dawned late and dismally. The fog that had hung round 
the mansion changed just before daybreak into drizzling rain, 
and this increased ere long to heavy and drenching showers. 
Everything looked gloomy and depressing, and the conspirators, 
were so disheartened, that they avoided each other's regards. 

Catesby mounted the walls of the mansion to reconnoitre. 
The prospect was forlorn and melancholy to the last degree. 
The neighbouring woods were obscured by mist ; the court-yard 
and garden flooded with rain; and the waters of the moat 
spotted by the heavy shower. Not an object was ni view, except 
a hind driving cattle to a neighbouring farm. Catesby shouted 
to him, and the fellow with evident reluctance approaching the 
brink of the moat, was asked whether he had seen any troops ii> 
the neighbourhood. The man answered in the negative, but 
said he had heard that an engagement had taken place in the 
night, about five miles from thence, near Hales Owen, betweeu 
Sir Everard Digby and Sir Richard Walsh, and that Sir Everard's 
party had been utterly routed, and himself taken prisoner. 



800 GUY FAWKES. 

This intelligence was a severe blow to Catesby, as it destroyed 
the last faint hope he had clung to. For some time he con- 
tinued wrapt in thoup;ht, and then descended to the lower part 
of the house. A large fire had been kept up during the night 
in the hall, and the greater part of the band were now gathered 
round it, drying their wet clothes, and conversing together. A 
plentiful breakfast had been served out to them, so that they 
were in tolerably good spirits, and many of them talked loudly 
of the feats they meant to perform in case of an attack. 

Catesby heard these boasts, but they fell upon an idle ear. 
He felt that all was over; that his last chance was gone ; and 
that the struggle could not be nnich longer protracted. Entering 
the inner room, he sat down at table with his companions, but 
he ate nothing, and continued silent and abstracted. 

*' It is now my turn to reproach you," observed Grant. " You 
look deefily depressed." 

*' Sir Everard Digby is a prisoner," replied Catesby, sternly. 
** His capture grieves me sorely. He should have died witli 
«s." 

All echoed the wish. 

Catesby arose and closed the door. 

" The attack will not be many hours delayed," he said ; " and 
tmle&s there should be some miraculous interposition in our 
behalf, it must end in our defeat. Do not let us survive it," he 
continued earnestly. " Let us swear to stand by each other as 
long as we can, and to die together." 

*' Agreed !" cried the others. 

" And now," continued Catesby, " I must compel myself to 
take some nourishment, for I have much to do." 

Having swallowed a few monthfuls of bread, and drained a 
goblet of wine, he again visited every part of the habitation, 
■examined the arms of the men, encouraged them by his looks 
and words, and became satisfied, unless some unlooked-for 
circumstance occurred to damp their ardour, they would ofler a 
determined and vigorous resistance. 

*' If I could only come oft' victorious in this last conflict, I 
sliould die content," thought Catesby. " And I do not despair 
of it." 

The rain continued till eleven o'clock, when it ceased, and 
the mist that had attended it partially cleared off". About noon, 
<Jatesby, who was on the look-out from the walls of the mansion, 
•descried a large troop of horsemen issuing from the wood. He 
immediately gave the alarm. The bell was rung, and all sprang 
to arms. 

By this time the troop had advanced within a hundred yards 
of the house, and Catesb}^ who had rushed into the court-yard, 
mounted a turret near the gate to watch their movcment.s, and 
issue his commands. The royalists were headed by Sir llichard 




/,-'J(' / '. 



7/ 



CLOSE OF THE REBELLION. 5gt 

Walsh, who was attended on the right by Sir John Foliot, 
and on the left by Topcliffe. Immediately behind them were 
Ketelbye, Salvvaye, Conyers, and others who had accompanied 
the posse comitatuft the day before. A trumpet was then sounded, 
and a proclamation made in a loud voice by a trooper, com- 
manding the rebels in the King's name to surrender, and to- 
deliver up their leaders. The man had scarcely concluded hisi 
speech when he was for ever silenced by a shot from Catesby. 

A loud and vindictive shout was raised by the royalists, and 
the assault instantly commenced. Sir Richard Walsh directed 
the attack against the point opposite the drawbridge, while Sir 
John Foliot, Topcliffe, and the others dispersed themselves, and 
completely surrounded the mansion. Several planks were thrust 
across the moat, and in spite of the efforts of the rebels many of 
the assailants effected a passage. 

Catesby drove back the party under Sir Richard Walsh, and 
with his own hand hewed asunder their plank. In doing this^ 
he so much exposed himself that, but for the injunctions of the 
Sheriff, who commanded his followers not to fire upon him, he 
must have been slain. 

The other rebel-leaders displayed equal courage, and equal 
indifference to danger, and though, as has just been stated, a 
considerable number of the royalists had got across the moat, and 
entered the garden, they had obtained no material advantage. 
Sir John Foliot and Topcliffe commanded this party, and 
encouraged them to press on. But such a continued and well- 
directed firing was kept up upon them from the walls and 
windows of the mansion, that they soon began to show symptoms, 
of wavering. 

At this juncture, and while Topcliffe was trying to keep his 
men together, a concealed door in the wall was opened, and 
('atesby issued from it at the head of a dozen men. lie in- 
stantly attacked Topcliffe and his band, put several to the sword,, 
and drove those who resisted into the moat. Foliot and Top- 
cliffe with difficulty escaped across the plank, which was seized 
and pulled over to his own side by Catesby. 

But the hope which this success inspired was instantly crushed. 
Loud shouts were raised from the opposite wing of the mansion,, 
and Catesby to his great dismay perceived from the volumes of 
smoke ascending from it that it was on fire. Uttering an 
exclamation of rage and despair, he commanded those with him^ 
not to quit their present position, and set off in the direction of 
the fire. 

He found that an outbuilding had been set in flames by a< 
lighted brand tlu-own across the moat by a trooper. The author 
of the action was named John Streetc, and was afterwards ren- 
dered notorious by another feat to be presently related. Edbrts 
were made to extingiiibh the conflagration, but such was the 



S02 GUY FAWKES. 

contusion prevailing that it was found wholly impossible to dc 
so, and it was feared that the destruction of the whole mansion 
would ensue. 

Disaster after disaster followed. Another party had crossed 
the moat, and burst into the court-yard. In tiie desperate con- 
ilict that ensued, Rookwood was shot through the arm, and 
severely wounded by a pike, and was borne into the house by 
one of his followers, whom he entreated to kill him outright, but 
his request was refused. 

Meantime, the drawbridge was lowered, and with loud and 
exulting shouts the great body of the royalists crossed it. 
<Jatcsby now perceived that the day was irretrievablv lost, 
('ailing to Christopher Wright, who was standing near him, to 
follow him, and rushing towards the court-yard, he reached it 
just as the royalists gained an entrance. 

In numbers both parties were pretty well matched, but the 
rebels were now thoroughly disheartened, and seeing how matters 
must end, many of them threw down their arms, and bcf^^ed for 
mercy. A destructive fire, however, was still kept up on the 
royalists by a few of the rebels stationed on the walls of the 
mansion, under the command of John Wright. 

Putting himself at the head of a few fiiithful followers, Catesbv 
fought with all the fury of despair. Christopher Wright was 
shot by his side. Grant instantly sprang forward, but was cut 
down by a trooper. Catesby was too busily occupied to attend 
to the fate of his companions, but seeing Thomas Winter near 
him, called to him to come on. 

" I can fight no longer," said Thomas Winter. " My right 
firm is disabled by a bolt from a cross-bow." 

" Then die," cried Catesby. 

" He fihall die— on the scaffold," rejoined Topcliffe, who had 
heard the exclamation. And rushing up to Thomas Winter, he 
seized him, and conveyed hitn to the rear of his party. 

Catesby continued to fight with such determined bravery that 
Sir Richard Walsh, seeing it would be vain to take him alive, 
withdrew his restrictions from his men, and ordered them to 
slay him. 

% this time most of the rebels had thrown down their arms. 
Those on the walls had been dislodged, and John Wright, 
refusing to yield, was slaughtered. Catesby, however, having 
been joined by Percy and half a dozen men, made a last despe- 
rate char;^^c u})on his opponents. 

In doing this, his sword shivered, and he would have fallen 
back, but found himself surrounded. Percy was close behind 
him, and keeping together, they fought back to back. Even in 
this disabled state, they made a long and desperate resistance. 

" Remember your oath, Percy," cried Catesby. "You have 
sworn not to be taken to the scaffold." 



CLOSE OF THE REBELLION. S03 

** Fear nothing," replied Percy. " I will never quit this spot 

1* ?j 
ive. 

The words were scarcely out of his mouth when he fell to the 
ground mortally wounded, and the same shot that had pierced 
his hreast had likewise stricken Catesby. It was fired by the 
trooper, John Streete, who has just been mentioned. 

Cf^llecting all his force, Catesby struck a few terrible blows at 
his opponents, and, dashing through them, made for the house. 
Just as he reached the door, which was standing open, his 
strength failed, and he fell to the ground. In this condition, he 
drajimed himself into the vestibule, where there was a large 
wooden statue of the Virgin, and clasping his arms around it 
pressed his lips to the feet of the image. He was followed by 
tSlreete, with his drawn sword in one hand and a petronel in the 
other, prepared to finish his work. But ere he could reach him, 
Catesby had expired. 

" So," exclaimed Topcliffe, who came up the next moment, 
with Sir Richard Walsh, " we have been robbed of our prey. 
The Earl of Salisbury will never forgive me for this disappoint- 
ment." 

" I am glad I have done it, though," observed Streete. " To 
kill two such traitors with one shot is something to talk of." 

" You will be well rewarded for it, no doubt," remarked 
Topcliffe, sarcastically. 

" I care not whether I am or not," rejoined Streete. " I have 
done my duty, and besides I have avenged my comrade, 
Richard Trueman, who was shot by this traitor when he read 
the proclamation." 

" I will take care that your brave action is duly represented to 
his Majesty," observed Sir Richard Walsh. 

And he failed not to keep his promise, Streete received a 
pension of two shillings a day for the rest of his life — no incon- 
«iderable sum in those days. 

The conflict was now at an end, for though some few of the 
more desperate of the rebels continued to struggle after their 
leaders had fallen, they were soon disarmed. Sir Richard Walsh 
i\n{\ Topcliffe went in search of the other conspirators, and find- 
ing Rookwood and Grant, who though severely wounded were 
not dead, lying in the hall, immediately secured them. Rook- 
\\ood on tlieir approach made an effort to plunge his tla;rgcr 
into his breast, but his hand was stayed by Sir Richard Wabh. 

" We shall not go away quite empty-handed," cried Topchtio. 
*' But these are sorry substitutes for Catesby. 

" lias Catesby escaped?" demanded Grant, fliintly. 

*' Ay, to the other world," rc])licd Topclili'e. 

*' Me has kept his word," groaned Grant. 

" He may have escaped some part of his punislnnent," said 
Topclifle, bitterly; " but the worst remains. His quarters will 



304 GUY FAWKES. 

be exposed on every gate in London, and his head on the bridge. 
As to you, traitors, you know your doom." 

" And are prepared for it," rejoined Grant 

A guard being left over the prisoners. Sir Richard Walsh and 
Topcliffe then went to see that the other captives were properly 
secured. Some few having made their escape into the adjoining 
fields, they were pursued and recaptured. 

The whole of the prisoners were then conveyed to Stourbridge, 
where they were lodged in the gaol, after which Sir Richard 
Walsh despatched a messenger to the Earl of Salisbury and the 
Lords of the Council acquainting them with what he had 
done. 



CHAPTER VL 

HAGLEY. 



Robert Winter, it may be remembered. Immediately after 
the explosion, quitted Holbeach, and did not return to it. He 
proceeded to the neighbouring thicket, and while wandering 
about in a state bordering on distraction encountered Stephen 
Littleton, who had likewise deserted his companions on the same 
day. Acquainting him with the disastrous occurrence that had 
taken place, and stating his impression that both God and man 
were against them, and that it would be vain as well as impious 
to struggle longer, he proposed to him to surrender. But 
Stephen Littleton so strongly combated this opinion, that he at 
last consented to make an effort to escape. This, however, was 
no easy matter, nor could they devise a plan that appeared 
feasible. Both were well provided with money; but under pre- 
sent circumstances it would be of little use to them. A large 
price being set on their heads, and the whole country alarmed, 
they scarcely knew where to seek shelter. After a long debate, 
they quitted the covert, and keeping clear of all habitations, took 
the direction of Stourbridge. 

On approaching the Stour, at a point opposite Churchill, 
where ihey knew the river was fordable, they perceived Sir 
Richard Walsh's force approaching, and threw themselves into 
a ditch to avoid observation. It was quite dark when they again 
ventured forth, and at the peril of their lives they forded the 
Stour, which was swollen more ihan it had been in the morning 
by the long-continued rain. Their design was to proceed to 
iLigley, the residence of Stephen Littleton's sister, Mrs. Littleton, 
and to claim her protection. This magnificent mansion lay 
about two miles on the other side of the river, in the heart of an 
extensive park, but they were obliged to take a circuitous route 
of nearlv double the distance to reach it, and when at length 



HAGLEY. S05 

they arrived there, and were about to steal into the court-yard, 
they found it occupied by a portion of Sir Richard Walsh's 
troop. 

Overcome by anxiety and fatigue, and scarcely knowin"' 
whither to proceed, they recrossed the park, and sought out the 
cottage of a poor woman, whose two sons had joined their ill- 
fated expedition, and were at that moment under arms at llol- 
beach. She was a good Catholic, and they thought they might 
confide in her. Arriving at her cottage, they glanced in at the 
window, and perceiving her, as they concluded, alone, and cook- 
ing a small piece of meat at the fire, they raised the latch, and 
entered the house. The woman turned at their approach, and 
uttering a cry of surprise and alarm, pointed towards a back 
room. They then saw that they had betrayed themselves ; but 
the caution came too late, and a stalwart trooper, alarmed by the 
cry, issued from the back room. From the wretched appearance 
of the new-comers, he at once guessed that they were rebels, and 
felt satisfied, from the richness of their apparel, dirtied and 
stained as it was, that they were persons of consequence. 
Accordingly, he drew a brace of petronels, and holding them at 
their heads, commanded them to surrender. 

They were too much taken by surprise, and too enfeebled to 
offer resistance, and the trooper calling to the old woman to 
bring a cord to bind them, at the same time unloosed his own 
girdle, with which he fastened Robert Winter's arms behind his 
back. In doing this, he was compelled to lay down his petronels, 
and he had scarcely done so, when the woman snatched them 
«p, and gave them to Stephen Littleton, who presented them at 
his head. 

It was now the turn of the conspirators to triumph. In another 
instant, Robert Winter was released by the old woman, and the 
pair throwing themselves upon the trooper, forced him to the 
ground. They then dragged him to the back room, and stripped 
him of his habiliments, which Stephen Littleton put on instead 
of his own attire, and binding him hand and foot, returned to 
the old woman. At the request of Robert Winter, she furnished 
him with a suit of clothes belon";in"; to one of her sons, and then 
set before them the best eatables she possessed. They were 
ravenously hungr}', and soon disposed of the viands. Meanwhile, 
their hostess told them that the whole country was in arms 
against them ; that Mrs. Littleton being suspected, though she 
had always been adverse to the design, her house had undergone 
a rigorous search ; but that Mr. IIuin]ihrey Littleton, not having 
taken any part in the insurrection, had not as yet been arrested, 
though it was feared he would be proved to be connected with 
the ])lot. She concluded by strongly counselling them to use 
the utmost caution, and to expose themselves as little as possible. 
They assured her she need have no apprehension on that score. 



S06 CITY FAWKES. 

and expressed great anxiety as to what would befal her when 
they were gone. 

" I do not desire to shed blood, if it can be helped," said 
Stephen Littleton; "but in a case oi necessit}', like the present, 
where life must be weighed against life, I hold it lawful to shed 
it. Shall we put the trooper to death ?" 

" Not unless your own safety requires it, good sirs," she said. 
** I shall quit this cottage soon after you have left it, and obtain 
a safe asylum with one of my neighbours. It matters not what 
becomes of me. Having lost my two sons, — lor I consider them 
as already dead, — I have nothing left to bind me to life." 

Unable to make any reply, the conspirators remained for some 
time silent, when, by the poor woman's advice, they withdrew to 
an upper chamber, and stretching themselves on a bed, sought a 
few hours' repose. The old woman kept watch below, and they 
gave her one of the petroncls, with strict injunctions to blow out 
the trooper's brains if he attempted to move. Nothing, however, 
occurred to alarm her, and at three o'clock she awakened them. 

Offering the woman a handsome reward, which, however, she 
declined, they then set out ; and shortly afterwards their hostess 
quitted her habitation, and withdrew to the cottage of a neigh- 
bour, where she remained concealed for some weeks, and then 
died of grief on learning that her sons had been slain during the 
assault of Plolbeach by the royalists. 

Recruited by the rest they had enjoyed, the conspirators pur- 
sued their course over the fields. The weather was the same as 
that which disheartened their confederates at Holbcach, and the 
rain iell so heavily that they had soon not a dry thread upon 
them. But being now disguised, they were not under so much 
apprehension of detection. Shaping their course towards Rowley 
Regis, in Stafiordshire, which lay about five miles from Hagley, 
where a farmer named Pclborrow, a tenant of Humphrey Lit- 
tleton, resided, and whom they thought W'Ould befriend them, 
they proceeded swiftly on their way ; but, though well acquainted 
with the country, they were so bewildered and deceived by the 
log, that they strayed materially out of their course, and when it 
grew light found themselves near Weoley Castle, and about four 
miles from Birmingham. 

Confiding in their disguises, and in their power of sustaining 
the characters they assumed, they got into the high road, and 
approaching a farm-house, Stephen Littleton, who had tied his 
companion's arms behind him with his belt, represented himself 
as a trooper conveying a prisoner from Stourbridge to Birming- 
ham, and in consequence of this obtained a breakfast from the 
farmer. After their meal w as over, the host, who had eyed them 
suspiciously, observed to the siq)poscd trooper, — 

"You will overtake some of your comrades before you roach 
Egbaston, and had better lose no time in joining thera. You 



HAGLEY. S07 

are Ivnown to me, m}' masters," he added, in a tone that could 
not be heard by the household ; " but I will not betraj' you. 
Get you gone." 

The conspirators did not fail to act upon the suggestion, and 
as soon as they got out of sight, struck across the country in the 
direction of Rowley Regis, and arrived at the farm-house which 
was their destination in about an hour. 

Pclborrow chanced to be in a barn adjoining his house, and 
alone, and on seeing them readily offered to hide them. No 
one had noticed their approach, and carefully concealing them 
amid the hay in the loft, he proceeded about his business as if 
nothing had happened. He could not just then procure them 
provisions without exciting suspicion ; but when night arrived 
brought them a sufficient suppl}' for the next day. 

In this way they passed nearly a week, never venturing to stir 
forth, for they had been traced to the neighbourhood, and 
constant search was going on after them. Pelborrow had great 
difficulty in keeping his men out of the barn, and the disap- 
pearance of the provisions excited the suspicions of his female 
domestics, who began to think all was not right. He therefore 
intimated to the cons[)irators that they must change their 
quarters, and in the dead of the night, they removed to the house 
ot another farmer named Perkes, residing on the borders of" 
Ilagley Park, to whom Pelborrow had confided the secret of 
their being in the neighbourhood, and who, on promise of a large 
reward, readily undertook to secrete them. 

Perkes met them at a little distance from his house, and con- 
ducted them to a barley-mow, where he had contrived a hiding- 
])lace amid the straw for them. A woman-servant and a man 
were both let into the secret by Perkes, and a sum of money, 
given him for that purpose by the conspirators, bribed them to 
silence. Here they remained close prisoners, unable to stir forth, 
or even to change their habiliments for nearly six weeks, during 
which time they received constant intelligence from their pro- 
tector of what was going forward, and learnt that the search fur 
them had not relaxed. They were not without hoj)e, however, 
that the worst was over, when an incident occurred that gave 
them serious uneasiness. 

One night, Perkes, who was a stout, hale yeoman, and had 
formerly been warrener to Mrs. Littleton, went to catch conies, 
with a companion named Poyntcr, and returned laden with spoil. 
After drinking a cup or two of ale together, the pair separated, 
and Poyntcr feeling fatigued with his exertions, as well as drowsy 
with the liquor he had swallowed, determined to pass the night 
in his friend's barn, and entering it, clambered up to the loft, 
and laid himself in the straw. In doing this, he slipped into the 
hole made for the conspirators, who, aroused by liis fall, instantly 
iwiLiiid him. Terrified to death, and fancying he had fallen into 

X2 



SOS GUY FAWKES, 

the hands of gipsies or other phindcrcrs, Poynter roared for 
mercy, which they were not at first disposed to show him ; but 
the poor wretch, finding into whose hands he had fallen, besought 
them in such piteous terms to spare his life, affirming with the 
strongest oaths that he would never betray them, that they con- 
sented to spare him, on condition of his remaining with them as 
long as they should occupy their place of concealment. 

When Perkes appeared in the morning, he was not a little sur- 
prised at finding his comrade caught in such a trap, but entirely 
approved of the course taken by the conspirators. Poynter, as 
may be supposed, was no willing captive ; and being constantly 
pondering on the means of escape, and of obtaining the reward 
for the apprehension of the conspirators, at last hit upon the 
following expedient. While engaged in the poaching expedition 
with Perkes, he had received a slight wound in the Ice;, and the 
close confinement to which he was now subjected inflamed it to 
such a degree as to render it highly dangerous. This he repre- 
sented to the conspirators, who, however, would not suffer hiiu 
to depart ; but desired Perkes to bring him some ointment to 
dress his wound. The request was complied with, and feigning 
that it was necessary to approach the light to apply the salve, 
Poynter scrambled up the straw, apparently for that sole purpose, 
lie did not attempt to fly for several days ; but at last, when they 
were grown less suspicious, he slided down the other side of the 
loft, and made good his retreat. 

The conspirators saw the error they had committed when too 
late. Not daring to pursue him, they remained in fearful anti- 
cipation of an arrest throughout the day. But they were not 
disturbed until night, when Perkes made his appearance. They 
told him what had happened; but he did not appear to be much 
alarmed. 

" I do not think you need be afraid of him," he said. " Let 
me have some money, and I will go in quest of him at once, and 
bribe him to silence." 

" Here are fifty marks," replied Stephen Littleton. " If that 
is not enough, take more." 

" It will amply suffice," replied Perkes. " I will answer for 
his silence." 

This assurance greatly relieved the conspirators, and they were 
made completely easy by the return of Perkes in less than an 
hour afterwards, who told them he had seen Poynter, and had 
given him the money, binding him by the most solemn oaths not 
to betray them. 

" I have still better news for you, my masters," he added. 
*'■ Mrs. Littleton has set out for London to-day ; and I have 
received orders from Mr. Humphrey Littleton to bring you to 
tlie hall at midnight." 

This last intelligence completed their satisfaction, and diey 



HAG LEY. 309 

awaited Perkes's return with impatience. Shortly before mid- 
nitrht, he came to summon them, and they set forth together. 
Perkes's house lay about a mile from the hall, and they soon 
entered the park. The night was clear and frosty, — it was now 
the middle of December, — and as the conspirators trod the crisp 
sod, and gazed at the noble but leafless trees around them, they 
silently returned thanks to Heaven for their restoration to free- 
dom. Humphrey Littleton was waiting for them at the end of 
an avenue near the mansion, and tenderly embraced them. 

Tears of joy were shed on both sides, and it seemed to 
Humphrey Littleton as if his brother had been restored from the 
grave. Dismissing Perkes with warm thanks, and promises of a 
further recompence, they then entered the house by a window, 
which had been left purposely open. Humphrey Littleton con- 
ducted them to his own chamber, where fresh apparel was pro- 
vided for them ; and to poor wretches who had not been able to 
put off their attire for so long a period, the luxury of the change 
was indescribably great. 

The arrival of the fugitives was kept secret from all the house- 
hold except the man-cook, John Ocklie, upon whose fidelity 
Humphrey Littleton thought he could rely. A good supper was 
jirepared by this man, and brought up into his master's chamber, 
■where the conspirators were now seated before a hearth heaped 
witii blazing logs. The conspirators needed no solicitation to 
fall to, and they did ample justice to the good things before them. 
His spirits being raised by the good cheer, Robert Winter 
observed to the cook, who was in attendance upon them, 

" Ah ! Jack, thy mistress little thinks what guests are now In 
her house, who have neither seen fire nor tasted a hot morsel for 
well-nigh two months." 

*' Ay, it is a sad matter," returned the cook, shaking his head, 
"and I wish I could offer your worships a flask of wine, or a cup 
of stout ale at the least. But the butler is in bed, and if 1 were 
to rouse him at this hour it might excite his suspicion. If you 
are willing, sir," he added, to Humphrey Littleton, " I will hie 
to my mother's cottage in the park, and bring a jug of ale from 
her." 

This was ao-reed to, and the cook left the house. His sole 
object, however, was to instruct his mother to give the alarm, so 
that the conspirators might be arrested before morning. 

On reaching her cottage, he was surprised to sec a light 
within it, and two men there, one of whom was Poynter, and the 
other Mrs. Littleton's steward, Robert Hazlewood. I'oyntcr 
Lad acquainted Hazlewood with all he knew respecting the con- 
spirators, supposing them still in the barley-mow, and they were 
discussing the best means of arresting ilicm, wlicu the cook 
entered the house. 

" The birds are flown," he said, " as you will find, if you search 



mo GUY FAWKES. 

the nest. But come to the hall with a sufficient force betimes 
to-morrow morning, and I will show you where to find them. I 
shall claim, however, my share of the reward, though I must not 
appear in the matter." 

Having fully arranged their plan, he procured the ale from his 
mother, and returned to the hall. The conspirators soon disposed 
of the jug, threw themselves on a couch in the room, and 
instantly dn^pping asleep, enjoyed such repose as only falls to 
the lot of those who have similarly suffered. And it was well 
they did sleep soundly, for it was the last tranquil night they ever 
enjoyed ! 

Humphrey Littleton, who, as has been stated, reposed implicit 
confidence in the coolt, had committed the key of the chamber 
to him, strictly enjoining him to call them in the morning ; and 
the fellow, feeling secure of his prey, retired to rest. 

About seven o'cloclc, he burst suddenly into the room, and 
with a countenance of well- feigned alarm, which struck terror 
into the breasts of the conspirators, cried — 

" Master Hazlewood and the officers are below, and say the3' 
must search the house. Poynter is with them." 

" The villain has betrayed us !"' cried Stephen Littleton. 
■*' Fools that we were to spare his life !" 

"There is no use in lamenting your indiscretion now, sir," 
replied the cook; "leave it to me, and I will yet effect your 
•escape." 

" We place ourselves entirely in your hands," said Stephen 
Littleton. 

" Go down stairs, sir," said the cook to Humphrey Littleton, 
*'and hold Master Hazlewood in conversation for a few minutes, 
and I will engage to get the gentlemen safely out of the house." 

Humphrey Littleton obeyed, and descending to the steward, 
told him he was willing to conduct him to every room in the 
house. 

" I am certain they are here, and shall not quit it till I find 
them," rejoined Hazlewood. "Ah I" he exclaimed, as if struck 
by a sudden thought, "you say they are not in the house. 
Perhaps, they are in the garden — in the summer-house? We 
will go and see." 

So saying, he took half-a-dozen of his men with him, leaving 
Poynter and the rest with Humphrey Littleton, who was per- 
plexed and alarmed at his conduct. 

Meanwhile, the cook led the two conspirators along the gal- 
lery, and from thence down a back staircase, which brought them 
to a small door comnumicating with the garden. A few seconds 
were lost in opening it, and when they issued forth they encoun- 
tered Hazlewood and his men, who instantly arrested them. 
The unfortimate consj)irators were conveyed under a strong 
guard to Londc^n, where the}' were committed to the Tower, to 
^ke their trial with their confederates. 



THE LAST NIGHT AT ORDSALL. Sll 

CHAPTER VII. 

VIVIANA's last night at ORDSALL HALL. 

* On the evenins; of the third day after quitting Dunchnrch, 
t Viviana Radcliffe and her companions arrived at Ordsall Hall. 
They had encountered many dangers and difficulties on the 
journey, and were well-nigh overcome with fatigue and anxiety. 
Fearful of being detained, Garnet had avoided all the larger 
towns in the way, and had consequently been driven greatly 
out of the direct course. He had assumed the disguise which he 
usually wore when travelling, that of a lawyer, and as he pos- 
sessed great mimetic talent, he sustained the character admirably. 
Viviana passed for his daughter, and his servant, Nicholas Owen, 
who was almost as clever an actor as his master, represented his 
clerk, while the two attendants performed the parts of clients. 
At Abbots'-Bromley, where they halted for refreshment on the 
second day, having spent the night at a small village near Lich- 
field, they were detained by the landlord, who entertained some 
suspicions of them ; but Garnet succeeded in frightening the man 
into allowing them to depart. They underwent another alarm 
of the same kind at Leek, and were for two hours locked up. 
But on the arrival of a magistrate, who had been sent for bv the 
host. Garnet gave so plausible an account of himself that the 
party were instantly set at liberty, and arrived without further 
molestation at their journey's end. 

Viviana's last visit to the hall had been sad enough, but it was 
not so sad as the present. It was a dull November evening, and 
the wind moaned dismally through the trees, scattering the 
yellow leaves on the ground. The house looked forlorn and 
desolate. No smoke issued from the chimneys, nor was there 
any external indication that it was inhabited. The drawbridge was 
down, and as they passed over it, the hollow trampling of their 
steeds upon the planks vibrated painfully upon Viviana's heart. 
Before dismounting, she cast a wistful look around, and surveyed 
tiie grass-grown and neglected court, where, in years gone by, 
she had sported; the moat on whose brink she had lingered; and 
the surrounding woods, which she had never looked upon, even 
on a dreary day like the present, and when they \Ycre robbed in 
some measure ot their bcaut}^ without delight. JScanning the 
ilcserted mansion from roof to fouiulation, she traced all its 
gables, angles, windows, doors, and walls, and claimed every 
]>icce of carved work, every stone as a familiar object, and as 
associated with other and happier hours. 

" It is but the wreck of what it was," she thought. " The 
spirit that animated it is fled. Gra.-s grows in its courts — no 
cheerful voices echo in its chambers — no hospitality is main- 



SI 2 uUY FAWKES. 

mined in its i.all — but neglect, gloom, and despair claim it as 
iheir own. The habitation and its mistress are well matched." 

Guessing from the melancholy expression of her countenance 
what was passing within, and thinking it advisable to turn the 
current of her thoughts. Garnet assisted lier to alight, and com- 
mitting the care of their steeds to Owen and the others, pro- 
ceeded with her to the jirincipal entrance. Everything appeared 
in nearly the same state as when they had last seen it, and the 
only change that had taken place was for the worse. The 
ceilings were mapped and mildewed with damps ; the once- 
gorgeously stained glass was shivered in the windows ; the costly 
arras hung in tattered fragments from the walls ; while the floors, 
which were still strewn with plaster and broken furniture, were 
flooded with the moisture that had found its way through the 
holes in the roof. 

" Bear up, dear daughter," said Garnet, observing that Viviana 
was greatly distressed by the sight, " and let the contemplation 
of this scene of havoc, instead of casting you down, inspire you 
with just indignation against enemies from whom it is vain to 
expect justice or mercy. How many (Catholic mansions have 
been thus laid waste ! How many high-born and honourable 
men, whose sole fault was their adherence to the religion of their 
fathers, and their refusal to subscribe to doctrines against which 
their consciences revolted, have been put to death like your 
father; nay, have endured a worse fate, for they have languished 
out their lives in prison, while their families and retainers have 
undergone every species of outrage ! How many a descendant 
of a })roud line, distinguished for worth, for loyalty, and for 
devotion, has stood, as you now stand, upon his desolate hearth 
— has seen misery and ruin usurp the place of comfort and hap- 
piness — and has heard the very stones beneath his feet cry out 
for vengeance. Accursed be our oppressors I" he added, lifting 
up his hands, and elevating his voice. " May their churches be 
thrown down — their faith crushed — their rights invaded— their 
children delivered to bondage — their hearths laid waste, as ours 
have been. May this, and worse come to pass, till the whole 
stock of heresy is nprooted !" 

" Hold, father 1" exclaimed Viviana, " even here, beholding 
this miserable sight, and with feelings keenly excited, I cannot 
ioin in your terrible denunciation. What I hope for — what I 
pray for, is toleration, not vengeance. The sufferings of our 
brethren will not have been in vain, if they enable our successors 
to worship God in their own way, and according to the dictates 
of their consciences. The ruthless conduct of our jiersecutors 
must be held in as much abhorrence by all good Protestants as 
our persecution of that sect, when we were in the ascendant, is 
regarded by all worthy members of our own Church. I cannot 
believe thai by persecution we can work out the charitable 



THE LAST NIGHT AT ORDSALL. 313 

precepts inculcated by our Saviour, and I ani sure such a course 
is as adverse to the spirit of religion as it is to that of humanitv. 
Let us bear our sorrows with patience, — let us utterno repininors, 
but turn the other cheek to the smiter, and we shall find, in due 
time, that the hearts of our oppressors will relent, and that all 
the believers in the True God will be enabled to worship him in 
peace, though at different altars." 

" Such a season will never arrive, daughter," replied Garnet, 
severely, " till heresy is extirpated, and the false doctrines now 
prevailing utterly abolished. Then, indeed, when the Church 
of Rome is re-established, and the old and true religion restored, 
universal peace will prevail. And let me correct the grievous 
and sinful error into which you h^ve fallen. Our church is 
always at war with heresy ; and if it cannot uproot it by gentle 
means, authorizes, nay enjoins the employment of force." 

" I will not attempt to dispute with you upon points of faith, 
father," returned Viviana; " I am content to think and act accord- 
ing to my own feelings and convictions. But I will not give up 
the hope that in some milder and wiser age, persecution on 
cither side will cease, and the sufferings of its victims be remem- 
bered only to soften the hearts of fanatics, of whatever creed, 
towards each other. Were a lesson wanting to ourselves, surely 
it might be found in the result that has attended your dark and 
criminal enterprise, and in which the disapproval of Heaven ha* 
been signally manifested." 

" Not so, daughter," replied Garnet. " An action is not to be 
judged or justified by the event attending it, but by its owu 
intrinsic merits. To aver the contrary were to throw a doubl 
upon the Holy Scriptures themselves, where we read in the Book 
of Judges that the eleven tribes of Israel were commanded to 
make war upon the tribe of Benjamin, and yet were twice 
defeated. We have failed. But this proves nothing against our 
project, which I maintain to be righteous and praiseworthy, 
undertaken to overthrow an heretical and excommunicated 
monarch, and to re-establish the true faith of the Most High 
throughout this land." 

" I lament to find that you still persist in error, father," 
replied Viviana; " but you cannot by any sophistry induce me 
to coincide with you in opinion. I hold the attempt an offence 
alike against God and man, and while I rejoice at the issue that 
has attended it, I deplore the irreparable harm it will do to the 
M'hole body of Catholics, all of whom will be connected, by the 
bigoted and unthinking of the hostile party, with the atrocious 
design. Not only have you done our cause an injury, but you 
have in a measure justified our opponents' seventy, and given 
them a plea for further persecution." 

"No more of this, daughter," rejoined Garnet, impatiently, 
"or I shall deem it necessary to reprove you. Let us searcb 



314 GUY FAWKES. 

the house, and try to find some habitable chamber in which you 
can pass the night." 

After a long search, they discovered a room in comparatively 
good order, and leavinj:; Viviana within it, Garnet descended to 
the lower part of the house, where he found Nicholas Owen, and 
the two other attendants. 

" We have chanced upon a scanty supply of provender for our 
steeds," remarked Owen, with a doleful look; " but we arc not 
likely to obtain a meal ourselves, unless we can feed upon rats 
and mice, which appear to be the sole tenants of this miserable 
dwelling." 

" You must go to Manchester instantly, and procure pro- 
visions," returned Garnet. " But take heed you observe the 
utmost caution." 

" Fear nothing," replied Owen, " If I am taken, your reve- 
rence will lose your supper — that is all." 

He then set out upon his errand, and Garnet proceeded to the 
kitchen, where, to his great surprise, he found the hearthstone 
«till warm, and a few lighted embers upon it, while crumbs of 
!)rcad, and little fragments of meat scattered about, proved that 
some one had taken a meal there. Startled by this discovery, he 
■continued his search, but as fruitlessly as before ; and though he 
•called to any one who might be hidden to come forth, the sum- 
mons was unanswered. One of the attendants had placed a few 
^sticks upon the smouldering ashes, and on returning to the 
kitchen, it was foimd that they had kindled. A fire being thus 
obtained, some of the broken furniture was used to replenish it, 
iind by Garnet's commands another fire was speedily lighted in 
Viviana's chamber. Night had now come on, and Owen not 
returning, Garnet became extremely uneasy, and had almost 
^iven him up, when the absentee made his appearance, with a 
large basket of provisions under his arm. 

"I have had some difficulty in obtaining them," he said; 
■*' and fancying I observed two persons following me, was obliged 
to take a circuitous route to get back. The whole town is in 
■commotion about the plot, and it is said that the most rigorous 
measures are to be adopted towards all the Catholic families in 
the neighbourhood." 

Sighing at the latter piece of intelligence, Garnet selected 
■such provisions as he thought would be acceptable to Viviana, 
and took them upstairs to her. She ate a little bread, and drank 
a cup of water, but refused to taste anything else, and finding it 
in vain to press her. Garnet returned to the kitchen, where, 
'being much exhausted, he recruited himself with a hearty meal 
and a cuj) of wine. 

Left alone, Viviana knelt down, and clasping a small crucifix 
to her breast, prayed long and fervently. While she was thus 
engaged, she heard the door open gently behind her, and turn- 



THE LAST NIGHT AT ORDSALL. 815 

ing her head, beheld an old man clothed in a tattered garb, with 
long white hair flowing over his shoulders, and a beard of the 
same snowy hue descending upon his breast. As he advanced 
slowly towards her, she started to her feet, and a brighter flame 
arising at the moment from the fire, it illumined the intruder's 
wobegone features. 

" Is it possible I" she exclaimed, — " can it be my father's old 
steward, Jerome Heydocke ?" 

" It is, indeed, my dear young mistress," replied the old man, 
falling on his knee before her. " Heaven be praised I" he con- 
tinued, seizing her hand, and bedewing it with tears; "I have 
seen you once again, and shall die content." 

" I never expected to behold you more, good Heydocke,'* 
returned Viviana, raising him. " I heard you had died in 
prison." 

" It was so given out by the jailers, to account for my escape," 
replied the old steward; "and I took care never to contradict 
the report i)y making my appearance. I will not distress you 
by the recital of all I have endured, but will simply state that I 
was confined in the prison upon Hunt's Bank, whence I escaped 
in the night by dropping upon the rocks, and from them into the 
river, where it was supposed I was drowned. Making my wa}'^ 
into the country, I concealed myself for a time in barns and out- 
buildings, until, at length, I ventured back to the old house, and 
have dwelt in it unmolested ever since. I should have perished 
of want long ago, but for the kindness of Mr. Humphrey Chetham. 
He used to send my son regularly to me with provisions ; and, 
now that Martin is gone to London, on business, as I under- 
stood, relating to you, he brings them to me himself. He will 
be here to-morrow." 

" Indeed I" exclaimed Viviana. " I must see him." 

" As you please," returned the old man. *' I suppose those 
nre your companions below. I was in my hiding place, and 
hearing voices and footsteps, did not dare to venture forth till all 
was still. On approaching this room, which I have been in the 
habit of occupying lately, and peeping through the door, wliich 
was standing ajar, I perceived a female figure, and thinking it 
must be you, though I scarcely dared to trust the evidence of 
my senses, I ventured in. Oh ! my dear, dear young mis- 
tress, what a joy it is to see you again ! I fear you nuist have 
sufl'ered much, for you are greatly altered." 

At this moment, Garnet entered tho room. He started on 
seeing the old steward. But an explanation was instantly given 
him. 

" You, then, are the person by whom the fire was recently 
cghted in ihe kitchen?" he asked. 
Heydocke replied in the affirmative. 
" I came to bid vou farewell ior the night, dear daughter,'* 



316 GUY FAWKES. 

sa'ul Garnet, " and to assure yon that you may rest without fear, 
for we have contrived to make fast the doors. Come with me, 
my son," he added to the steward, " and you shall have a com- 
fortable meal below." 

Making a profound reverence to Viviana, the old man followed 
him down stairs. 

Viviana continued to pace to and fro within her chamber for 
some time, and then, overcome with fatigue, flung herself upon 
the bedstead, on which a cloak had been thrown. Sleep soon 
closed her eyes, but it was disturbed by frightful and distressing 
dreams, from which she was suddenly aroused by a touch upon 
the arm. Starting up, she perceived the old steward by the side 
of her couch, with a light in his hand. 

" What brings you here, Heydocke ?" she demanded, with 
surprise and alarm. 

" You have slept soundly, my dear young mistress, or you 
would not require to be informed," replied the steward. " There I 
do you not hear it ?" he added, as a loud knocking resounded 
from below. 

Viviana listened for a moment, and then as if struck by a 
sudden idea, hurried down stairs. She found Garnet and the 
others assembled in the hall, but wholly unnerved by friglit, 
" Hide yourselves," she said, " and no ill shall befal you. Quick ! 
— not a moment is to be lost !" 

Having allowed them sufficient time for concealment, she 
demanded in a loud voice who was without ? 

" Friends," was the reply. 

*' It is the voice of Doctor Dee," replied Heydocke. 

** Indeed !" exclaimed Viviana. " Admit him instantl}'." 

Heydocke obeyed, and throwing open the door, gave entrance 
to the Doctor, who was wrapped in his long turred gown, and 
carried a lantern. He was accompanied by Kelley and Humphrey 
Chetham. 

*' Your visit is singularly timed, Mr. Chetham," said Viviana, 
after she had saluted the party; " but you are not the less wel- 
come on that account. I much desired to see you, and indeed 
should hav^e sent for you to-morrow. But how did you know I 
was here ?" 

" The only explanation I can offer you is this," replied 
Chetham. " I was hastily sunmioncd from my residence at 
Crumpsall by Kelley, who told me you were at Ordsall Hall, 
and that Doctor Dee was about to visit you, and desired my 
company. Thus summoned, I came at once." 

*' A strange explanation indeed !" replied Viviana. 

" Close and fasten the door," said Dee, in an authoritative tone 
to Kelley, and as soon as his commands were obeyed, he took 
Viviana's hand, and led her to the farther end of the halL 



I 



THE LAST NIGHT AT ORDSALL. 317 

" My art informed me of your arrival, Viviana," he said. " I 
am come to save yoii. You are in imminent danger." 

" I well know it," she replied ; " but I have no wish to fly 
from justice. I am weary of my life, and would gladly resign it." 

" I would call to your recollection, Viviana," pursued Dee, 
*' that I foretold the disastrous result of this plot, in which you 
have become unhappily involved, to Guy Fawkes, and warned 
him not to proceed in it. But he would not be advised, and is 
now a prisoner in the Tower." 

" All I wish is to go thither, and die with him," rejoined 
Viviana. 

" If you go thither, you will die before him," said Dee. 

" I would do so," she replied. 

" Viviana Radcliff'e," returned Dee, in a compassionate tone, 
*' I truly grieve for you. Your attachment to this heinous traitor 
completely blinds you. The friendship I entertained for your 
mother makes me anxious to serve you — to see you happy. It 
is now in j'our power to be so. But if you take another false 
step, your fate is decided, and you will die an early death. I 
will answer for your safety — nay, what is more, I will undertake 
that ere long you shall again be mistress of this mansion, and 
have 5'our estates restored to you." 

" You promise fairly, sir," she replied, with a mournful smile. 

" I have not yet done," pursued Dee. " All I require for the 
service is, that when freed by the death of Guy Fawkes from the 
chain that now binds you, — for I am aware of your ill-starred 
union with him, — you shall bestow your hand upon Humphrey 
Chetham." 

" It may not be," replied Viviana, firmly. " And if you could 
in truth read the secrets of the heart, you would know that mine 
would instantly reject the proposal." 

" Think not it originates with me, Viviana," said Humphrey 
Chetham, who had approached them unobserved. " My pre- 
vious experience of your character would alone have prevented 
nie from becoming a party to any such proposal, had I known it 
would be made. Do not, I beseech you, sir," he added to Dec, 
" clog your offer with conditions which will effectually prevent 
its accomplishment." 

" You are true to yourself, Mr. Chetham," rejoined Viviana, 
*^ and will not, therefore, wonder that I continue so. Were I to 
assent to Doctor Dee's jiroposal, I should be further from happi- 
ness than I am now, even if he could make good his words, 
and restore me to the station I have forfeited. I have received 
a shock from which I shall never recover, and the only haven of 
repose to which I look forward is the grave." 

" Alas I" exclaimed Chetham, in a pitying tone. 

" You will think I trespass too much upon your kindness," she 



o 



18 GUY FAWKES. 



pursued ; " but you can render me a frreat service, and it will be 
the last I shall ever require from you." 

" Name it I" cried Chctham, eagerly. 

"I would beg you to escort me to London," she rejoined: 
** and to deliver me to the lords of the council. I would willingly 
escape the indignities to which T shall be exposed if I am con- 
veyed thither as a prisoner. Will you do this ?" 

" I will," replied Chetham. 

*' Lest you should think I have offered more than I can perform, 
Viviana," said Dee, who had listened attentively to the foregoing 
conversation, " I will now tell you on what grounds I build my 
expectation of procuring your pardon. The conspiracy was first 
revealed by me to the Earl of Salisbury, though for his own pur- 
poses he kept it secret to the last. He owes me a heavy debt, 
and shall pay it in the way I propose, if you desire it." 

" I will abide by what I have done," replied Viviana. 

" You know, then, what fate awaits you ?" said Dee. 

" I shall not shrink from it," she rejoined. 

" It is well," he replied. " Before I leave, I will give yoti 
another caution. Father Garnet is here. Nay, attempt not to 
deny it. You cannot deceive me. Besides, I desire to serve, 
not harm him. If he remains here till to-morrow, he will be 
captured. A proclamation has been issued for his arrest, as well 
as for that of Father Oldcorne. Deliver him this warning. And 
now, farewell !" 

With this, he took up his lantern, and followed by Kelley, 
quitted the hall. 

Humphrey Chetham only tarried a few moments to inform 
Viviana that he would return soon after daybreak with a couple 
of steeds for the journey. As soon as he was gone, Viviana 
communicated Dee's warning to Garnet, who was so alarmed by 
it, that he resolved not to delay his own departure a moment. 
Taking an affectionate leave of Viviana, and confiduig her 
to the care of the old steward, he set out with his three 
attendants. 

Faithtul to his promise, llumphrc}' Chetham appeared at the 
appointed time. Viviana bade an eternal farewell to the old 
steward, who was overwhelmed with grief, and looked as if his 
sorrows would soon be ended, and mounting one of the steeds 
brought by the young merchant, they took the direction of 
London. 



HENDLIP. 319 

CHAPTER VIIL 

HENDLIP. 

Garnet proceeded at a rapid pace for some miles before he 
acq-\'>jnte(l his companions whither he was going. He then 
informed Nicholas Owen, who rode by his side, that he should 
make the best of his way to Hendlip House, the seat of Mr, 
Thomas Abingdon, near Droitwich, in Worcestershire, where hf 
knew that Father Oldcorne and Anne Vaux had retired, and 
where he was certain to meet with a friendly reception and pro- 
tection. Owen, who was completely in his master's confidence, 
agreed that no safer asylum could be found, and they pursued 
their journey with so much ardour, that early on the following 
night they arrived within a short distance of the mansion. Owen 
was sent forward to reconnoitre, and returned in about half an 
hour with Mr. Abingdon, who embraced Garnet, and told him 
he was truly happy in being able to offer him a retreat. 

" And I think it will prove a secure one," he added. " There 
are so many hiding-places in the old house, that if it is beset for 
a year you will scarcely be discovered. Have you heard of the 
fate of your confederates ?" 

" Alas ! no, my son," replied Garnet ; " and I tremble to 
ask it." 

" It had better be told at once," rejoined Abingdon. *' Catesby, 
Percy, and the two Wrights, have been slain in the defence of 
Holbeach ; while Rookwood, Grant, and Thomas Winter, all of 
whom were severely wounded in the siege, have been made 
prisoners, and are now on their way to the Tower." 

" A fearful catalogue of ills I" exclaimed Garnet. 

*' It is not yet complete," pursued Abingdon. " Sir Everard 
Digby has been defeated, and made prisoner in an attempt to 
bring additional force to his friends, and Keyes has been 
arrested in Warwickshire." 

" Tiiese are woful tidings truly, my son," returned Garnet. 
" Rut Heaven's will be done !" 

He then dismissed his two attendants, to whom he gave a sum 
of money, together with the steeds, and attended by Nicholas 
Owen, repaired to the house with Mr. Abingdon, who admitted 
them through a secret door. 

Hendlip House, which, unfortunately for the lovers of pic- 
tiu'esque and storied habitations, was pulled down a few years 
ago, having been latterly used as a ladies' boarding-school, was a 
liirge and irregular structure, with walls of immense thickness, 
tali stacks of chimneys, turrets, oriel windows, and numberless 
projections, contrived to mask the labyrinths and secret chambers 



S20 GUY FAWKES. 

within. Erected by John Abinjidon, father of the proprietor at 
the period of this history, and cofferer to Queen lilizabeth in the 
early part of the reign of that princess, it was filled with secret 
staircases, masked entrances, trap-doors, vaults, subterranean 
passages, secret recesses, and every other description of liiding- 
place. An immense gallery surrounded three sides of the 
entrance-hall, containing on each side a large chimney-piece, 
surmounted by a shield displaying the arms of the family — 
<irgent, a bend, gules, three eaglets displayed, or. Behind each or 
these chimney-pieces was a small cell, or " priest's-hole," as it 
was termed, contrived in the thickness of the wall. I'hroughout 
the mansion, the chambers were so sombre, and the passages so 
numerous and intricate, that, in the words of one who described 
it from personal observation, the whole place presented " a picture 
of gloom, insecurity, and suspicion." Standing on an elevated 
situation, it commanded the country on all sides, and could not 
be approached during the day-time without alarm being given 
to its inmates. 

Thomas Abingdon, the owner of the mansion at the period in 
question, and the eldest son of its founder, was born at Thorpe, 
near Chertsey, in Surrey, in 1560. He was educated at Oxford, 
and finished his studies at the Universities of Paris and Rheims. 
A man of considerable taste and learning, but of a plotting dis- 
position, he became a willing tool of the Jesuits, and imme- 
diately on his return to England, connected himself with the 
different conspiracies set on foot for the liberation of the 
imprisoned Queen of Scots. For these offences he was im- 
prisoned in the Tower for the term of six years, and only 
escaped death from the fact of his being the Queen's godson, 
coupled with the estimation in which she had held his father. On 
his liberation, he remained perfectly tranquil till the accession of 
James, when he became a secret plotter against that monarch. 
His concealment of the two priests, about to be related, occa- 
sioned his being again sent to the Tower, and if it had not been 
for the intercession of Lord Mounteagle, whose sister he had 
espoused, he would have been executed. He was pardoned on 
condition of never stirring beyond the precincts of Worcester- 
shire, and he employed his retirement in compiling an account 
of the antiquities of that county, which he left behind him in 
manuscript, and of which Doctor Nash, its more recent historian, 
lias largely availed himself. 

With a habitation so contrived, Mr. Abingdon might fairly 
promise his guests a safe asylum. Conducting them along a 
secret passage to a chamber of which he alone possessed the key, 
he left Garnet within it, and taking Owen with him to another 
place of concealment, returned shortly afterwards with Anne 
Vaux and Father Oldcorne. The two priests tenderly embraced 
■each other, and Oldcorne poured forth his tears on his superior's 



HENDLIP. S21 

shoulder. Garnet next turned to Anne Vaux, between whom 
and himself, as has been before mentioned, an affectionate 
intimacy subsisted, and found her quite overcome by her fecU 
ings. Supper was now served to Garnet by a confidential 
servant, and after a few hours spent in conversation with his 
friends, during which they discussed the disastrous issue of the 
affair, and the probable fate of the conspirators, they quitted him, 
and he retired to rest — but not before he had returned thanks 
to Heaven for enabling him once more to lay down his head in 
safety. 

On the following morning, he was visited by Mrs. Abingdon, 
a lady of considerable personal attractions, and Anne Vaux ; 
and when he had recovered from the fatigue of his journey, and 
the anxieties he had recently undergone, he experienced great 
delight in their society. The chamber he occupied was lighted 
by a small loop-hole, which enabled him to breathe the fresh air, 
and gaze upon the surrounding country. 

In this way, nearly two months passed on, during which, 
though rigorous inquiries were made throughout the country, no 
clue was found by the searchers to lead them to Ilendlip ; and 
the concealed parties began to indulge hopes that they should 
escape detection altogether. Being in constant correspondence 
with her brother. Lord Mounteaglc, though she did not trust 
him with the important secret of the concealment of the priests, 
Mrs. Abingdon ascertained all that was done in reference to the 
conspirators, whose trials were now approaching, and communi- 
cated the intelligence to Garnet. 

On the morning of the 20th of January, and when long; 
quietude had bred complete fancied security in Garnet, Ann 
Vaux and Mrs. Abingdon suddenly entered his chamber, and 
with countenances of the utmost alarm, informed him that Mr. 
Abingdon's confidential servant had just returned from Worcester, 
where his master then was, and had brought word thatTopcliffc, 
armed with a search-warrant from the Earl of Salisbury, had 
just passed through that city on his way to Holt Casile, the 
residence of Sir Henry Bromley 

" It appears," said Mrs. Abingdon, " that Humphrey Littleton, 
who has been apprehended and condeunicd to death at Worcester 
for harbouring his brother and Robert Winter, has sought to 
procure a remission of his sentence by betraying your retreat. 
In consequence of this, Topcliffc has been sent down from 
London, with a warrant addressed to Sir Henry Bromley, to aid 
him in searching Hcudlip. My husband has given particular 
orders that you are to be removed to the most secure hiding- 
place without delay ; and he deeply regrets that he himself can- 
not return till evening, for fear of exciting suspicion." 

" Take me where you please, dautThtcr," rc})lied Garnet, who 
was thrown into great perturbation by the intelligence. " I 



322 GUY FAWKE? 

thoiiiiht myself prepared for any emergency. But I was wofullj 
deceived." 

" Be not alarmed, father," saifl Anne Vaux, in an encouraging 
tonp. " I^ct them search as long as they will, they will never 
discover your retreat." 

"I have a strong presentiment to the contrary," replied 
Garnet. 

At this moment, Oldcorne made his appearance, and on 
learning the alarming news, was as much dismayed as his 
superior. 

After a short consultation, and while the priests were putting 
aside every article necessary to be removed, Mrs. Abingdon pro- 
ceeded to the gallery, and contrived on some plausible pretext 
to send away the whole of the domestics from this part of the 
house. This done, she hastily returned, and conducted the two 
priests to one of the large fire-places. 

A raised stone about two feet high occupied the inside of the 
chimney, and upon it stood an immense pair of iron dogs. 
Obeying Mrs. Abingdon's directions. Garnet got upon the stone, 
and setting his foot on the large iron knob on the left, found a 
few projections in the masonry on the side, up which he 
mounted, and opening a small door, made of planks of wood, 
covered with bricks, and coloured black, so as not to be dis- 
tinguishable from the walls of the chimney, crept into a recess 
contrived in the thickness of the wall. This cell was about two 
feet wide, and four high, and was connected with another 
chimney at the back, by means of three or four small holes. 
Around its sides ran a narrow stone shelf, just wide enough to 
afford an uncomfortable seat. Garnet was followed by Oldcorne, 
who brought with him a quantity of books, vestments, and sacred 
vessels used in the performance of the rites of the Church of 
Rome. These articles, which afterwards occasioned them much 
inconvenience, they did not dare to leave behind. 

Having seen them safely bestowed, Mrs. Abingdon and her 
companion went in search of provisions, and brought them u 
piece of cold meat and a pasty, together with some bread, dried 
truit, conserves, and a flask of wine. They did not dare to 
bring more, for fear of exciting the suspicion of the household. 
Their next care was to conduct Owen, and Oldcorne's servant. 
Chambers, to a similar retreat in one of the other chimneys, and 
to provide them with a scanty sujiply of provisions and a flask 
of wine. All this was accoujplislicd v/ithout being noticed by 
any of the domestics. 

As may be imagined, a most anxious day was passed by all 
parties. Towards evening. Sir Henry Bromley, the sheriff of 
th-rf county, accompanied by Topcliffe, and attended by a troop 
of soldiers, appeared at the gates of the mansion, and demanded 
ndmittance. Just at this moment, Mr. Abingdon rode up, and 



HENDLIP. S23 

nffecting to know nothing of the matter, saluted Sir Henry 
Bromley, with whom he was on terras of intimacy, and inquired 
his business. 

*' You are charged with harbouring two Jesuit priests, Fathers 
Garnet and Oldcorne, supposed to be connected with the late 
atrocious conspiracy against the King, Mr. Abingdon," inter- 
posed Topcliffe ; " and I brought a warrant from the Earl of 
Salisbury, which I have delivered to Sir Henry Bromley, com- 
manding him to search your house for them." 

" I was loth to accept the office, Mr. Abingdon," said Sir 
Henry Bromley, who was a handsome, middle-aged man ; " but 
my duty to my sovereign allows me no alternative. I trust, though 
a Catholic, that you share my own detestation of this diabolicai 
plot, and would not shelter any of its contrivers, or abettors." 

" You judge me rightly, Sir Henry," replied Abingdon, who, 
meanwhile, had received a private signal from his confidential 
servant that all was safe, " I would not. I am just returned from 
Worcester, where I have been for the last two days. Enter my 
house, I pray you, and search every corner of it ; and if you find 
a Jesuit priest concealed within it, you shall hang me at my own 
gate." 

" You must be misinformed, sir," observed Sir Henry, who 
was completely imposed upon by Abingdon's unconcerned 
demeanour ; " thev cannot be here." 

" Trust me, they are," returned the other, " and I should like 
to take him at his word." 

Giving directions to the band to environ the house, and guard 
all its approaches, so as to prevent any one from csca])ing from 
it, Topclilfe took half-a-dozen men with him, and instructed 
ihem how to act. Tiiey first repaired to the great dining- 
chaniber, wlicre, in accordance with the instructions received 
from the Earl of Salisbury, Topcliffe proceeded to the further 
end of the room, and directed his men to break down tho 
wainscot. With some difficulty, the order was obeyed, and the 
entrance to a vault discovered, into wiiich Topcliffe descended 
but he found notliinG: to repay his trouble. 

Returning to the dining-chambcr, he (piestioned JNIr. i» jmg 
don, who secretly enjoyed his disappointment, as to tho use ol 
the vault, but the latter professed entire ignorance of its existence. 
The searchers next proceeded to the cellar, and bored the floors 
with a broach to a considerable depth, to try whether there were 
any vaults beneath them, but they made no discovery. Mean- 
while Topcliffe hurried upstairs, and examined the size of the 
rooms, to see whether they corresponded with those below; and 
wherever any ditTerence was observable, he caubcd the jKUiels to 
be pulled down, and holes broken in the walls. In this way, 
several secret passages were discovered, one of which led to the 
chamber latelv occupied by Garnet- 

Y 2 



824 GUY FAWKES. 

Encouraged by this discovery, the searchers conti'^ucd their 
operations to a late hour, when they desisted for the night On 
the following day they resumed their task, and Sir Henry 
Bromley took a general survey of the house, both externally and 
internally, noting the appearances outside, and seeing that they 
corresponded with the rooms within. The three extraordinary 
chimney-pieces in the gallery attracted Topcliffe's attention; but 
the contrivances within were so well managed, that they escaped 
his notice. He even got into the chimneys, and examined the 
walls on either side, but could detect nothing. And, lastly, he 
ordered large fires to be lighted within them, but the experiment 
proving fruitless, he turned his attention elsewhere. 

Mr. Abingdon had attended him during this part of the search, 
and, though he preserved an unmoved exterior, he was full of 
apprehension, and was greatly relieved when it was abandoned. 
In the course of the same day, two other hiding-places were 
found in the thickness of the walls, but nothing was discovered 
within them. In order to prevent any communication with the 
concealed persons, Topcliffe stationed a sentinel at the door of 
Mr. Abingdon's chamber, and another at that of Anne Vaux. 

On the third day the search w^as continued more rigorously 
than ever. Wainscots were taken down ; walls broken open ; 
the boards of the floor removed ; and other secret passages, 
vaults, and hiding-places discovered. Some priests' vestments 
and articles used in the Romish service were found in one of 
these places, and shown to Mr. Abingdon. He at first denied 
all knowledge of them; but when Topclifie brought forward the 
title-deeds of his property, which had been found in the same 
place, he w^as obliged to confess he had put them there himself. 
Still, though these discoveries had been made, the searchers 
were as far from their aim as ever; and Sir Henry Bromley, 
who began to despair of success, would have departed on the 
fifth day, if Topcliffe had not prevented him. 

" I am certain they are here," said the latter, " and have hit 
upon a plan which cannot fail to bring them forth." 

The prisoners meanwhile suffered grievously from their con- 
finement, and hearing the searchers knocking against the walls, 
and even within the chimney, felt certain they should be dis- 
covered. Not being able to stand upright, or to stretch them- 
selves within the cell, the sitting posture they were compelled to 
.adopt became, after a time, intolerably irksome. Broths, milk, 
wine, and other nutritious fluids, were conveyed to them by 
means of a reed from the adjoining chimney ; but after the fiftti 
day this supply was stopped, as Mrs. Abingdon and Anne Vaux 
were compelled by Topcliffe to remove to a different part of the 
house. 

They now began to experience all the horrors of starvation, 
and debated whether they should die where they were, or yield 
themselves up to their enemies. Wretched as their condition 



HENDLIP. 325 

was, liowever, it was not so bad as that of their domestics, Owen 
and Chambers, whose wants had not been so carefully attended 
to, and who were now reduced to the most deplorable state. 
Nor were their friends less uneasy. Aware that the captives, 
whom there was no means of relieving, for the searchers were 
constantly on the watch, could not hold out much longer, Mrs. 
Abingdon consulted with her husband whether it would not be 
better to reveal their hiding-places ; but this he would not 
permit. 

By this time, every secret chamber, vault, and passage in the 
place, except the actual retreats of the conspirators, had been 
discovered by Topcliffe, and though nothing material was found, 
he felt assured, from the uneasiness displayed by Mr. Abingdon 
and his wife, and above all by Anne Vaux, that it could not be 
long before his perseverance was rewarded. Though he nar- 
rowly watched the two ladies, from the first, he could never 
detect them in the act of conveying food to the captives; but 
feeling convinced that they did so, he determined to remove 
them to a different part of the house, and their unwillingness to 
obey the order confirmed his suspicions. 

" Wc are sure of our prey now," he observed to Sir Ilenr}'' 
Bromley. " They must be half-starved by this time, and will 
speedily surrender themselves." 

" Pray Heaven they do so !" returned the other. " I am 
wearied to death with my long stay here." 

" Have a few hours' patience," rejoined Topcliffe, " and you 
will find that your lime has not been thrown away." 

And he was right. Soon after midnight, a trooper, who was 
watching in the gallery, beheld two spectral-looking figures 
approach him, and appalled by their ghastly appearance, uttered 
a loud cry. This brought Topclitfc, who was in the hall below, 
to his aid, and instantly perceiving what was the matter, he ran 
towards the supposed phantoms, and seized them. The poor 
wretches, who were no other than Owen and Chambers, and were 
well-nigh famished, offered no resistance, but would neither 
confess where they had been hidden, nor who they were. As 
the trooper had not seen them come forth, though he affirmed 
with a tremendous oath that they had issued from the floor, th 
walls were again sounded, but with no result. 

Food being placed before the captives, they devoured it 
voraciously ; but Topcliffe forbore to (piestion them fiirther that 
night, feeling confident that he could extract the truth from 
them on the morrow, either by promises or threats. He was 
however, mistaken. They continued as obstinaie as before, and 
when confronted widi Mr. Abingdon, denied all knowledge of 
him; neither would they explain how tliey got into the house. 

Sir Henry Bromley, however, now considered himself justified 
in placing Mr. Abingdon and his lady under arrest, and Tojicliffe 
i-edoubled his exertions to discover the hiding-plnce of the two 



326 GUY FAWKCS. 

priests. He examinod every part of the g:nllery most carefully, 
— took down one of the chunncy-}/Icccs, (sin<>;ularly enough, if 
was the wrong one,) but was still unable to discover their 
retreat. 

Meanwhile, the poor wretches inside found it impossible to 
endure their condition longer. Anything seemed preferable to 
the lingering and agonizing death they were now enduring, and 
they resolved to delay their surrender no longer. Had they 
been able to hold out a few hours more, they would have 
escaped; for Sir Henry Bromley was so fatigued with the search, 
and so satisfied that nothing further would come of it, that he 
resolved, notwithstanding Topcliffe's efforts to dissuade him, to 
depart on the morrow. Of this they were ignorant, and having 
come to the determination to surrender, Garnet opened the 
•entrance to the chimney, and hearing voices below, and being 
too feeble to get out unassisted, he called to the speakers for 
aid. His voice was so hollow, and had such a sepulchral sound, 
that those who heard it stared at each other in astonishment 
and affright. 

** Who calls?" cried one of the troopers, after a pause. 

" One of those you seek," replied Garnet. *' Come and help 
us forth." 

Upon hearing this, and ascertaining whence the voice came 
from, one of the men ran to fetch Sir Henry Bromley and Top- 
clifFe, both of whom joyfully obeyed the summons. 

" Is it possible they can be in the chimney ?" cried Topclifi'c. 
" Why, I myself have examined it twice." 

" We are here, nevertheless," replied Garnet, who heard the 
remark; "and if you would take us alive, lose no time." 

The hint was not lost upon Topcliffe. Casting a triumphant 
look at Bromley, he seized a torch from one of his attendant.^, 
and getting into the chimney, soon perceived the entrance to 
the recess. 

On beholding his prey, he uttered an exclamation of J03', and 
the two miserable captives, seeing the savage and exulting grin 
that lighted up his features, half repented the step they had 
taken. It was now, however, too late, and Garnet begged him 
to help them out. 

" That I will readily do, father," replied Topcliffe. " You 
have given us a world of trouble. But you have made ample 
amends for it now." 

" Had we been so minded, you would never have found us," 
rejoined Garnet. " This cell would have been our sepulchre." 

" No doubt," retorted Topcliffe, with a bitter laugh. " But 'j. 
death on the scaff(jld is preferable to the horrors of starvation." 

Finding it impossible to remove Garnet, whose limbs were so 
cramped that they refused their oflice, he called to the trooper? 
below to bring a ladtler, which was placed in the chimney. 



WHITEHALL. 327 

and then, with some exertion, he succeeded in getting hira 
down. This done, he supported him towards !Sir Henry 
Bromley, who was standing near a small table in the gallery. 

*' I told you your time would not be thrown away, Sir Henry,** 
he observed ; " here is Father Garnet. It is well you yielded 
yourself to-night, father," he added, to Garnet, with his cus- 
tomary cynical chuckle ; for Sir Henry had resolved to depart 
to-morrow." 

" Indeed !" groaned Garnet. " Help me to a chair.** 
While this was passing, Oldcorne was brought down by two 
of the troopers, and the unfortunate priests were conveyed to an 
adjoining chamber, where they were placed in a bed, their 
stiffened limbs chafed, and cordials administered to them. They 
were reduced, however, to such extremity of weakness, that it 
was not judged prudent to remove ihem till the third day, when 
they, together with their two servants, Owen and Chambers, 
who were as much enfeebled as themselves, were conveyed to 
Worcester. 



CHAPTER IX. 

WHITEHALL. 



Such was the expedition used by Humphrey Ciicthatn and 
Viviana, that they accomplished the journey to London in an 
extraordinarily short space of time. Proceeding direct to 
Whitehall, Viviana placed a letter in the hands of a halberdier, 
and desired that it might be given without delay to the Earl of 
Salisbury. After some demur, the man handed it to an usher» 
who promised to lay it before the Earl. Some time elapsed 
before the result of its reception was known, when an officer, 
accompanied by two sergeants of the guard, made his appear- 
ance, and commanded Viviana and her companion to follow iiim. 

Crossing a wide hall, which was filled with the various 
retainers of the palace, who regarded them with a sort of listless 
curiosity, and ascending a flight of marble steps, they traversed 
a long corridor, and were at length ushered into the presence of 
the Earl of Salisbm-y. He was seated at a ta!)le, covered with a 
nuikitude of papers, and was busily employed in writing a 
desjiatch, but immediately stoj)pcd on their entrance. He was 
not alone. His companion was a middle-aged man, attired in a 
suit of black velvet, with a cloak of the same material ; but as he 
sat with his back towards the door, it was impossible to discern 
his features. 

" You may leave us," said Salisbury to the officer, " but 
remain without." 



S28 GUY FAWKES. 

'' And be ready to enter at a moment's notice," added his 
companion, without ahering his position. 

The officer bowed, and retired with his followers. 

" Yonr surrender of yourself at this time, Viviana RadcliiTe," 
said the Earl, "weighs much in your favour; and if you are dis- 
])osed freely to declare all you know of the conspiracy, it is not 
impossible that the King may extend his mercy towards you." 

" I do not desire it, my lord," she replied. " In surrendering 
myself, I have no other aim than to satisfy the laws I have out- 
raged. I do not St- k to defend myself, but I desire to offer an 
explanation to your lordship. Circumstances, which it is needless 
to detail, drew me into connexion with the conspirators, and I 
became unwillingly the depositary of their dark design." 

*' You were guilty of misprision of treason in not revealing it," 
remarked the Earl. 

" 1 am aware of it," she rejoined; " but this, I take heaven to 
witness, is the extent of my criminality. I held the project in 
the utmost abhorrence, and used every argument I was mistress 
of to induce its contrivers to abandon it." 

" If such were the case," demanded the Earl, " what withheld 
you from disclosing it ?" 

" I will now confess what tortiu'c could not wring from mc 
before," she replied. " I was restrained from the disclosure by 
a fatal passion." 

" I suspected as much," observed the Earl, v/ith a sneer. 
■** For whom ?" 

" For Guy Fawkes," returned Viviana. 

" God's mercy ! Guy Fawkes !" ejaculated the Earl's com- 
panion, starting to his feet. And turning as he spoke, and facing 
her, he disclosed heavy but not unintellectual features, now 
charged with an expression of the utmost astonishment. " Did 
jou say Guy Fawkes, mistress ?" 

" It is the King," whispered Humphrey Chetham. 

*' Since I know in whose presence I stand, sire," replied 
Viviana, " I will answer the interrogation. Guy Fawkes was 
the cause of my concealing my acquaintance with the plot. 
And more, I will confess to your Majesty, that much as I abhor 
the design, if he had not been a conspirator, I should never have 
loved him. His sombre and enthusiastic character first gave 
him an interest in my eyes, which, heightened by several 
important services which he rendered me, soon ripened into 
love. Linked to his fortunes, shrouded by the same gloomy 
cloud that enveloped him, and bound by a chain from which I 
could not extricate myself, I gave him my hand. But the 
moment of our union was the moment of our separation. We have 
not met since, and shall meet no more, unless to part for ever." 

" A strange history !" exclaimed James, in a tone that shavved 
he was not unmoved by the relation. 



WHITEHALL. S29 

" I beseech your Majesty to jjrant me one boon," cried Viviana, 
falling at his feet. " It is to be allowed a single interview with 
my husband — not for the sad gratification of beholding him 
again — not for the indulgence of my private sorrows — but that I 
may endeavour to awaken a feeling of repentance in his breast, 
and be the means of saving his soul alive." 

" My inclinations prompt me to grant the request, Salisbury," 
said the King, irresolutely. " There can be no risk in doing it 
—eh ?" 

" Not under certain restrictions, my liege," replied the Earl. 
" You shall have your wish, then, mistress," said James, " and 
I trust your efforts may be crowned with success. Your husband 
is a hardy traitor — a second Jacques Clement — and we never 
think of him without the floor shaking beneath our feet, and a 
horrible smell of gunpowder assailing our nostrils. Blessed be 
God for our preservation ! But whom have we here ?" he added, 
turning to Humphrey Chetham. "Another conspirator come to 
surrender himself?" 

" No, my liege," replied Chetham ; *• I am a loyal suJjject of 
your Majesty, and a stanch Protestant." 

" If we may take your word for it, doubtless," replied the 
King, with an incredulous look. " But how come you in this 
lady's company ?" 

" I will hide nothing from your Majesty," replied (Chetham. 
** Long before Viviana's unha})py acquaintance with Fawkcs — 
for such I must ever consider it — my affections had been fi.xed 
upon her, and I fondly trusted she would not prove indifferent 
to my suit. Even now, sire, when all hope is dead within me, I 
have not been able to overcome my passion, but love lier as 
devotedly as ever. When, therefore, she desired my escort to 
London to surrender herself, I could not refuse the request." 

" It is the truth, my liege," added Viviana. " I owe Hum- 
phrey Chetham (for so this gentleman is named) an endless deb: 
of gratitude; and not the least of my present distresses is the 
thought of the affliction I have occasioned him." 

" Dismiss it from your mind, then, Viviana," rejoined Chetham. 
" It will not mitigate my sorrows to feel that I have added to 
yours." 

" Your manner and looks seem to give a warranty for loyalty, 
young sir," said the King. " But I nuist have some assurance of 
the truth of your statement before you are set at large." 

" I am your willing prisoner, my liege," returned Chetham.' 
*' But I have a letter for the Earl of Salisbury, which may vouch 
perhaps for me." 

And as he spoke, he ])laced a letter in the Earl's hands, who 
broke open the seal, and hastily glanced at its contents. 

"It is from Doctor Dee,"" he said, "from whom, as your 
Majesty is aware, we have received much important information 



J;30 GUY FAWKES. 

relative to this atrociojis design. lie answers for this vouno" 
man's loyalty." 

" I am glad to hear it," rejoined the King. *' It would have 
been mortifying to be deceived by so honest a physiognomy." 

" Your Majesty will be pleased to attacb your signature u> 
this warrant lor Viviana lladeliffe's committal to the Tower," 
said Salisbury, placing a paper before him. 

James complied, and the Earl summoned the guard. 

" Have I your Majesty's permission to attend this unfortimate 
lady to the fortress?" cried Chetham, prostrating himself before 
the King. 

James hesitated, but glancing at the Earl, and reading no 
objection in his looks, he assented. 

Whispering some private instructions to the officer respecting 
Chetham, Salisbury delivered the warrant to him. Viviana and 
her companion were then removed to a small chamber adjoining 
the guard-room, where they remained for nearly an hour, at the 
expiration of which time the officer again appeared, and con- 
ducted them to the palace-stairs, where a large wherry awaited 
them, in which they embarked. 

James did not remain long with his councillor, and as soon as 
he had retired, Salisbury sunmioned a confidential attendant, 
and told him to acquaint Lord Mounteagle, who was in an 
adjoining apartment, that he was now able to receive him. The 
attendant departed, and presently returned with the nobleman 
in question. As soon as they were alone, and Salisbury had satis- 
fied himself they could not be overheard, he observed to the other, 

*' Since Tresham's committal to the Tower yesterday, I have 
received a letter from the lieutenant, stating that he breathes 
nothing but revenge against yourself and me, and threatens to 
betray us, if he is not released. It will not do to let him be 
examined by the Council ; for though we can throw utter 
discredit on his statement, it may be prejudicial to my future 
designs." 

" True, my lord," replied Mounteagle. " But how do you 
propose to silence him ?" 

" By poison," returned Salisbury. " There is a trusty fellow 
in the Tower, a jailer named Ipgreve, who will administer it to 
him. Here is the powder," he added, unlocking a coffer, and 
taking out a small packet; " it was given me by its com[)oundcr. 
Doctor Dee. It is the same, I am assured, as the celebrated 
Italian poison prepared by Pope Alexander the Sixth ; is with- 
out scent or taste ; and destroys its victim without leaving a trace 
of its effects." 

" I must take heed how I offend your lordship," observed 
3Iounteagle. 

" Nay," rejoined Salisbury, with a ghastly smile, " it is for 
traitors like Tresham, not true men like you, to fear me." 



THE PARTING. 331 

•* I understand the distinction, my lord," replied the other. 

" I must intrust the entire management of this affair to you,** 
pursued Salisbury. 

" To me !" exclaimed Mounteagle. ** Tresham is my brother- 
in-law. I can take no part in his murder." 

"If he lives, you are ruined," rejoined Salisbury, coldly. 
" You must sacrifice him or yourself But I see you are reason- 
able. Take this powder, and proceed to the Tower. See 
Ipgreve alone, and instruct him to drug Tresham's wine with it. 
A hundred marks shall be his reward when the deed is done." 

" My soul revolts from the deed," said Mounteagle, as he took 
the packet. " Is there no other way of silencing him?" 

" None whatever," replied Salisbury, sternly. *' His blood 
be upon his own head." 

With this, Mounteagle took his departure. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE PARTING OF VIVIANA AND IimiPHREY CHETHAJL 

Humphrey Chetham was so oppressed by the idea of partini^ 
with Viviana, that he did not utter a single word during their 
transit to the Tower. Passing beneath the gloomy archwa}' of 
Traitors' Gate, they mounted the fatal steps, and were conducted 
to the guard-room near the By-ward Tower. The officer then 
<iespatched one of the warders to inform the lieutenant of 
Viviana's arrival, and telling Humphrey Chetham he would allow 
him a few minutes to take leave of her, considerately withdrew, 
and left them alone together. 

'* Oh ! Viviana !*' exclaimed Chetham, unable to repress his 
grief, " my heart bleeds to see you here. If you rejient the stcfv 
you have taken, and desire freedom, say so, and I will use every 
effort to liberate you. I have been successful once, and may be 
so again." 

*' I thank you for your devotion," she rc])lied, in a tone of 
profound gratitude ; " but you have rendered mo the last service- 
I shall ever require of you. 1 deeply deplore the misery 1 have 
occasioned you, and regret my inal)ility to rc(juitc your attach- 
ment as it deserves to be requited. My last prayers shall be for 
your happiness; and I trust you will meet with some being 
worthy of yon, and who will make amends for my insensihilify. * 

" Be not deceived, Viviana," replied Chethatu, in a broken 
voice ; " I shall never love again. Your image is loo deeply 
imprinted upon my heart ever to be effaced." 

'* Time may work a change," she rejoined ; " tliough I ought 
not to say so, for 1 feel it would work none in me. Siilfcr me 



332 GUY FAWKES, 

to pive yon one piece of counsel. Devote yourself resolutely to the 
business of lite, and you will speedily regain your peace of mind." 

" I will follow your instructions implicitly," replied Chetham; 
■** but have little hope of the result you promise me." 

"Let the effort be made," she rejoined; — "and now promise 
ane to quit London to-morrow. Return to your native town, 
■employ yourself in your former occupations; and strive not to 
think of the ])ast, except as a troubled dream from which you 
have fortunately awakened. Do not let us prolong our parting, 
•or your resolution may waver. Farewell I" 

So saying, she extended her hand towards him, and he pressed 
it passionately to his lips. 

" Farewell, Viviana !" he cried, with a look of unutterable 
anguish. " May Heaven support you in your trials i" 

" One of them I am now enduring," she replied, in a broken 
voice. " Farewell for ever, and may all good angels bless you !" 

At this moment, the officer appeared, and announcing the ap- 
proach of the lieutenant, told Chetham that his time had expired. 
\Vithout hazarding another look at Viviana, the young merchant 
tore himself away, and followed the officer out of the Tower. 

Obedient to Viviana's last request, he quitted London on the 
following day, and acting upon her advice, devoted himself on 
Jiis return to Manchester sedulously to his mercantile pursuits. 
Ills perseverance and integrity were crowned with entire success, 
iind he became in due season the wealthiest merchant of the 
town. But the blighting of his early affections tinged his whole 
life, and gave a melancholy to his thoughts and an austerity to 
liis manner originally foreign to them. True to his jiromise, he 
<lied unmarried. His long and worthy career was marked by 
actions of the greatest benevolence. In proportion as his means 
increased, his charities were extended, and he truly became *'a 
father to the fatherless and the destitute." To him the town of 
Manchester is indebted for the noble library and hospital bearing 
his name ; and for these admirable institutions by which they 
so largely benefit, his memory must ever be held in veneration 
by its inhabitants. 



CHAPTER XI. 

THE SUBTERRANEAN DUNGEON. 



Regarding Viviana with a smile of savage satisfaction. Sir 
William Waad con)manded Jasper Ipgreve, who accompanied 
tiim, to convey her to one of the subterranean dungeons below 
the Devereux Tower. 

" She cannot escape thence without your connivance," he said; 
■*'and you shall answer to me for her safe custody with your life." 



THE SUBTERRANEAN DUNGEON. S33 

" If she escapes again, your worship shall hang me in her 
stead," rejoined Ipgreve. 

" My instructions from the Earl of Salisbury state that it is 
the King's pleasure that she be allowed a short interview with 
Guy Fawkes," said the lieutenant, in a low tone. " Let her be 
taken to his cell to-morrow." 

The jailer bowed, and motioning the guard to follow him with 
Viviana, he led the way along the inner ward till he arrived at 
a small strong door in the wall a little to the north of the 
Beauchamp Tower, which he unlocked, and descended into a 
low cavernous-looking vault. Striking a light, and setting fire 
to a torch, he then led the way along a narrow gloomy passage^ 
which brought them to a circular chamber, from which other 
passages diverged, and selecting one of them, threaded it till he 
came to the door of a cell. 

" Here is your dungeon," he said to Viviana, as he drew back 
the heavy bolts, and disclosed a small chamber, about four feet 
wide and six long, in which there was a pallet. " My dame will 
attend you soon." 

With this, he lighted a lamp, and departing with the guard,, 
barred the door outside. Viviana shuddered as she surveyed the 
narrow dungeon in which she was placed. Roof, walls, and floor 
were of stone; and the aspect of the place was so dismal and 
tomb-iike, that she felt as if she were buried alive. Some hours 
elapsed before Dame Ipgreve made her appearance. She was 
accompanied by Ruth, who burst into tears on beholding Viviana. 
The jailer's wife had brought a few blankets and other neces- 
saries with her, together with a loaf of bread and a jug of water. 
While disposing the blankets on the couch, she never ceased 
upbraiding Viviana for her former flight. Poor Ruth, who was 
compelled to assist her mother, endeavoured by her gestures and 
looks to convey to the unfortunate captive that she was as much 
devoted to her as ever. Their task completed, the old woman 
withdrew, and her daughter, casting a deeply-commiserating 
look at Viviana, followed her, and the door was barred without. 

Determined not to yield to despondency, Viviana knelt down, 
and addressed herself to Heaven ; and, comforted by her prayers, 
threw herself on the bed, and sank into a peaceful shnnbcr. 
She was awakened by hearing the bolts of her cell withdrawn, 
and the next moment Ruth stood before her. 

" I fear you have exposed yourself to great risk in thus 
visiting mc," said Viviana, tenderly embracing her. 

" I would expose myself to any risk for you, sweet lady,** 
replied Ruth. *'But, oh ! why do I see you here again ? The 
chief support of Guy Fawkes during his sufferings has been 
the thought that you were at liberty." 

" I surrendered myself in the hope of beholding him again 
rejoined Viviana. 






334 GUY FAWKES. 

"You have given a fond, but fatal proof of your aflection,** 
returned Ruth. " The knowledge that you arc a captive will 
afflict him more than all the torments he has endured." 

" What torments has he endured, Ruth ?" incjuired Viviana 
with a look of anguish. 

" Do not ask nie to repeat them," replied the jailer's daughter. 
" They are too dreadful to relate. When you behold his 
shattered frame and altered looks, you will comprehend what he 
has undergone." 

" Alas !" exclaimed Viviana, bursting into tears, " I almost 
fear to behold him." 

*' You must prepare for a fearful shock," returned Ruth. *' And 
now, madam, 1 must take my leave. I will endeavour to see you 
^gain to-morrow, but dare not promise to do so. I should not 
have been able to visit you now, but that my father is engaged 
with Lord Mounteagle." 

*' With Lord Mounteagle !" cried Viviana. " Upon what 
business ? 

" Upon a foul business," rejoined Ruth. " No less than the 
■destruction of Mr. Tresham, who is now a prisoner in the Tower. 
Lord Mounteagle came to the Well Tower this evening, and 1 
accidentally overheard him propose to my father to administer 
poison to the person I have named." 

*' I do not pity their victim," returned Viviana. ** He is ;i 
double-dyed traitor, and will meet with the fate he deserves." 

"Farewell, madam," said Ruth. " If I do not see you again, 
jou will know that you have one friend in this fortress who 
deeply sympathizes with your afflictions." 

So saying, she withdrew, and Viviana heard the bolts slipped 
gently into their sockets. 

Vainly, after Ruth's visit, did she try to compose herself 
Sleep fled her eyes, and she was haunted all night by the image 
of Fawkcs, haggard and shattered by torture, as he had been 
described by the jailer's daughter. Day and night were the same 
to her, and she could only compute progress of the time by her 
own feelings, judging by which, she supposed it to be late in the 
day when she was again visited. The bolts of her cell being 
withdrawn, two men clad in long black gowns, and having hoods 
drawn over their faces, entered it. They were followed by 
Ipgreve ; and Viviana, concluding she was about to be led to the 
torture, endeavoured to string herself to its endurance. Though 
he guessed what was passing in her breast, Jasper Ipgreve did 
not care to undeceive her, but motioning the hooded officials to 
follow lum with her, quitted the cell. Seizing each a hand, the 
attendants led her after him along a number of intricate passages, 
until he stopped before the door of a cell, which he opened. 

" Be brief in what you have to say," he cried, thrusting her 
forward. " I shall not allow you much time." 

Viviana no sooner set foot in the cell than she felt in whose 



THE SUBTERRANEAN DUNGEON. 335 

presence she stood. On a stool at the farther end of the narrow 
chamber, with his head upon his breast, and a cloak wrappeci 
around his limbs, sat Fawkes. A small iron lamp, suspended by 
a rusty chain from the ceilinpr, served to illumine his ^hastU' 
features. He lifted his eyes from the ground on her entrance, 
and recognising her, uttered a cry of anguish. Raising himself 
by a great effort, he opened his arms, and she rushed into them. 
For some moments, both continued silent. Grief took away 
their utterance ; but at length, Guy Fawkes spoke. 

" My cup of bitterness was not sufficiently full," he said. 
** This alone was wanting to make it overflow." 

" I fear you will blame me," she replied, " when you learn that 
I have voluntarily surrendered myself!" 

Guy Fawkes uttered a deep groan. 

" 1 am the cause of your doing so," he said. 

" You are so," she replied. " But you will forgive me when 
you know my motive. I came here to urge you to repentance. 
Oh I if you hope that we shall meet again hereafter — if you hope 
that we shall inherit joys which will requite us for all our 
troubles, you will employ the brief time left you on earth in 
imploring forgiveness for your evil intentions." 

*' Having had no evil intentions," replied Fawkes, coldly, " I 
have no pardon to ask." 

" The Tempter who led you into the commission of sin under 
the semblance of righteousness, puts these thoughts into your 
heart," replied Viviana. " You have escaped the commission of 
an oflfence which must have deprived you of the joys of heaven, 
and I am thankful for it. But if you remain impenitent, I sliall 
tremble for yom* salvation." 

" My account will soon be settled with my Maker," rejoined 
Fawkes ; " and he will punish or reward me according to my 
deserts. I have acted according to my conscience, and can never 
repent that which I believe to be a righteous design." 

" But do you not now see that you were mistaken," retiirncd 
Viviana, — " do you not perceive that the sword which yoa 
raised against others has been turned against yourself, — and th.iL 
the Great Power whom you serve and worship has declared him- 
self against you ?" 

" Yon seek in vain to move me," replied Fawkes. " I am as 
insensible lo your arguments as to the tortures of my cnenues. ' 

" Then Heaven have mercy upon vour soul !" she rcjoinetl. 

" Look at me, Viviana," cried Fawkes, "and behold the wreck 
I am. What has supported me amid my tortures— in this 
liungeon — in the ])resence of my relentless foes? — what, but t.ie 
consciousness of having acted rightly ? And what will supj)<)rl 
me on the scaffold except the same conviction? If you love me, 
do not seek to shake my faith I But it is idle to talk thus. Yon 
cannot do so. Rest satisfied we shall meet aixain. Evcrythmg 
assures me of it. Wretched as I ai-pca.'- in this solitary cell, i 



53f» CV FA^VKES. 

aifi not wholly miserable, because 1 am buoyed up by the certainty 
that my actions arc approved by Heaven." 

" I will not attempt to destroy the delusion, since it is pro- 
(luctive of happiness to you," replied Viviana. " But if my 
earnest, heartfelt prayers can conduce to your salvation, they 
sliall not be wantinf];." 

As she spol<e, the door of the cell was opened by Jasper 
[pgreve, who stepped towards her, and seized her roughly by 
the hand. 

" Your time has expired, mistress," he said; "you nmst come 
with me." 

" A minute longer," implored Fawkes. 

*' Not a second," replied Ipgreve. 

" Shall we not meet again ?" cried Viviana, distractedly. 

" Ay, the day before your execution," rejoined Ipgreve. " I 
have good news for you," he added, j)ausing for a moment, and 
addressing Fawkes. " Mr. Tresham, who I told you has been 
l)rouQfht to the Tower, has been taken suddenly and dangerously 

ill-" 

" If the traitor perishes before me, I shall die content," ob- 
served Fawkes. 

" Then rest assured of it," said Viviana. " The task ol 
vengeance is already fulfilled." 

She was then forced away by Ipgreve, and delivered by him to 
the hooded officials outside, who hurried her back to her dungeon. 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE TKAITOR BETRAYED. 



Lord Mountkagle arrived at the Tower shortly after Viviana,, 
and repairing at once to the lieutenant's lodgings, had a brief 
conference with him, and informed him that he had a secret 
order to deliver to Jasper Ipgreve, from the Earl of Salisbury^ 
touching the conspirators. Sir William Waad would have 
summoned the jailer; but Mounteagle preferred visiting him at 
the Well Tower, and accordingly proceeded thither. 

He found Ipgreve with his wife and daughter, and telling him 
he desired a moment's private speech with him, the jailer dis- 
missed them. Suspecting that the new-comer's errand related in 
some way to Viviana, Ruth contrived to place herself in such 
a situation that she could overhear what passed. A moment's 
scrutiny of Jasper's villanous coinitenance satisfied Mounteagle 
that the Earl of Salisbury was not mistaken in his man ; and, as 
soon as he supposed they were alone, he unhesitatingly opened 
his plan to him. As he expected, Jasper exhibited no reluctance 



THE TRAITOR BETRAYED. 257 

to unden'take it; and, after some further disc::ssi.on, itTvas agreed 
to put it in execution without delay. 

" The sooner Mr. Tresham is silenced the better," said 
Jasper; *'for he threatens to make disclosures to the Council 
that will bring some noble persons," with a significant look at 
jVIounteagle, *' into trouble." 

" Where is he confined?" demanded the other, 

" In the Beauchamp Tower," replied Ipgreve. 

" I will visit him at once," said Mounteagle ; " and when 
I have conferred with him, will call for wine. Bring two 
goblets, and in that which you give to Tresham place thin 
powder." 

Ipgreve nodded assent, and with a grim smile took the packet. 
tShortly after this, they quitted the Well Tower together, and 
passing under the archway of the Bloody Tower, crossed the green, 
and entered the fortification in which the traitor was confined. 
Tresham was treated with far greater consideration than the 
other conspirators, being allowed the use of the large room on 
the upper floor of the Beauchamp Tower, which was seldom 
allotted to any persons except those of the highest distinction. 
When they entered, he was pacing to and fro within his chamber 
in great agitation ; but he immediately stopped on seeing Mount- 
eagle, and rushed towards him. 

" You bring me my liberation?" he said. 

" It is impossible to eflfect it at present," returned the other. 
" But make yourself perfectly easy. Your confinement will not 
be of long duration." 

" I will not be trifled with," cried Tresham, furiously. " I: I 
am examined by the Council, look to yourselves. As I hope 
for salvation, the truth shall out." 

" Leave us," said Mounteagle, with a significant look at t!ia 
jailer, who quitted the chamber. 

" Hark 'e, Mounteagle," said Tresham, as soon as they were 
alone, " I have been your tool thus far. But if you propose to 
lead me blindfold to the scatlold, you are greatly mistaken. You 
think that you have me safe within these walls; that my voici 
cannot be heard; and that I cannot betray you. But you arc 
deceived — fearfully deceived, as you will find. I have your 
letters— the Earl of Salisbury's letters, ])roving that you ^vcr- 
both aware of the plot — and that you employed me to watch \\s> 
progress, and report it to you. I have also letters from Doctor 
Dee, the warden of Manchester, detailing his acquaintance with 
the conspiracv, and containing descriptions of the persons of 
Fawkes and Catesby, which 1 showed to the Earl of Salisbury. 
— These letters are now in my possession, and I will deliver 
them to the Council, if I am not released." 

" Deliver them to me, and I swear to you, you shall l>j "Xt 
free," said Mounteagle. 

Z 



338 OUT FAWKES. 



(( 



I will not trust yon," rejoined Tresham. ** Liberate mc, 
and they »re yours. But I will not rob myself of vengeance. I 
will confound you and the false Earl of Salisbury." 

" You wrong us both by your unjust suspicions," said Moui't- 
eagle. 

" Wrong you !" echoed Tresham, contemptuously. " WLero 
is my promised reward ? Why am I in this dungeon ? Why 
am I treated like a traitor ? If you meant me fairly, I shouid 
not be here, but like yourself at liberty, and in the enjoyment o* 
the King's favour. But you have duped me, villain, and shall 
rue it. If I am led to the scaffold, it shall be in your company." 

" Compose yourself," rejoined Mounteagle, calmly. " Appear- 
ances, I own, are against us. But circumstances render it impe- 
ratively necessary that the Earl of Salisbury j-hould appear to act 
against you. You have been charged by Guy Fawkes, when 
under the torture, of being a confederate in the design, and your 
arrest could not be avoided. I am come hither to give you a 
solemn assurance that no harm shall befal you, but tha-t you 
shall be delivered lirom your thraldom in a few days — perhaps ia 
a few hours." 

" You have no further design against me," said Tresham, 
suspiciously. 

" What motive could I have in coming hither, except to set 
your mind at rest?" rejoined Mounteagle. 

" And I shall receive my reward ?" demanded Tresham. 

" You will receive your reward," returned Mounteagle, with 
significant emphasis. " I swear it. So make yourself easy." 

" If I thought I might trust you, I should not heed my 
imprisonment, irksome though it be," rejoined Tresham. 

*' It cannot be avoided, for the reasons I have just stated," 
replied Mounteagle. " But come, no more despondency. All 
will be well with you speedily. Let us drown care in a bumper. 
What ho I jailer," he added, opening the door, " a cup of wine !" 

In a few minutes, Ipgrcvc made his appearance, bearing two 
goblets filled with wine on a salver, one of which he presented 
to Mounteagle, and the otiier to Tresham. 

" Here is to your speedy deliverance from captivity !" said 
Mounteagle, draining the goblet. " You will not refuse that 
pledge, Tresham ?" 

" Of a surety not," replied the other. " To my speedy deli- 
verance !" 

And he emptied the cup, while Mounteagle and the jailer 
exchanged significant glances. 

" And now, having fully discharged my errand, I must bid 
you farewell," said Mounteagle. 

" Yon will not forget your promise?" observed Tresham. 

"Assuredly not," re{)lied the other. "A week hence, and 
you will make no complaint against me. — Are you sure you did 



THE TRAITOR BETRAYED. ?35 

^ot p;ive me the wrong goblet?" he added to Ipgreve, as they 
descended the spiral staircase. 

" Quite sure, my lord," returned the jailer, witli h ^in; 
smile. 

Mounteagle immediately quitted the Tower, and hasteni'-g to 
"Whitehall, sought out the Earl of Sr.lisbur}', to whom lie re^^^ted 
what he had done. The Earl complimented him on his fKilt'ul 
management of the matter ; and congratulating each other upon 
having got rid of a dangerous and now useless instrument, they 
separated. 

On the following day, Tresham was seized with a sudden 
illness, and making known his symptoms to Ipgreve, the chirur- 
geon who attended the prison \vas sent for, and on seeing him, 
pronounced him dangerously ill, though he was at a loss to 
explain the nature of his disorder. Every hour the sick map 
irrew worse, and he was torn with racking pains. Connecting 
his sudden seizure with the visit of Lord Mounteagle, an idea of 
the truth flashed upon him, and he mentioned his suspicions to 
the chirurgeon, charging Ja^])er Ipgreve with being accessory to 
the deed. The jailer stoutly denied the accusation, and charged 
the prisoner in his turn with making a malicious statement to 
bring him into discredit. 

''I will soon test the truth of his assertion," observed the 
cliirurgeon, taking a small flat piece of the purest gold from his 
doublet. " Place this in your mouth." 

Tresham obeyed, and Ipgreve watched the experiment with 
gloomy curiosity. 

" You are a dead man," said the chirurgeon to Tresham, as 
he drew forth the piece of gold, and perceived that it was 
slightly tarnished. " Poison has been administered to you." 

" Is there no remedy — no counter-poison ?" demanded Tres- 
ham, eagerl}'. 

Tlie chirurgeon shook his head. 

" Then let the lieutenant be summoned," said Tresham ; "I 
have an important confession to make to him. I charge this 
man," pointing to the jailer, " with giving poisoned wine to me. 
Do you hear what I say to you ?" 

" I do," replied the chirurgeon. 

" But he will never reveal it," said Ipgreve, with great uncon- 
cern. "I have a warrant from the Earl of Salisbury for what I 
have done." 

"What!" cried Tresham, "can murder be committed here 

with impunity?" 

" You have to thank your own indiscretion for what has hap- 
pened," rejoined Ipgreve. "Had you kept a close tongue in 
your head, you would have been safe." 

" Can nothing be done to save mc ?" cried the miserable man, 
with an imploring look at the chirurgeon. 

Z2 



O'rO GUV FAWKES. 

" Nothing whatever," replied llie person appealed to. *' T 
v,ould advise you to rcconiniend your soul to God." 

**\Vill you not inform the lieutenant that I desire to speak 
Vr'tth him ?" demanded Tresham. 

Tne chiruv<i:;eon glanced at Ipgrcve, and receiving a sign from 
him. gave a promise to that effect. 

They then quitted the cell together, leaving Tresham in a 

tate oi'indcscribable agony both of mind and body. Half an 

hour afterwards, the chirurgcon returned, and informed him that 

the lieutenant refused to visit him, or to hear his confession, and 

wholly discredited the fact of his being poisoned. 

*' I will take charge of your papers, if you choose to commit 
them to me," he said, " and will lay them before the Council." 

" No," replied Tresham ; " while life remains to me I will 
never part with them." 

" I have brought you a mixture which, though it cannot heal 
vou, will, at least, allay your sufferings," said the chirurgcon. 

" 1 will not take it," groaned Tresham. " I distrust you as 
much as the others." 

" 1 will leave it with you, at all events," rejoined the chirur- 
gcon, setting down the ])hial. 

The noise of the bolts shot into their sockets sounded to 
Tresham as if his tomb were closed upon him, and he uttered a 
cry of anguish. He would have laid violent hands upon him- 
self, and accelerated his own end, but he wanted courage to do 
so, and continued to pace backwards and forwards across his 
chamber as long as his strength lasted. He was about to throw 
himself on the couch, from which he never expected to rise 
again, when his eyes fell upon the phial. " What if it should be 
poison !" he said, " it will end my sufferings the sooner." 

And placing it to his lips, he swallowed its contents. As the 
chirurgcon had foretold, it alleviated his sufferings, and throwing 
himself on the bed he sank into a troubled slumber, during 
which he dreamed that Catesby appeared to him with a vengc- 
lul countenance, and tried to drag him into a fathomless abyss 
that yawned beneath their feet. Shrieking with agony, he 
awoke, and found two persons standing by his couch. One of 
them was the jailer, and the other appeared, from his garb, to be 
a priest ; but a hood was drawn over his head so as to conceal 
his features. 

" Are you come to witness my dying pangs, or to finish me ?** 
demanded Tresham of the jailer. 

'■' I am come for neither purpose," replied Ipgreve ; " I pity 
your condition, and have brought you a priest of your own faith, 
who, like yourself, is a prisoner in the Tower. I will leave him 
with you, but he cannot remain long, so make the most of your 
lime." And with these words, he retired. 

When he was gone, the supposed priest, who spoke in feeble 



THE TRIAL. S4T 

and faltering accents, desired to hear Tresham's confession, and 
having listened to it, gave him absohation. The wretched man 
then drew from his bosom a small packet, and offered it to the 
confessor, who eagerly received it. 

" This contains the letters of the Earl of Salisbury and Lord 
Mounteagle, which I have just mentioned," he said " 1 prav 
you lay them before the Privy Council." 

" I will not fail to do so," replied the confessor. 

And recitinn; the pra\'er for one m extremis over the dvin^* 
111 'J r> 

man, he departed. 

" I have obtained the letters from him," said Mounteagle, 
throwing back his hood as he quitted the chamber, and addressing 
the jailer. " And now you need give yourself no further concern 
about him, he will be dead before morning." 

Jasper Ipgreve locked the door upon the prisoner, and pro- 
ceeded to the Well Tower. When he returned, he found Mount- 
eagle's words had come to pass. Tresham was lying on the floor 
quite dead — his collapsed frame and distorted countenance 
showing the agonies in which he must have expired. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE TRIAL. 



TiiK trial of the conspirators, which had been delayed in order 
that full evidence might be procured against them, was, atlcngti.v 
appointed to take place in Westminster Hall, on Monday, th*^ 
27th of January, 1606. Early on the morning of this day, the 
eight surviving confederates (Garnet and Oidcorne being at this 
time secreted at Hendlip) were conveyed in two large covered 
wherries from the fortress to the place of trial. In spite of the 
severity of the weather, — it was snowing heavily, and tiie river 
was covered with sheets of ice, — they were attended by a vast 
number of boats filled with persons anxious to obtain a sight of 
them. Such was the abhorrence in which the actors in tiie con- 
spiracy were held by the populace, that, not contcMit with 
menaces and execrations, many of these persons hurled missiles 
against the wherries, and would have proceeded to further vio- 
lence if they had not been restrained by the pikemen. When 
the prisoners landed, a tremendous and fearful shout was raised 
by the mob stationed at the head of the stairs, and it rcijuircd 
the utmost effortsof the guard to protect them from injury. Two 
lines of soldiers, with calivers on their shoulders, were drawn 
out from the banks of the river to the entrance of the Hall, and 
between tiiem the conspirators marched. 

The melancholy procession was headed by Sir Wilham Wuad, 



5^2 GUY FAWKES. 

who was followed by an officer of the guard and six halberdiers. 
Then came the executioner, carrying the gleaming imj)lcment of 
death with its edge turned from the prisoners. He was followed 
by Sir Evcrard Digby, whose noble figure and handsome coun- 
tenance excited much sympathy among the beholders, and 
Ambrose Rookwood. Next came the two Winters, both of whom 
appeared greatly dejected. Next, John Grant and Robert 
Bates, — Catesby's servant, who had been captured at llolbeach. 
And lastly, Keyes and Fawkcs. 

Bitterly and justly incensed as were the multitude against the 
conspirators, their feelings underwent some change as they 
beheld the haggard countenance and shattered frame of Guy 
Fawkes. It was soon understood that he was the individual 
who had been found in the vault near the Parliament House, 
with the touchwood and matches in his belt ready to fire the 
train ; and the greatest curiosity was exhibited to see him. 

Just as the foremost of the conspirators reached the entrance 
of the Hall, a terrific yell, resembling nothing human, exce])t 
the roar of a thousand tigers thirsting for blood, was uttered by 
the mob, and a tremendous but ineffectual attempt was made to 
break through the lines of the guard. Never before had so 
large an assemblage been collected on the spot. The whole of 
the space extending on one hand from Westminster Hall to the 
gates of Whitehall, and on the other to the Abbey, was filled 
with spectators ; and every roof, window, and buttress was occu- 
pied. Nor was the interior of the Hall less crowded. Not an 
inch of room was unoccupied ; and it was afterwards complained 
in Parliament, that the members of the house had been so 
pressed and incommoded, that they could not hear what was said 
at the arraignment. 

The conspirators were first conveyed to the court of the Star- 
Chamber, where they remained till the Lords Commissioners 
had arrived, and taken their seats. The commissioners were the 
Earl of Nottingham, Lord High Admiral of England; the Earl 
of Suffolk, Steward of the Household ; the Earl of Worcester, 
Master of the Horse; the Earl of Devonshire, Master of the 
Ordnance ; the Earl of Northampton, Warden of the Cinque- 
Ports ; the Earl of Salisbury, Princij)al Secretary of State ; Sir 
John Po])hain, Lord Chief Justice ; Sir Thomas Fleming, Lord 
Ciiief Baron of the Exchequer; and SirTiiomas Walmisley and 
Sir Peter Warburton, Knights, and both Justices of the Common 
Pleas. 

Summoned by an ushei-, the c()ns])irators were conducted to a 
platform covered with black cloth, which had been erected at the 
lower end of the Hall. A tnuruuir of indignation, vainly sought: 
to be rejiressed by the grave looks of the Commissioners, burst 
from the immense assemblage, as they one by one ascended the 
Steps of the platform. Guy Fawkes was the last to mouiit, and 



THE TRIAL. 343 

his appearance was followed by a deep groan. Supporting him- 
self against the rail of the scaffold, he surveyed the assemblage 
with a stern and undaunted look. As he gazed around, he could 
not help marvelling at the vast multitude before him. The whole 
of the peers and all the members of the House of Commons 
Avere present, while in a box on the left, though screened by a 
lattice, sat the Queen and Prince Henry ; and in another on the 
right, and protected in the same way, the King and his courtiers. 

Silence being peremptorily commanded, the indictment was 
read, wherein the prisoners were charged with conspiring to 
blow up the King and the peers with gunpowder, and with 
attempting to incite the Papists, and other persons, to open 
rebellion ; to which all the conspirators, to the no small surprise 
of those who heard them, and were aware that they had sub- 
scribed their confessions, pleaded not guilty. 

" How, sir !" cried the Lord Chief Justice, in a stern tone to 
Favvkes. "With what face can you pretend to deny the indict- 
ment, when you were actually taken in the cellar with the 
powder, and have already confessed your treasonable intentions ?" 

" I do not mean to deny what I have confessed, my lord," 
replied Fawkes. " But this indictment contciins many matters 
Avhich I neither can nor will countenance by assent or silence. 
And I therefore deny it," 

*' It is well," replied the Lord Chief Justice. " Let the trial 
proceed." 

The indictment being opened by Sir Edward Philips, sergeant- 
at-law, he was followed by Sir Edward Coke, the attorney- 
general, who in an eloquent and elaborate speech, whicli pro- 
<luced an extraordinary effect upon the assemblage, expatiated 
upon the monstrous nature of the plot, which he characterised as 
*' the greatest treason that ever was plotted in England, and 
against the greatest king that ever reigned in England;" and 
after narrating the origin and progress of the conspiracy, con- 
cluded by desiring that the confessions of the prisoners should 
be openly read. This done, the jury were ordered by the Lord 
Chief Justice to retire, and the injunction being obeyed, they 
almost instantly returned with a verdict of guilty. 

A deep, dread silence then prevailed throughout the Hall, 
and every eye was bent upon the conspirators, all of whom main- 
tained a composed demeanour. Tliey were then questioncil by 
the Lord Chief Justice whether they had anything to say why 
judgment of death should not be pronounced against thcin. 

" All T have to crave of your lordships," said Thomas Winter, 
*' is, tiiat being the chief offender of the two, I may die for my 
brother and myself" 

" And I ask only that my brother's request may not be 
granted," said Robert Winter. *' If he is condemned, I do not 
desire to live." 



Sit GUY FAWKES. 

" I have nothinfj; to solicit — not even pardon," said Keyes, 
carelessly. " My fortunes were always desperate, and are better 
now than they have ever been." 

" I desire mercy," said llookwood, " not from any fear of 
death, but because so shameful an endino; will leave a perpetual 
stain upon my name and blood. I humbly submit myself to the 
King, and pray him to imitate our Supreme Judge, who some- 
times punishes corporally, but not mortally." 

" 1 have been guilty of a conspiracy, intended but never 
effected," said John Grant, " and solicit forgiveness on that 
plea." 

** My crime has been fidelity to my master," said Bates. " If 
the King will let me live, I will serve him as faithfully as I did 
Mr. Catesby." 

" I would not utter a word," said Fawkes, looking sternly 
round ; " if I did not fear ujy silence might be misinterpreted. 
I would not accept a pardon if it were offered me. I regard the 
project as a glorious one, and only lament its failure." 

" Silence the vile traitor," said the Earl of Salisbury, rising. 

And as he spoke two halberdiers sprang up the steps of the 
scaffold, and placing themselves on either side of Fawkes, pre- 
pared to gag him. 

" I have done," he said, contemptuously regarding them. 

" I have nothing to say save this," said Sir Everard Digby, 
bowing to the judges, " If any of your lordships will tell me 
you forgive me, I shall go more cheerfully to the scaffold." 

" Heaven forgive you, Sir Everard," said the Earl of Notting- 
ham, returning his reverence, " as we do." 

" I humbly thank your lordship," replied Digby. 

Sentence was then passed upon the prisoners by Lord Chief 
Justice Popham, and they were removed from the platform. 

As they issued from the Hall,. and it became known to the 
assemblage without that the}^ were condemned, a shout of fierce 
exultation rent the air, and they were so violently assailed on all 
sides, that they had great difficulty in reaching the wherries. 
The guard, however, succeeded, at length, in accomplishing 
iheir embarkation, and they were conveyed back in safety to the 
Tower. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE LAST MEETING OF FAWKES AND VIVIANA, 

Up to this time, Viviana had not been allowed another interview 
with Guy Fawkes. She was twice interrogated by the Privy- 
Council, but having confessed all she knew of the conspiracy, 
excepting what might implicate Garnet and Oldcorne, neither 



THE LAST MEETING S45 

of whom she was aware had been apprehended, she was not 
again subjected to the torture. Her health, however, rapidly 
sank under her confinement, and she was soon reduced to such 
an extreme state of debility that she could not leave her bed. 
The chirurgeon having been called in by Dame Ipgreve to 
attend her, reported her condition to Sir William Waad, who 
directed that every means should be adopted for her restoration, 
and that Ruth Ipgreve should remain in constant attendance 
upon her. 

Ascertaining all particulars relative to Guy Fawkes from the 
jailer's daughter, it was a sad satisfaction to Viviana to learn 
that he spent his whole time in devotion, and appeared com- 
pletely resigned to his fate. It had been the Earl of" Salisbury's- 
purpose to bring Viviana to trial at the same time as the rest of 
the conspirators, but the chirurgeon reporting that her removal 
at this juncture would be attended with fatal consequences, he 
was compelled to defer it. 

When the result of the trial was made known to Viviana by 
Ruth, though she had anticipated the condemnation of Guy 
Fawkes, she swooned away, and on her recovery, observed to 
Ruth, who was greatly alarmed at her looks, " I feel I am going 
fast. I should wish to see my husband once more before I die.'* 

" I fear it is impossible, madam," replied Ruth; "but I will 
try to accomplish it." 

" Do so," rejoined Viviana; " and my blessing shall rest ever 
on your head." 

** Have you any valuable ?" inquired Ruth. *' My heart 
bleeds to make the demand at such a moment. But it is the 
only way to produce an effect on the avaricious nature of my 
father." 

" I have nothing but this golden crucifix," said Viviana; 
*' and I meant to give it to you." 

" It will be better employed in this way," rejoined Ruth,, 
taking it from her. 

Quitting the cell, she hurried to the Well Tower, and foimd 
her father, who had just returned from locking up the conspira- 
tors in their different dungeons, sitting down to his eveniuj^ 
meal. 

" What is the matter with the wench ?" he cried, staring at 
her. " You look quite distracted. Is Viviana Radcliffe dead T 

" No; but she is dying," replied Ruth. 

" If that is the case I must go to her directly," observed Dame 
Ipgreve. " She may have some valuable about her which I nuist 
secure." 

" You will be disappointed, mother," rejoined Rutli, witii fk 
look of irrepressible disgust. " She has nothing valuable left 
hut this golden crucifix, which she has sent to my father, on con- 
dition of his allowing Guy Fawkes to see her before she dies.'* 



34f6 GUY FAWKES. 

" Give it me, wench," cried Jasper Ipgreve; " and let her die 
in peace." 

" She will not die in peace unless she sees him," replied Rutl 
*' Nor shall you have it, if yon do not comply with her request. 

" How !" exclaimed her father, " do you dare " 

" Think not to terrify me, father," interrupted Ruth ; *' I am 
resolute in this. Hear me," she cried, seizing his arm, and 
fixing a look upon him that seemed to pierce his soul, — " hear 
me," she said, in a tone so low as to be inaudible to her mother ; 
■" she sliall see him, or I will denounce you as the murderer of 
Tresham. Now will you comply ?" 

" Give nie the cross," said Ipgreve. 

'' Not till you have earned it," replied his daughter. 

"Well, well," he rejoined; " if it must be, it nmst. But I 
may get into trouble in the matter. I must consult Master 
Forsett, the gentleman jailer, who has the charge of Guy Fawkes, 
before I dare take him to her cell." 

" Consult whom you please," rejoined Ruth, impatiently; 
•*' but lose no time, or you will be too late." 

Muttering imprecations on his daughter, Ipgreve left the Well 
Tower, and Rutli hurried back to Viviana, whom she foimd 
anxiously expecting her, and related to her what she had done. 

" Oh, that I may hold out till he comes I" cried Viviana ; 
*' but my strength is failing fast." 

Ruth endeavoured to comfort her; but she was unequal to the 
effort, and bursting into tears, knelt down, and wept upon the 
pillow beside her. Half an hour had now elapsed. It seemed 
an age to the poor sufferers, and still the jailer came not, and 
even Ruth had given up all hope, when a heavy tread was heard 
in the passage ; the door was opened ; and Guy Fawkes appeared, 
attended by Ipgreve and Forsett. 

" We will not interrupt your parting," said Forsett, who 
*<cemed to have a touch of humanity in his composition. And 
beckoning to Ruth to follow him, he quitted the cell with Ipgreve. 

Guy Fawkes, meanwhile, had approached the couch, and 
gazed with an expression of intense anguish at Viviana. She 
returned his glance with a look of the utmost affection, and 
clasped his hand between her thin fingers. 

" I am now standing on the brink of eternity," she said in 
ix solemn tone, " and I entreat you earnestly, as you hope to 
insure our meeting hereafter, to employ the few days left you 
in sincere and hearty repentance. You have sinned — sinned 
deeply, but not beyond the power of redemption. Let me feel 
that 1 have saved you, and n)y last moments will be happy. 
Oh ! by the love I have borne you — by the pangs I have endured 
for you — by the death I am now dying for you — let me im{)lore 
you not to lose one moment, but to supplicate a merciful Pro- 
vidence to pardon your offence." 




\lj W^^f^i^^ ■'■ 



SAINT PAUL'S CHURCHYARD. 347 

" I will — I will," rejoined Fawkes, in broken accents. '* You 
have opened my eyes to my error, and I sincerely repent it." 

" Saved I saved I" cried Viviana, raising herself in the bed 
Opening her arms, she strained him to her bosom ; and for a 
few moments they mingled their tears together. 

" And now," she said, sinking backwards, " kneel by me — • 
pray for forgiveness — pray audibly, and I will join in your 
prayer." 

Guy Fawkes knelt by the bedside, and addressed tne most 
earnest supplications to Heaven for forgiveness. For a while he 
heard Viviana's gentle accents accompany him. They grew 
fainter and fainter, until at last they totally ceased. Filled 
with a dreadful apprehension, he sprang to his feet. An angelic 
smile illumined her countenance ; her gaze was fixed on him 
for one moment — it then grew dim and dimmer, until it was 
extinguished. 

Guy Fawkes uttered a cry of the wildest despair, and fell to 
the ground. Alarmed by the sound, Forsctt and Ipgreve, who 
were standing outside, rushed into the cell, and instantly 
raised him. But he was now in a state of distraction, and for 
the moment seemed endowed with all his former strength. 
Striving to break from them, he cried, in a tone of the most 
piercing anguish, " You shall not tear me from her ! I will die 
with her ! Let me go, I say, or I will dash out my brains 
against these flinty walls, and balk you of your prey." 

But his struggles were in vain. They held him fast, and 
calling for further assistance, conveyed him to his cell, where, 
fearing he might do some violence to himself, they placed him 
in irons. 

Ruth entered the cell as soon as Fawkes and the others had 
quitted it, and performed the last sad offices for the de])arted. 
Alternately praying and weeping, she watched by the body 
during the whole of the ni^ht. On the following day, the 
remains of the unfortunate Viviana w^ere interred in the chaj)el 
of Saint Peter on the Green, and the sole mourner was the 
jailer's daughter. 

'•' Peace be with her !" cried Ruth, as she turned away from 
the grave. " Her sorrow's at last are over." 



CHAPTER XV. 

SAINT Paul's churchyard. 



Guy Fawkf.9 was for some time wholly inconsolable. His 
stoical nature seemed completely sul)ducd, and he wcj)t like an 
aidant. By degrees, however, the violence of his grief abated. 



848 GUY FAWKES. 

and calling; to mind the last injunctions of her whose loss he 
mourned, he addressed himself to prayer, and acknowled<>-in'>- 
his guilt, besought her intercession with Heaven for his 
forgiveness. 

It will not seem strange, when his superstitious character is 
taken into consideration, that he should fancy he received an 
immediate proof that his prayers were heard. To his excited 
imagination it appeared that a soft unearthly strain of music 
floated in the air over his head; that an odour like that of 
Paradise filled his cell ; while an invisible finger touched his 
brow. While in this entranced state, he was utterly insensible 
to his present miserable situation, and he seemed to have a 
foretaste of celestial happiness. He did not, however, desist 
from prayer, but continued his supplications throughout the day. 

On that night, he was visited by the lieutenant, who announced 
to him that the execution of four of the conspirators w^as fixed for 
Thursday (it was then Tuesday), while his own and that of the 
three others would not take place till the following day. 

" As you are the greatest traitor of all, your execution will be 
reserved to the last," pursued Waad. " No jiart of the sentence 
will be omitted. You will be dragged to Old Palace Yard, over 
against the scene of your intended bloody and damnable action, 
at a horse's tail, and will be there turned off the gallows, and 
hanged, hut not till you are dead. You will then be embowcUed ; 
your vile heart, which conceived this atrocious design, will bo 
torn beating from your breast; and your quarters will be placed 
on the palace gates as an abhorrent spectacle in the eyes of men, 
and a terrible proof of the King's just vengeance." 

Guy Fawkes heard the recapitulation of his dreadful sentence 
unmoved. 

" The sole mercy I would have craved of his Majesty would 
have been permission to die first ! " he said. " But Heaven's 
will be done ! I deserve my doom." 

"What! is your stubborn nature at length subdued?" cried 
the lieutenant in surprise. " Do you repent of your offence ?" 

"Deeply and heartily," returned Fawkes. 

" Make the sole amends in your power for it, then, and dis- 
close the names of all who have been connected with the 
atrocious design," rejoined Waad. 

"I confess myself guilty," replied Fawkes, humbly. " But 1 
accuse no others." 

"Then yoa die impenitent," rejoined the lieutenant, "and 
cannot hope for u)ercy hereafter." 

Guy Fawkes made no answer, but bowed his head upon his 
breast, and the lieutenant, darting a malignant look at him, 
quitted the cell. 

On th.e following day, the whole of tlie conspirators were 
taken to St. John's chapel, in the White Tower, where a dis- 



SAINT PAUL'S CHURCHYARD. SiO 

course was pronounced to them by Doctor Overall, Dean of St. 
Paul's, who enlarged upon the enormity of their offence, and 
exhorted them to repentance. The discourse over, they were 
about to be removed, when two ladies, clad in mourning habits, 
<^ntered the chapel. These were Lady Digby and Mrs. 
Rookwood, and they immediately flew to their husbands. The 
rest of the conspirators walked away, and averted their gaze from 
the painful scene. After an ineffectual attempt to speak, Lady 
Digby swooned away, and was committed by her husband, while 
in a state of insensibility, to the care of an attendant. Mrs 
Rookwood, however, who was a woman of high spirit, and great 
personal attractions, though the latter were now wasted by 
affliction, maintained her composure, and encouraging her 
husband to bear up manfully against his situation, tenderly em- 
braced him, and withdrew. The conspirators were then taken 
back to their cells. 

At an early hour on the following morning the four miserable 
persons intended for death, namely. Sir Everard Digby, the 
elder Winter, John Grant, and Bates, were conducted to the 
Beauchamp Tower. Bates would have stood aloof from his 
superiors ; but Sir Everard Digby took him kindly by the hand, 
and drew him towards them. 

"No distinctions must be observed now," he said. "We 
ought to beg pardon of thee, my poor fellow, for bringing thee 
into this strait." 

"Think not of me, worshipful sir," replied Bates. "I loved 
Mr. Catesby so well, that I would have laid down my life for 
him at any time; and I now die cheerfully in his cause." 

" Mr. Lieutenant," said Robert Winter to Sir William Waad, 
who stood near them with Forsett and Ipgreve, " I pray you 
commend me to my brother. Tell him I die in entire love of 
him, and if it is possible for the departed to watch over the 
living, I will be with him at his last hour." 

At this moment, a trampling of horses was heard on the 
green, and the lieutenant proceeding to the grated window, 
saw four mounted troopers, each having a sledge and hurdle 
attached by ropes to his steed, drawn up before the door. \N hile 
he was gazing at them, an officer entered the room, and in- 
formed him that all was in readiness. Sir William ^Vaad then 
motioned the prisoners to follow him, and they descended the 
spiral staircase. 

The green was thronged with horse and foot soldiers, and as 
the conspirators issued from the arched door of the fortidcatiou, 
the bell of Saint Peter's chapel began to toll. Sir Everard 
Digby was first bound to a hurdle, with his face towards the 
horse, and the others were quickly secured in the same manner. 
The melancholy cavalcade was then put in motion. A troop of 
horse-soldiers in their full accoutrcmentSj and with calivcrs upon 



S50 GUY FAWKES. 

their shoulders, rode first; then came a band of halberdiers oa 
foot; then the masked executioner mounted on a led horse, 
then the four prisoners on the iiurdles, one after the otber; then 
the lieutenant on horseback; while another band of horse-soldiers, 
equipped like the first, bronf>;ht up the rear. They were met by 
the Recorder of London, Sir Henry Montague, and the sheriffs, 
at the gate of the Middle Tower, to the latter of whom the lieu- 
tenant, according to custom, delivered up the bodies of the pri- 
soners. After a short delay, the train again set forward, and 
emerging from the Bulwark Gate, proceeded through an enor- 
mous concourse of spectators towards Tower-street. 

Aware that a vast crowd would be assembled in the city, and 
apprehensive of some popular tumult, the Lord Mayor had 
issued precepts to the aldermen of every ward, commanding 
them " to cause one able and sufficient person, with a halbert in 
his hand, to stand at the door of every dwelling-house in the 
open street in the way that the traitors were to be drawn towards 
the place of execution, there to remain from seven in the morn- 
ing until the return of the sheriffs." But these were not the 
whole of the arrangements made to preserve order. The caval- 
cade, it was fixed, was to proceed along Tower-street, Grace- 
church street, Lombard-street, Cheapside, and so on to the west 
end of Saint Paul's cathedral, where the scaffold was erected. 
Along the whole road, on either side, a line of halberdiers was 
drawn up, while barriers were erected against the cross streets. 
Nor were these precautions needless. Such a vast concourse 
was collected, that nothing but the presence of a strong armed 
force could have prevented confusion and disorder. The roofs 
of all the houses, the towers of the churches, the steps of the 
crosses were covered with spectators, who groaned and hooted as 
the conspirators passed by. 

The scaffold, as has just been stated, was erectod^ in front of 
the great western entrance of the cathedral, "he mighty 
valves of the sacred structure were thrown cpc. i;d disclosed 
its columned aisles crowded with spectators, as \\iX3 its roof and 
central tower. The great bell, which had begun to toll when 
the melancholy procession came in sight, continued to pour forth 
its lugubrious sounds during the whole of the ceremonial. The 
rolling of muffled drums was likewise heard above the tunuiltuous 
murmurs of the impatient multitude. The whole area from the 
cathedral to Ludgate-hill was filled with spectators, but an open 
space was kept clear in front of the scaffold, in which the 
prisoners were one by one unbound from the hurdles. 

During this awful pause, they had sufficient time to note the 
whole of the dreadful preparations. At a little distance fron^ 
them was a large fire, on which boiled a caldron of pitch, 
destined to receive their dismembered limbs. A tall gallows, 
approached by a double ladder, sprimg from the scatfuld, on 



SAINT PAUL'S CHURCHYARD. S51 

which the hangman was already mounted with the rope in his 
hand. At the foot of the ladder was the quartering-block, near 
which stood the masked executioner with a chopper in his hand, 
and two large sharp knives in his girdle. His arms were bared 
to the shoulder ; and a leathern apron, soiled by gory stains, and 
tied round his waist, completed his butcherly appearance. Straw 
was scattered upon the scaflbld near the block. 

Sir Everard Digby was the first to receive the fatal summons. 
He mounted with a firm footstep, and his youth, his noble aspect, 
and undaunted demeanour, awakened, as before, the sympathy 
of the beholders. Looking round, he thus addressed the 
assemblage : — 

" Good people, I am here about to die, ye well know for what 
cause. Throughout the matter, I have acted according to the 
dictates of my conscience. They have led me to undertake this 
enterprise, which, in respect of my religion, I hold to be nf> 
offence, but in respect of the law a heinous offence, and I 
therefore ask forgiveness of God, of the King, and of the whole 
realm." 

Crossing himself devoutly, he then knelt down, and recited 
his prayers in Latin, after which he arose, and again looking 
round, said in an earnest voice, 

** I desire the prayers of all good Catholics, and of none 
other." 

" Then none will pray for you," replied several voices from the 
crowd. 

Heedless of the retort. Sir Everard surrendered himself to the 
executioner's assistant, who divested him of his cloak and 
doublet, and unfastened his collar. In this state, he mounted 
the ladder, and the hangman ful filled his office. 

Robert Winter was next suiiuuoued, and ascended the scaffold 
v>ith great firmness. Everything proclaimed the terrible tragedy 
(liat liad just been enacted. The straw was sprinkled with 
blood, so was the block, so were the long knives of the execu- 
tioner, whose hands and arms were dyed with the same crimson 
stain ; while in one corner of the scaffold stood a basket, con- 
taining the dismembered limbs of the late unfortunate sufferer. 
But these dreadful sights produced no effect on Robert Winter. 
Declining to address the assemblage, he at once surrendered 
himself to the assistant, and shared the fate of his friend. 

Grant was the next to follow. Undismayed as his predecessor, 
he looked round with a cheerful countenance, and said, — 

" I am about to suffer the death of a traitor, arKl am content 
to die so. But I am satisfied that our project was so far from 
being sinful, that I rely entirely on my merits in bearing a part 
in it, as an abundant satisfaction and expiation for all the sins 
I have at other times of my life comniitted." 

This speech was received by a terrific yell from the multitude. 



R52 GUY FAWKES. 

Wholly untEDved, however, Grant uttered a few prayers, and 
then crossing; himself, mounted the ladder and was quickly 
despatched. The bloody business was completed by the slaughter 
of Bates, who died asresolutel}' as the others. 

These executions, being conducted with the utmost delibera- 
tion, occupied nearly an hour. The crowd then separated to 
talk over the sight they had witnessed, and to keep holiday 
during the remainder of the day; rejoicing that an equally- 
exciting spectacle was in store for them on the morrow. 



I 



CHAPTER XVI. 

OLD PALACE YAKD, 



■Guy Fawkes's tranquillity of mind did not desert him to the 
last. On the contrary, as his term of life drew near its close, he 
became more cheerful and resigned ; his sole anxiety being that 
all should be speedily terminated. When Ipgreve took leave of 
liim for the nisht, he threw himself on his couch and soon fell 
into a gentle slumber. His dreams were soothing, and he fancied 
that Viviana appeared to him clad in robes of snowy whiteness, 
and regarding him with a smiling countenance, promised that 
the gates of eternal happiness would be opened to him on the 
morrow. 

Awaking about four o'clock, he passed the interval between 
that time and his summons by the jailer in earnest prayer. At 
six o'clock, Ipgreve made his appearance. He was accompanied 
by his daughter, who had prevailed on him to allow her to take 
leave of the prisoner. She acquainted Fawkes with all par- 
ticulars of the interment of Viviana, to which he listened with 
tearful interest. 

" Would m}' remains might be laid beside her !" he said. 
^'But fate forbids it I" 

" Truly, does it," observed Ipgreve, gruffly ; " unless you 
would have her body removed to the spikes of Whitehall 
gates." 

Disregarding this brutal speech, which called a blush of shame 
to the cheeks of Ruth, Fawkes affectionately pressed her hand, 
and said, 

" Do not forget me in your prayers, and sometimes visit the 
grave of Viviana." 

" Doubt it not," she replied, in accents half suffocated by 
grief 

Fawkes then bade her farewell, and followed the jailer through 
various intricate passages, which brought them to a door opening 
upon one of the lower chambers of the Beauchamp Tower. 



OLD PALACE YARD. S53 

Unlocking it, Ipgreve led the way up the clrcnlai* staircase, and 
ushered his companion into the large chamber where llookwood, 
Keyes, and Thomas Winter were already assembled. 

The morning was clear, but frosty, and bitterly cold ; and 
when the lieutenant appeared, Rookwood besought him to allow 
them a fire as their last earthly indulgence. The request was 
peremptorily refused. A cup of hot spiced wine was, however,, 
oflFered them, and accepted by all except Fawkes. 

At the same hour as on the previous day, the hurdles were 
brought to the entrance of the fortification, and the prisoners 
bound to them. The recorder and sheriffs met them at the 
jMiddle Tower, as they had done the other conspirators, and the 
cavalcade set forth. The crowd was even greater than on tlie 
former occasion ; and it required the utmost exertion on the 
part of the guard to maintain order. Some little delay occurred 
at Ludgate; and during this brief halt, Rookwood heard a cry, 
and looking up, perceived his wife at the upper window of one 
of the habitations, waving her handkerchief to him, and cheering 
him by her gestures. He endeavoured to answer her by signs ; 
but his hands were fast bound, and the next moment, the caval- 
cade moved on. 

At Temple Bar another halt occurred ; and as the train moved' 
slowly forward, an immense crowd, like a swollen stream, swept 
after it. The two gates at Whitehall, then barring the road to 
Westminster, were opened as the train apyiroached, and a certain 
portion of the concourse allowed to pass through. The scaffbki,. 
which had been removed from Saint Paul's, was erected in the 
middle of Old Palace Yard, in front of the House of Lords.. 
Aroimd it were circled a band of halberdiers, outside whom 
stood a dense throng. The buttresses and pinnacles of the- 
Abbey were covered with spectators; so was the roof of the 
Parliament House, and the gallery over the entrance. 

The bell of the Abbey began to toll as the train passed" 
through the gates of Whitehall, and its deep booming filled the 
air. Just as the conspirators were released from the hurdles,. 
Topcliffe, who had evidently from his disordered attire arrived 
from a long journey, rode up, and dismounted. 

"I am just in time," he cried, with an exulting glance at the 
conspirators; "this is not the last execution 1 shall witness. 
Fathers Garnet and Oldcorne are prisoners, and on their way to 
London. I was a long time in unearlhing the priestly foxes, 
but I succeeded at last." 

At this moment an officer approached, and summoned Thomas; 
Winter to mount the scatiuld. He obeyed, and exhibited no 
symptom of quailing, except that his complexion suddenly 
turned to a livid colour. Being told of this by the lieutenant,. 
he tried to account for it by saying that he thought he saw his 
brother precede him up the stejis. He made a brief address,. 

A A 



3.j4 guy fawkes. 

protcstinnr he died a true Catholic, and in that faith, notwith- 
gtandin<T his oflences, hoped to be saved. 

Rookwof^d followed him, and indulged in a somewhat lon^^er 
oration. " I confess my offence to God," he said, " in seekin«>- 
to shed blood, and implore his mercy. I likewise confess my 
offence to the King, of whose majesty I humbly ask forgiveness ; 
and I further confess my ofience to the whole state, of whom in 
<ieneral I entreat pardon. May the Almighty bless the King, 
the Queen, and all their royal progeny, and grant them a long 
and happy reign ! May He turn their hearts to the Catholic faith, 
so that heresy may be wholly extirpated from the kingdom !" 

The first part of this speech was well received by the assem- 
blage, but the latter was drowned in groans and hootings, amid. 
which Rookvvood was launched into eternitv. 

Keyes came nex', and eyeing the assemblage disdainfully, 
•went up the ladder, and threw himself off with such force that 
he broke the rope, and was instantly despatched by the exc- 
tioner and his assistants. 

Guy Fawkes now alone remained, and he slowly mounted the 
Bcalfold. His foot slipped on the blood-stained boards, and he 
would have fallen, if Topcliffe, who stood near him, had not 
caught his hand. A deep silence prevailed as he looked around, 
and uttered the following words in a clear and distinct voice : — 

" I ask forgiveness of the King and the state ior my criminal 
intention, and trust that my death will wash out my offence." 

He then crossed himself and knelt down to pray, after which 
his cloak and doublet were removed by the executioner's assistant 
and placed with those of the other conspirators. He made an 
effort to mount the ladder, but his stiffened limbs refused their 
office. 

" Your courage fails you," sneered Topcliffe, laying his hand 
upon his shoulder. 

" My strength does," replied Fawkes, sternly regarding him. 
** Help me up the ladder, and you shall see whether 1 am afraid 
to die." 

Seeing how matters stood, the executioner who stood by, 
leaning upon his chopper, tendered him his blood-stained hand. 
But Fawkes rejected it with disgust, and exerting all his strength, 
forced himself up the ladder. 

As the hangman adjusted the rope, he observed a singular 
smile illumine the features of his victim. 

" You seem hajipy," he said. 

" I a7n so," replied Fawkes, earnestly, — "I see the form of her 
I loved bee koning me to unfading happiness." 

With tliis, he stretched out his arms and sprang from the 
ladder, liefore his frame was exposed to the executioner's knife. 
life was totally extinct. 



THE LAST EXECUTION. 355 

CHAPTER XVII. 

THE LAST EXECUTION. 

Little more remains to be told, and that little is of an equally 
oainf'ul nature with the trayrical events just related. 

Fathers Garnet and Oldcorne, together with Mr. Abingdon 
and their servants, arrived in London on the 12th of February, 
about a fortnight after the execution of the other conspirators. 
They were first taken to the Gate-house at Westminster, and 
were examined on the following day by the Earl of Salisbury and 
the Privy-Council at the Star- Chamber. Nothing could be 
elicited from them, and Garnet answered the Earl's interro- 
gatories with infinite subtlety and address. The examination 
over, they were ordered to be removed to the Tower. 

Topclitfe accompanied them to the stairs. As they proceeded 
thither, he called Garnet's attention to a ghastly object stuck on 
a spike over the palace gates. 

"Do you recognise those features?" he asked. 

" No," replied Garnet, shudderingly averting his gaze. 

" I am surprised to hear it," I'ejoined Topclitfe, "for they were 
once well known to you. It is the head of Guy Fawkes. Of all thc^ 
conspirators," he added, with a bitter laugh, "he was the only 
one who died truly penitent. It is reported that this hap[)y 
change was wrought in him by Viviana Radcliffe." 

** Heaven have mercy upon his soul 1" muttered Garnet. 

*• I will tell you a strange tale about Catesby," ])ursued 
Topclitfe. " He was buried in the garden at Holbeach with 
Percy, but an order was sent down by the Earl of Salisbury to 
have their bodies disinterred and quartered. When Catesby's 
head was severed from the trunk, to be set on the gates of 
Warwick, fresh blood spouted forth, as if life were in the veins." 

"You do not expect me to believe this idle story?" said 
Garnet, incredulously. 

" Believe it or not, as you please," returned Topcliffe, angrily. 

On arriving at the fortress. Garnet was lodged in the large 
chamber of the Beauchamp Tower, and allowed the attendance 
«)f his servant, Nicholas Owen, while Oldcorno was equally 
well accommodated in the Constable Tower. This leniency was 
the result of the policy of the Eurl of Salisbury, who h<)j>ed tcv 
obtain disclosures from the two Jesuit priests which would enable 
him to strike the decisive blow he meditated against the Papists. 
But he was unsuccessful. They refused to nuike any confessions 
/vhich would criminate themselves, or implicate others ; and as 
Jione of the conspirators, not even Trcsham, had admitted their 
connexion with the plot, it w^as difficult to find proof against 
ihem. Garnet underwent daily examinations from the Earl 



336 GUY FAWKES. 

of Salisbury and the commissioners, but he baffled all their 
inquiries. 

" If \vc cannot wring the truth from you by fair means. Mr. 
iGarnet," said Salisbury, " we must have recourse to torture." 

*' Minare ista pucris,"" replied Garnet, contemptuously. 

" Leave these two priests to me, my lord," observed Sir 
William Waad, who was j)rcsent at the examination, which took 
place at the council-chamber in his lodgings, — "leave them to 
me," he said in a low voice to the Earl, " and I will engage to 
procure a full confession from their own lips, without resorting 
to torture." 

" You will render the state an important service by doing so," 
replied Salisbury, in the same tone. " I place the matter entirely 
in your hands." 

The lieutenant set to work without loss of time. By his di- 
rections. Garnet and Oldcorne were removed from their present 
places of confinement to two subterranean cells immediately 
adjoining each other, but between which a secret recess, con- 
trived in the thickness of the wall, and built for the purpose it 
was subsequently put to, existed. Two days after they had been 
so immured, Ipgreve, who had received his instructions, loitered 
for a moment in Oldcorne's cell, and with affected hesitation 
informed him that for a trifling reward he would enable him to 
hold unreserved communication with his fellow-prisoner. 

Oldcorne eagerly caught at the bait, but required to be 
satisfied that the jailer could make good his words. Ipgreve 
immediately proceeded to the side of the cell, and holding a 
lamp to the wall, showed him a small iron knob. 

" Touch this spring," he said, " and a stone will fall from its 
place, and enable you to converse with Father Garnet, who is in 
the next cell. But you must take care to replace the stone when 
any one approaches.*' 

Promising to observe the utmost caution, and totally un- 
suspicious of the deceit practised upon him, Oldcorne gave 
Ipgreve the reward, and as soon as he was gone, touched the 
spring, and found it act precisely as the jailer had stated. 

Garnet was greatly surprised to hear the other's voice, and on 
learning how the communication was managed was at first 
suspicious of some stratagem, but by degrees his fears wore off, 
and he became unreserved in his discourse with his companion, 
■discussing the fate of the conspirators, their own share in the 
])lot, the probability of their acquittal, and the best means of 
baffling their examiners. All these interlocutions were over- 
heard and taken down by the lieutenant and two other witnesses, 
Forsett and Lockerson, jmvate secretary to the Earl of Salisbury, 
who were concealed in the recess. Having obtained all the 
information he desired, Sir William Waad laid his notes before 
the Council, and their own confessions being read to the priests. 



THE LAST EXECUTION. 357 

they were both greatly confused, though neither would admit 
their authenticity. 

Meanwhile, their two servants, Owen and Chambers, had 
been repeatedly examined, and refusing to confess, were at last 
suspended from a beam by the thumbs. But this producing no 
result, they were told that on the following day they would be 
placed on the rack. Chambers then offered to make a full con- 
fession, but Owen, continuing obstinate, was conveyed back to 
ills cell. Ipgreve brought him his food as usual in the evening, 
and on this occasion, it consisted of broth, and a small allowance 
of meat. It was the custom of the jailer to bring with him a 
small blunt-pointed knife, with which he allowed the prisoner to 
cut his victuals. Having got possession of the knife, Owen 
tasted the broth, and complaining that it was quite cold, he 
implored the jailer to get it warmed for him, as he felt extremely 
unwell. Somewhat moved by his entreaties, and more by his 
appearance, Ipgreve complied. On his return, he found the 
unfortunate man lying in one corner of the cell, partially covered 
by a heap of straw which ordinarily formed his bed. 

" Here is your broth," he said. "Take it while it is hot. I 
shall give myself no further trouble about v«" " 

" It will not be needed," gasped Owen. 

Alarmed by the sound of his voice, Ipgreve held the light 
towards him, and perceived that his foce was pale as death. At 
the same time, he remarked that the floor was covered with 
blood. Instantly divining the truth, the jailer rushed towards 
the wretched man, and dragging away the blood-stained straw, 
found he had inflicted a frightful wound upon himself with the 
knife which he still held in his grasp. 

" Fool that I was, to trust you with the weapon !" cried 
Ipgreve. " But who would have thought it could inflict a mortal 
■wound ?" 

" Any weapon will serve him who is resolved to die," rejoined 
Owen. *' You cannot put me on the rack now." And with a 
ghastly expression of triumph, he expired. 

Soon after this, Oldcorne and Abingdon were sent down to 
Worcester, where the former was tried and executed. Stephen 
Littleton suffered death at the same time. 

On Friday, the 23rd of March, full proofs being obtained 
against him, Garnet was arraigned of high treason at Guild- 
hall. The trial, which excited extraordinary interest, was 
attended by the King, by the most distinguished personages, 
male and female, of his court, and by all the foreign am- 
bassadors. Garnet con(hicted himself throughout his arraign- 
ment, which lasted for thirteen hours, with the same courage and 
address which he had displayed on his examinations before the 
commissioners. But his subtlety availed him little. He was 
found guilty and condeumed. 



S5S GUY FAWKES. 

The execution of the sentence was for some time deferred, it 
beinp; hoped that a complete admission of his guilt would be 
obtained from him, together with disclosures relative to the 
designs of the Jesuit l)arty. With this view, the examinations 
were still continued, but the rigour with which he had been 
latterly treated was relaxed. A few days before his execution, 
he was visited by several eminent Protestant Divines, — Doctor 
Montague, Dean of the Chapel Royal ; Doctor Neile, Dean of 
Westminster; and Doctor Overall, Dean of Saint Paul's; with 
whom he had a long disputation on points of faith and other 
spiritual matters. 

At the close of this discussion. Doctor Overall remarked, " 1 
suppose you expect, Mr. Garnet, that after your death, the 
Church of Rome will declare you a martyr?" 

*' I a martyr!" exclaimed Garnet, sorrowfully. "O what a 
martyr I should be ! If, indeed, I were really about to suffer 
death for the Catholic religion, and had never known of this 
project, except by means of sacramental confession, I might 
perhaps be accounted worthy the honour of martyrdom, and 
might deservedly be glorified in the opinion of our church. As 
it is, I acknowledge myself to have sinned in this respect, and 
deny not the justice of the sentence passed upon me." 

Satisfied, at length, that no further disclosures could be 
obtained from him, the King signed the warrant for his execution 
on the ind of May. 

The scaffold was erected at the west end of Saint Paul's 
Cathedral, on the spot where Digby and the other conspirators 
had suffered. A vast assemblage was collected as on the former 
occasion, and similar precautions were taken to prevent tumult 
and disturbance. The unfortunate man's torture was cruelly and 
unnecessarily prolonged by a series of questions proposed to 
him on the scaffold by Doctor Overall and the Dean of West- 
minster, all of which he answered very collectedly and clearly. 
He maintained his fortitude to the last. When fully prepared, 
he mounted the ladder, and thus addressed the assemblage : — 

"I commend myself to all good Catholics. I grieve that 1. 
have offended the Kinj; by not revealin"; the desiq-n entertained 
against him, and that I did not use more diligence in preventmg 
the execution of the plot. I commend myself most humbly to 
the lords of his Majesty's coimcil, and entreat them not to judge 
too hardly by me. 1 beseech all men that Catholics may not i 
fare the worse for my sake, and 1 exhort all Catholics to take 
care not to mix themselves witti seditious or traitorous designs 
against the King's Majesty, whom God preserve !" 

Making the sign of the cross upon his forehead and breast, he 
continued : 

" In nomine Patris^ Filii, et Spiritics Sancti ! Jesus Maria f 
Maria, mater graticG ! mater misericordim ! Tu me ab hoste 



THE LAST EXECUTION. 359 

protege, et hard mortis suscipe ! In manus tuas, Dominc, commendo 
piriturn vieurn, quia tu redimisti me, Domine, Deus veritatix.''^ 
Again crossing; himself, he added, — "Per crucis hoc siqnum 
fugiat procul umne malignum ! Infige crucem tuam, Domine^ in 
corde meo /" 

And with this last pathetic ejaculation he threw himself from 
the ladder. 

Garnet obtained, after death, the distinction he had disclaimed 
while livinfr. He was enrolled, together with Oldcorne, amono- 
the list of Catholic martyrs. Several miracles are affirmed by 
the Jesuits to have been performed in his oehalf. Father More 
relates that on the lawn at Hendlip, where he and Oldcorne last 
set foot, "a new and hitherto unknown species or grass sprang 
up into the exact shape of an imperial crown, and remained for 
a long time without being trodden down by the feet of passengers, 
or eaten up by the cattle." It was further asserted that a spring 
of oil burst forth at the west end of Saint Paul's Cathedral on 
the precise spot where he suffered. But the most singular 
prodigy is that recounted by Endajmon Joannes, who affirms 
that in a straw which had been sprinkled with Garnet's blood, a 
human countenance, strangely resembling that of the martyr, 
was discovered. This legend of the jNIiraculous Straw, having 
received many embellishments and improvements as it travelled 
abroad, obtained universal credence, and was conceived to fully 
establish Garnet's innocence. 

Anne Vaux, the Jesuit's devoted friend, retired with her 
sister, Mrs. Brooksby, to a nunnery in Flanders, where she ended 
her days. 

So terminated the memorable and never-to-be-forjiotten Gun- 
powder Treason, for deliverance from which our chnrch still 
offers thanksgivings, and in remembrance of which, on the anni- 
versary of its discovery, fagots are collected and bonfires lighted 
to consume the effigy of the arch-conspirator, Guy Fawkes. 



TUli ENU 



University of California 

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1388 

Return ttiis material to the library 

from which it was borrowed. 



NOV 

DEC(j|i OCT IB 1999 

"^ iK4v i 4 2004 




^uthT^egionalubraRYFAciV,];!, 




AA 000 369 329 8 





N 





4 



University of Call 

Southern Regie 

Library Facili 



