Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was prcscrvod for gcncrations on library shclvcs bcforc it was carcfully scannod by Google as pari of a projcct 

to make the world's books discoverablc online. 

It has survived long enough for the Copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to Copyright or whose legal Copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, cultuie and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this flle - a reminder of this book's long journcy from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken Steps to 
prcvcnt abuse by commercial parties, including placing lechnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use ofthefiles We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's System: If you are conducting research on machinc 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a laige amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encouragc the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each flle is essential for informingpcoplcabout this projcct and hclping them lind 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are lesponsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in Copyright varies from country to country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any speciflc use of 
any speciflc book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search mcans it can bc used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

Äbout Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organizc the world's Information and to make it univcrsally accessible and uscful. Google Book Search hclps rcadcrs 
discover the world's books while hclping authors and publishers rcach ncw audicnccs. You can search through the füll icxi of ihis book on the web 

at |http: //books. google .com/l 



/, ^'c:^ 



^tv 




l 






I .- ■ '« 



« . 

iri '■• - . . ,;f 

f., ' , - 

> ■ ' : \, 

k.'! ■ .'■ 



*'j- ■- 



\-- 



w. 



( 'J 



), ' 



(r'i- ■■ , 


' i 


iÄi-' V* 


i---. 


■La/ » '' '^ 




i^' ■- ■' 




^)l V '; 


.': 


J,y-. - ' ' 




[»•■-' 




Ef^' -^r 




B*- •■''~'' 


* 


nr> " ^ ^/ 


/' *^ 


u^v\^ . <A 




P'-^X; ' 


1 1.'' 


fc^5:'';! 


) 




f 


If -It ' ' . ■' _ 





\ -1 , \ ' ' 



F 



'ri:.-^i 



COLLECTION 



Cf THi 
NEW V9I0C 



OF 



BRITISH AiJTHORS 



TAÜCHNITZ EDITION. 



VOL. 1058. 



HILARY ST. IVES BY W. H. AINSWORTH. 



IN TWO VOIUMES. 
VOL. I. 



6 



[ 



TAUCHNITZ EDITION. 
By the same Anthor, 

WIMDSOR CASTLE ^ . . . 1 vol. 

SAINT JAMBS'S 1 vol. 

JACK 8HEPPABD 1 vol. 

THE LANCA8HIBE WITCHE8 2 VOls. 

THE STAR-CHAMBER 3 vols. 

THE FLITCH OF BACON .......... 1 vol. 

THE 8PENDTHRIPT 1 VOl. 

MERYYN CLITHEBOE 2 vols. 

OVINGDEAN ORANGE 1 VOl. 

THE CONSTABLE OF THE TOWEB 1 vol. 

THE LORD MAYOR OF LONDON ...... 2 voU. 

CARDINAL POLE 2 V0l8. 

JOHN LAW 2volg. 

THE 8PANI8H MATCH 2 vols. 

THE CONSTABLE DE BOURBON 2 vols. 

OLD COURT 2vola. 

MYDDLETON POMPRET 2 vola. 

THE SOUTH-SEA BUBBLE 2 volg. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 



A NOVEL. 



BY 



WILLIAM HARRISON AINSWORTH. 



COPYRIGHT EDITION. 
IN TWO VOLUMES. ^^ . 



VOL. L-^ii. Biew Ye,^ 



LEIPZIG 
BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ 

1869. 

TAe Right of Translation is reserveä. 



THE NEW YORK 

PUBLIC LIBRARY 

73392B 

ASTOn, LRNOX ANU 
TILDEN FtH'N:iATlON8 
B 1U40 L 



CONTENTS 



OF VOLUME I 



BOOK I. 

MAY. 

Page 

— - I. Lost on a Heath ',.'.. . 9 

IL Mrs. Sutton . * 26 

IIL Mrs. Radclifie . ' 40 

IV. The Interview 5a 

V. May and her Mother 60 

VI. Oswald 67 

VII. Mr. Radcliffe 77 

VI IL Sir Charles Ilminster and Lady Richborough .... 83 

IX. Why Mrs. Sutton went to Guildford, and whom she met there 91 

X. Colonel Delacombe 99 

XL Mr. Page Thomton 104 

XII. In what manner Mrs. Sutton obtained possession of the Docu- 

ments 115 

XIII. May's Birthday 122 



XIV. HiUuys Story 133 

XV. The Sketch 144 

XVI. Breakfast 152 

XVII. What passed in the Housekeeper's Room .... x6i 

XVIII. A Second Breakfast x66 

XIX. Hpwlhey met »ficr long Yean, ,,,,,, xy^ 



n >■ 



VI CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. 

BOOK IL 

MYRTILLA. 

Page 

I. A Lectuie from Grandpapa 185 

IL In the Summer-house 194 

IIL Mrs. RadclifTe gives Hilary Advice 198 

IV. The Scheme Frustrated 303 

V. Contrary to Expectation, Sir Charles is accepted . . 211 

VI. Hilary leaves Hazlemere 216 

VII. Boxgrove 226 

VIII. Hilar/s Letter . 247 

IX. A little Music in the Drawing-room, and a little Talk in the 

Dressing-room 256 

X. The Colonel's Opinion of the Letter . . . ' . . 266 

XI. A Scetch taken in Boxgrove Park 374 

V 



'/ 



HILARY ST. IVES, 



BOOK I. 

MAY. 






L<- 









Lost on a Heath. 

One evening, at the latter end of April, a few 
years ago, just as it was becoming dusk, a young man, 
extremely well favoured and well proportioned, took 
his way on foot across an extensive heath in one of 
our southem counties. 

HHary St. Ives — for so was he named — might be 
about one or two and twenty. Rather dark, perhaps, 
but strikingly handsome. Features regulär and well 
cut; complexion olive; locks jet black; eyes dark and 
shaded by long eyelashes that tempered their fire; beard 
black and of a silken texture. Altogether, as fine a 
young man as you could desire to see. A Tweed walk- 
ing suit and round feit hat constituted his costume. 
Across his broad Shoulders were strapped a knapsack 
and a waterproof coat, and he carried a stout stick in 
his band. 

Our young traveller was bound for the village of 
Wootton , which was situated at the further side of the 
heath, where he had leamt there was a good inn, at 
which he proposed to rest for the night. He had 
walked far that day, and having dined early and some- 
what sparingly, was quite ready for supper. In fact, 
the keen air and exercise made him feel ravenously 
bungry. 



10 HILARV^-ST» IV^S. 

As far as A»<ould judge — for^he wa« a stranger to 
the country— ^three miles still lay between him and the 
desired haven; fsfothing to so stout a pedestrian as he. 
But if the distance could be shortened so much the 
better. He Would be sooner at the inn and supper 
would be sooner set before him. 

After looking in the direction where he supposed 
Wootton lay, and studying, as far as he was able, the 
intervening ground, he came to the conclusion that a 
considerable angle might be cut ofF by quitting the 
high road, and crossing the heath as a crow would 
wing its füght over it. All very well in the day-time, 
but the shades of night were gathering rapidly, and the 
gloom was increased by a mist that arose from an ad- 
jacent marsh. 

Hilary, however, had no misgivings — no idea of 
the risk he might run. He was not aware that between 
him and Wootton lay a deep and dangerous morass, 
which could only be safely traversed by one familiär 
with the locality. 

Wootton Heath, though partially reclaimed, still 
comprehended many miles of wholly uncultivated land. 
Being undrained, some portions of the waste were 
marshy, and about half a mile to the left of the road, 
along which our young traveller was wending his way, 
lay the extensive morass to which we have just ad- 
verted. 

On the other side the heath was less swampy, and 

being covered by a short thymy turf, was well adapteji 

to sheep pasture. When enlivened by SMaslvme, the 






HILARY ST. IVES. 1 1 

Wide expanse, purpled by heather, embellished by fern 
and Clusters of tall gorse, with here and there a grey 
old thom or a holly, presented a channing picture. 
The limits of the heath were marked on the right by 
a broad belt of firs overtopped by the white spire of a 
newly built church. On the left the boundary was un- 
defined, the village of Wootton being invisible. Three 
or four little knolls or hillocks rising in the midst of 
the waste were crowned with clumps of pines, and 
contributed to the beauty of the landscape. 

Before quitting the high road Hilary looked around 
in quest of some one to direct him to Wootton. 
Not a human being was in sight. Not a sound was 
heard, except the bleating of sheep and the distant 
barking of a watch-dog. The heath was perfectly 
soiitary. However, our young travellerdid not hesitate; 
but striking off on the left, where, as we have ex- 
plained, the danger lay, he speeded over the elastic 
turf. 

In this manner he had soon accomplished nearly 
half a mile, without encountering any obstacle, except 
such as was presented by clumps of gorse, intermingled 
with briers, and was congratulating himself on his 
clevemess, when the swampy nature of the ground 
brought him to a sudden standstill. 

Not a minute too soon. Had he taken many Steps 
farther, he would have been engulphed in the treacherous 
morass. He understood his danger, and perceiving that 
the qnagmlre must be impassable, and not liking to 



12 HILARY ST. IVES. 

skirt it, he tumed back, as much provoked with him- 
seif as he had previously been well satisfied. 

He endeavoured to regain the high road, which he 
had so impradently quitted, but bewildered by the 
gloom — for it was now quite dark — he failed in dis- 
covering it, and after wandering about for nearly half 
an hour, again found himself on the verge of the 
morass. 

This was indeed vexatious. But confident that by 
pursuing a straight course he must eventually reach the 
road, he turned back at once. Unluckily, his course 
was not straight. Without being aware of it, he deviated 
from the direct line, and to his infinite surprise and 
mortification, found himself, for the third time, on the 
borders of the morass. 

He was now quite confounded, and began to think 
he must be condemned to move in a magic circle. 

Another half hour found him only more hopelessly 
involved. By no efforts could he discover the road, 
though he appeared to have no difficulty in finding the 
morass. Uneasy thoughts beset him. He shuddered 
at the idea of passing the night on the dark and dreary 
heath. But he soon took heart. Though constantly 
baffled, he would not succumb, until forced to do so 
by sheer exhaustion. 

Vainly did he attempt to extricate himself from 
the magic circle. Äs surely as he went on, so surely 
did he come back to the inevitable point. At last, he 
was brought to a halt. Carefully as he proceeded, he 
contrived to roll down a hoUow, and when he re- 



HILARY ST. IVES. I3 

covered from the fall he sat down on the brink of the 
pit to refiect; the bitterness of his reflections being 
aggravated by the tantalising picture summoned up by 
his fancy of the snug parlour at the inn , with the hot 
supper in preparation. 

Heavens! how hungry he feit. Springing to his 
feet he set off again, but presently got entangled in a 
thick Cluster of gorse. 

But help was now at band. While he was struggling 
out of the gorse, voices reached his ears, and he in- 
stantly hastened in the direction whence the sounds 
proceeded, shouting lustily as he went. 

Instead of responding to his outcries, the inter- 
locutors became suddenly mute, and the darkness did 
not permit him to distinguish them. 

After a moraenfs pause, he called out again. This 
time, a gniff voice demanded who he was, and what 
he wanted? Hilary replied that he was a traveller, 
who had lost his way on the heath, and pressing on 
as he spoke, soon descried two sturdy-looking vaga- 
bonds, who were Standing in a more open spot, tran- 
quilly awaiting his approach. The fellows were roughly 
dad, and had the appearance of gipsies, and their 
looks and deportment inspired Hilary with distrust. On 
their part, the gipsies eyed him narrowly. 

As he came up, the surly fellow who had first ad- 
dressed him, asked if he wanted to be smothered in 
the bog, that he ventured near it on so dark a night. 

"I have no such desire," replied Hilary. "Like a 
fool I must needs quit the high road, and I have ^^id 



14 HILARY ST. IVES. 

the penalty for my foUy by being kept wandering about 
on the brink of the marsh for two hours at least." 

"Ho! ho!" laughed the gipsy. "Pleasant pastime 
on a dark night. You may thank your stars it's no 
worse. It's easier to get into a bog than to get out 
of it, as many a poor devil has found to his cost." 

"I want to go to Wootton!" cried Hilary, who 
did not like this jesting; "will you show me the way?" 

"The nearest way lies straight on," said the man. 

"Why that will take me to the marsh!" cried Hilaiy. 

"To be sure it will!" exclaimed the other gipsy, 
with a coarse laugh. "Seth Cooper is gammoning you. 
You must go round about, if you want to get safely to 
Wootton." 

"Why need you trouble yourself about him, Reuben! " 
cried Seth Cooper. "What is it to you if he should be 
drownded." 

"Not much, certainly. Still " 

"Will half a crown tempt you to show me the 
road?" interrupted Hilary. 

"I should say not," retumed Seth Cooper. "Do 
you rate your life at only half a crown's valley?" 

"Make it half a crown a-piece," quoth Reuben, 
who seemed of milder mood than his companion, "and 
we'll consider about it." 

"Well," cried the young man, "put me in the 
right way to Wootton, and you shall have what you 
ask." 

"Money down, or we don't budge," cried Seth 
Cooper, 



HILARY ST. IVES. I5 

"No," rejoined Hilary, in a determined tone. 
"Bring me to the high road, and I'll pay you. But 
not a stiver tili then." 

Seth made some growling observations, l)ut his 
companion signified his assent to the young man's 
proposal, and the pair at once moved off, bearing 
towards the right. Hilary, who had now quite re- 
covered his energies, followed them. 

After trudging along in silence for a few minutes, 
Reuben hung back, and in a more civil tone than he 
had previously adopted, inquired of Hilary if he had 
travelled far that day? 

"Farther than you would like to travel on foot, I 
reckon," replied ^he young man. 

"Then you must have had a long tramp," retumed 
Reuben, laughing. "Many's the time Fve done my 
forty miles, and been none the worse for it." 

"But you warn't incommoded with a heavy knap- 
sack," remarked Seth Cooper, turning round. "Why 
don't you offer to carry it for the gemman?" 

"Come, no nonsense!" cried Hilary, stemly. 
"Leave my knapsack alone. You'd best." 

"Why, what's the matter?" rejoined Seth. "Do 
you think we want to rob you — eh?" 

"You would find it no easy job if you made the 
attempt. Move on, I say, and keep well in front." 

But instead of complying, both men stopped. 

"It seems you don't like our Company, master," 
remarked Reuben. "That being the case, you'd better 
go on alone." 



l6 HILARY ST. IVES. 

''You made a bargain with me, and I expect you 
to fulfil your pari of it, as I mean to fiilfil mine/' said 
Hilary, in a bold, authoritative tone. ^'I insist upon 
your conducting me to the high road." 

"First teil us what youVe got in that ere knapsack/' 
remarked Seth. " We should like to know." 

"Wonld you? Then I don't intend to gratify your 
curiosity. I would fain believe you to be honest men." 

**Why, what eise do you take us for?" cried Seth, 
fiercely. "Out with it. Let's know your mind." 

His manner clearly intimated violence, but his 
comrade dragged him ofF, and they went on as before. 
The high road was not far distant, and on reaching it, 
they both faced about. 

"That's the way to Wootton," said Reuben. "We'll 
now wish you good night." 

"Not afore he has settled with us," cried Seth. 

Wliile Hilary was searching for the money , Seth 
rushed suddenly upon him, änd §eizing him by the 
throat, with a choking gripe, bore him to the ground. 
Hilary struggled desperately, and would have freed 
himself, if Reuben had not come to his comrade's 
assistance. 

Seth then possessed himself of the stick, and beat 
the luckless young man with it about the head tili he 
rendered him insensible. 

The two ruflians next proceeded to despoil their 
victim, took off his knapsack, and were proceeding to 
empty his pockets and pluck the guard-chain from his 
neck, when the noise of wheels alarmed them. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 17 

A dog-cart *as Coming pn at a quick pace. and 
its lamp, together with the light of the cigars they were 
Smoking, showed there were two persons in the vehicle. 
These persons appeared to be known to Reuben, for 
he remarked to his comrade, who was still kneeling 
upon his victim's ehest, 

"It's old Radcliffe, of Hazlemere, and his nevey, 
young Oswald Woodcot. We must be oflF. But first 
let US drag the poor devil out of the road, or hell be 
run over." 

"Never mind if he is," rejoined Seth Cooper. "If 
I'd had my own way, we should have done.the job 
where me met him, and then we could have flung the 
body into the bog, and no more would have been 
heard of him." 

Here the rapid advance of the dog-cart forced him 
to abandon part of his booty, and he disappeared with 
his comrade amid the furze-bushes. 

The disaster apprehended by Reuben seemed im- 
minent. Luckily, however, Mr. Radcliffe descried the 
body of the unfortunate young man lying in the middle 
of the road and pulled up just in time. 

'*Who-oh, Spanker!" he cried. "What's that, a 
sack, or a man? Get down, Oswald, and see what 
it is." 

His nephew flung away his cigar, descended at 
once, and inmiediately afterwards called out, in ac- 
cents of horror, 

"It's a man — murdered, I fear." 

"Murdered! bless me! I hope not," cried Mr. 

Hila$y St. Ives. I, 2 



l8 HILARY ST. IVES. 

Radcliffe, who was likewise greatiy horrified. "Take 
the lamp, Oswald , and make a careful examination. 
I'd get down myself, but, as you know, Spanker won't 
stand." 

And, as if to confirm the Statement, the mettlesome 
horse snorted, and exhibited signs of impatience. 

"He's a young man, uncle — a very fine young 
man," exclaimed Oswald, throwing the light of the 
lamp upon Hilary's pallid aud blood-stained visage. 
"Roughly handled, but not dead. He breathes, and 
I think may recover. It would seem that he has only 
just been attacked, and probably we have disturbed 
his assailants." 

"Why do you imagine the poor fellow has been 
attacked by more than one person, Oswald?" 

"For this reason, uncle. Such a powerfuUy built 
young fellow, as he appears to be, would have beaten 
any ordinary ruffian, unless he had been taken un- 
awares." 

"Have you any idea who he is?" 

"Not the least. Never saw him before. He looks 
like a gentleman. There's a signet ring on his finger. 
I wonder the villains didn't take it. Perhaps they 
hadn't time, for theyVe left his watch and guard-chain. 
What's to be done, uncle? We can't leave him here." 

"Of course not," rejoined Mr. Radcliffe. "It's a 
mercy I didn't run over him. I should never have 
forgiven myself if I had." 

"Well, uncle, the best plan will be for you to drive 
as fast as you can to Malham's, the surgeon's at Woot- 



HILARY ST. IVES. 1$ 

ton, and procure assistance. I'U stay with the poor 
feUow." 

"No, no; that won't do. The villains may be 
lurking about. If we could only manage to get him 
into the dog-cart, we might take him to the surgery. 
Can he move at all?'* 

"rU see." 

As Oswald , wbo was a stalwart young fellow him- 
self, essayed to lift the injured man, the latter exhibited 
some slight consciousness , but he was so stunned and 
confused that considerable difficulty was experiöiced 
in getting him into the dog-cart. This being ac- 
complished at last, he was sustained by Oswald, while 
Mr. Radcliffe drove on at a quick pace towards Wootton. 

As they speeded over the heath, the rapidity of the 
motion in some degree revived Hilary, and he 
endeavoured to explain what had befallen him. Mr. 
Radcliffe and his nephew, however, deemed it prudent 
not to put too many questions to him. 

On reaching Wootton, Mr. Radcliffe drove at once 
to the surgery. Luckily, Mr. Malham was within, and 
having carefully washed the coagulated blood from the 
wounded man's dark locks and sponged his brow, he 
pronounced that he was not seriously injured. There 
was no fracture of the skull. A stimulant administered 
to the sufferer tended greatly to restore him. 

Meantime, Oswald, leaving the injured man to the 
care of the surgeon, set off in quest of the police, and 
he now returned with an officer, to whom Hilary de- 
tailed all particulars of the murderous attack made 



20 HILARY ST. IVBS. 

upon him, describing his assailants as well as he could, 
and mentioning the names by which they had addressed 
each other. 

Wormald, the officer, who seemed an active and 
intelligent man, listened attentively to what was told 
him, and remarked that^ he had no doubt the men 
were gipsies — Cooper being a common name among 
the vagabonds. Wootton Heath, he said, was infested 
by the vagabonds. Two men, answering to the de- 
scription given of the robbers, had been seen about 
the village lately. They were tinkers. Wormald feit 
certain he should be able to efFect their capture before 
morning. 

"I hope I shall recover my knapsack," said Hilary. 
"It contains nothing of any value, except some papers, 
which are of great importance to myself. I would 
rather lose a good sum of money than those documents." 

On hearing this, the officer looked rather grave, 
and so did Mr. Radcliffe. 

"Excuse me, sir," remarked Wormald, "for saying 
that you ought not to have placed important documents 
in a knapsack." 

"Certainly not," observed Mr. Radcliffe, shaking 
his head. 

"Yes, I feel I did wrong," said Hilary. 

"Well, I don't think you will lose them, as they 
can't be of any value to these rascals," said the 
officer. 

"You mustn't let the scent get cold, Wormald," 
cn'ed Oswald. "The sooner you givQ chase the better," 



HILARY ST. IVES. 21 

"I can guess pretty well where I'm likely to meet 
with the rogues, sir," said the officer, confidently. "I 
and my mate, Barker, will mount and be on their 
track in less than ten minutes. But you haven't yet 
told me your name, sir." 

"Hilary St. Ives — that's my name," replied the 
young man. 

"From Cornwall?" inquired Oswald, 

"No," replied the other; but he gave no further 
information. "You'U find me at the inn," he added 
to the officer. 

"No, you won't, Wormald," cried Mr. Radcliffe. 
"You'll find Mr. St. Ives at Hazlemere. I mean to 
take him home with me." 

"All right, sir," replied the officer. And with a 
Salute he departed. 

"You won't be in bad quarters at Hazlemere, I 
can promise you, Mr. St. Ives," observed Oswald. "My 
uncle, though I say it to his face, is the jolliest old 
gentleman in the county." 

"At all events, you'll be more comfortable with me 
than you would be at the George, though you wouldn't 
be badly off there," said Mr. RadcliiSe. ,"My house- 
keeper, Mrs. Sutton, will take good care of you — eh, 
Malham?" 

"Mr. St. Ives couldn't be in better hands than Mrs. 
Sutton's," returned the surgeon. "And he zvt'ii require 
a nurse, for he mustn't expect to escape without a 
little fever. It wouldn't surprise me if he were laid up 
for two or three days,' 



» 



22 HILARY ST. IVES. 

" You hear that, Mr. Radcliife," said Hilary. " Doesn*t 
that alarm you?" 

"Not in the least. Mrs. Sutton is an excellent 
nurse, as Mr. Malham can testify." 

"That I can, sir., Though Mr. St. Ives has had 
the ill luck to be knocked down, he has contrived to 
fall on his legs." 

"Gad, Malham, it's uncommonly lucky we happened 
to be passing at the time. My nephew and I have 
been to Binfied — intending merely to make a call — but 
Tom Irby persuaded us to stay dinner, and we were 
getting back as fast as Spanker could take us — and 
you know how well he goes — when we came upon this 
poor young fellow lying in the middle of the road. 
Another minute, and it would have been all over with 
him — but we won't think of that. Here he is." 

"I feel I am indebted to you, sir, and to your 
nephew for the preservation of my life," said Hilary, 
earnestly. "I am truly sensible of your kindness. But 
I really am not in a condition to avail myself of your 
hospitality. Having lost my knapsack, I have not even 
a change of linen." 

"Poh! Oswald will supply all your wants in that 
respect." 

^ "That I will, with the greatest pleasure," said the 
young man. "You shall have the pick of my ward- 
robe, Mr. St. Ives, and as we're about the same size, 
my things will fit you." 

"All's settled," cried his uncle, "Help our young 
friend into the dog-cart," 



HILARY ST. IVES. 2^ 

Hilary made some further remonstrances, but the 
worthy old gentieman ovemiled them, and glancing at 
his nephewj the latter assisted Hilary to arise, and the 
two young men went out of the surgery together. 

Mx. Radcliffe tarried to have a parting word with 
the surgeon. 

"Anything to say to me, Malham?" he asked. 

"Not much, sir," replied the surgeon. "You may 
make up your mind to have this young man at Hazle- 
mere for three or four days, or a week. He's certain 
to have fever, and it won't be long in Coming ön. No 
need for alarm , though. No mischief has been done. 
He has been knocked about the head pretty severely, 
but his skull is luckily as thick as an Irishman's, and 
not easily cracked. I needn't prescribe for him. You 
have only to explain the case to Mrs. Sutton. She 
has a medicine ehest, and will know what to give 
him." 

"Ay, Mrs. Sutton beats you all hollow, Malham," 
cried Mr. Radcliffe, with a laugh. "She likes to act 
as nurse." 

"Mrs. Sutton is a very clever woman, and a very 
good woman, and if I got hurt, I should like her to 
nurse me — that's all I can say." 

"She's invaluable to us, Malham," cried the old 
gentieman, tears of gratitude springing to his eyes. 
"She has lived with us for nineteen years — ever since 
my darling May was born — and we have never had a 
feult to find with her. As you know, my dear wife 
has always been an invalid. A nurse is a necessvly \.o 



24 HILARY ST.- IVES. 

her, and she has found the best of nurses in Mrs. 
Sutton. Without her unremitting care and attention — 
and skill, Malham, skill — Mrs. Radcliflfe wonldn't be 
alive now." 

It seemed a pleasure to the old gentleman to sing 
his housekeeper's praises. A pleasure, also, to the 
surgeon to listen to them. 

" You may with truth assert, sir," he rejoined, "that, 
but for Mrs. Sutton's care, your wife wonld not be 
alive now." 

Emotion kept Mr. Radcliflfe silent. He brushed his 
eyes, and said, "You'U come over to see this young 
fellow in the morning, Malham?" 

"I'll come to see how he gets on, since you de- 
sire it, sir; but I'm sure Mrs. Sutton will treat him 
properly." 

**At all events, she'll be very glad to consult with 
you. You're a great favourite of hers, Malham." 

The surgeon smiled and bowed. 

"I wonder who the deuce this young St. Ives can 
be? and where he comes from? I don't know whether 
you remarked it, but he seemed rather shy in giving 
any information about himself to my nephew. I'm 
certain he's a gentleman, or I wouldn't take him home 
with me." 

"A gentleman, no doubt, sir. Don't excite him 
by any questions to-night. He's not exactly himself. 
We shall learn all about him, by and by. Get him to 
bed as soon as you can." 

Nothing more passed. Mr. Radcliflfe bade the sur- 



HILARY ST. IVES. 2$ 

geon good night, and shook hands with him. On 
g^oing forth, he found that his nephew and Hilary were 
already seated in the dog-cart. Mr. Malham's groom 
was Standing at Spanker's head. Taking the reins 
from the man, Mr. Radcliffe got into the vehicle more 
ictively than might have been expected from so stout 
i personage, and drove off. 

Hazlemere was about a mile and a half distant 
rem Wootton, and while they are on the way thither, 
ve shall take the opportunity of offering a brief de- 
cription of the place, antl saying a few words about 
ts occupants, ' 



26 HILARY ST. IVES. 



IL 

Mrs. Sutton. 

Hazlemere House was a large, commodious, red- 
brick mansion, built, towards the close of the last 
Century, by the present owner's grandsire — a merchant 
of the City of London. The site had been well chosen, 
in the midst of a lovely country. Though the house 
was comparatively modern, not being more than seventy 
years old, there was fine timber around it; the gardens 
were extensive, and the grounds well laid out. At no 
great dlstance, there was a miniature lake, from which 
the place derived its name. "To sum up,'' as the 
worthy old cit, who reared it, used to say, it was a 
delightful country house. 

Like his sire and grandsire, our friend, Mr. Theo- 
bald Radcliflfe, had been in business in the City, but 
had retired several years ago, and now lived entirely at 
Hazlemere. His wife, as we have seen, was a great 
invalid, and never left home. She would not stir 
without Mrs. Sutton, and Mrs. Sutton did not like to 
leave Hazlemere. Mr. Radcliffe had no son; but he 
had something far better — a most charming daughter. 

Her father was very proud of her, and he might 

well be so. May Radcliffe had a thousand attractive 

qualities which it would take pages to enumerate. She 

must have had some faults, we suppose, but her father 






HILARY ST. IVES. 2^ 

could never discern them. He thought her perfection. 
She was exceedingly amiable, and her nature was so 
jojous that she seemed to diffuse happiness wherever 
she went. Her light laughter was the pleasantest music 
in her father's ears, though he liked also to listen to 
her sweet voice as she touched the piano. May was 
a favourite with everybody in the house, except Mrs. 
Sutton. The exception may appear incomprehensible, 
seeing that Mrs. Sutton had nursed her during infancy, 
and watched over her ever since, and might naturally 
be supposed to have almost a mother's love for her. 
But so it was. Mrs. Sutton had once doated upon 
her; but her feelings of late had undergone a change. 
She did not, however, allow this change to appear, but 
treated May with every semblance of affection, and 
seemed anxious as ever to gratify her slightest wish. 

But May was not to be deceived. She detected the 
change. What had she done to forfeit her dear old 
nurse's love? She could not teil. But the idea made 
her unhappy, and being whoUy incapable of conceal- 
ment, she confessed her uneasiness to the author of it, 
promising, if she had offended in any way, to make 
instant reparation. "Teil me what it is, dear Mrs. 
Sutton," she cried. "You know how dearly I love 
you." 

Mrs. Sutton looked surprised and hurt, and re- 
proached her gently, telling her she was a silly child 
to entertain any such nonsensical notion. She then 
kissed her affectionately, and assured her, with a look 
that carried conviction with it, that she loved Viei b^XX^x 



28 HILARY ST. IVES. 

than any one in the world, except her dear mistress. 
Secretly, perhaps, Mrs. Sutton did not love either of 
them overmuch. But she played her part so well, that 
she efFectually dlssipated all May's misgivings. 

Mrs. RadclifFe was the youngest daughter of Mr. 
Page Thornton, a flourishing solicitor of Chester. Both 
the Miss Thorntons were considered belies in their 
day, and had been much admired by the youth of 
Chester, as well as by the officers quartered in the 
ancient city of Hugh Lupus. Both married well, though 
neither was united to the man she herseif would have 
chosen. Isabella, the eldest, became the second wife 
of Dr. Woodcot, an eminent physician in Manchester. 
But of her anon. Esther Thornton, who had been a 
great flirt, and had had we know not how many en- 
tanglements, managed to captivate Mr. RadclifFe, whom 
she met at a ball at Liverpool. Mr. Radcliffe was 
double Esther's age; but that did not matter; he was 
a wealthy merchant, and when he foUowed her to 
Chester, and proposed, Mr. Thornton, who was tired 
out by so many flirtations that came to nothing, in- 
sisted upon her accepting him. She did so, and gave 
up Captain Delacombe, who became distracted. Like 
a sensible fellow as he was, Mr. Radcliffe did not trouble 
himself with his wife's former flirtations , but esteemed 
himself eminently fortunate in possessing such a charm- 
ing creature. 

Esther had been always extremely delicate, and 

after the birth of May she became a confirmed invalid. 

A young widow, unembarrassed by a family, was re- 






HILARY ST. IVES. 2^ 

commended to her as a nurse. This was Mrs. Sutton, 
who had never since quitted the family, and had really 
become a very important member of it. It is question- 
able whether she had most influence with Mrs. Rad- 
clifFe or her husband. Both were governed by her 
without being aware of it. Mrs. Sutton at the time of 
her entrance into the family, and assumption of the 
duties of nurse and housekeeper, for she filled both 
Offices, was about five-and-twenty — perhaps not quite 
so much — but she called herseif five-and-twenty. She 
never gave any particulars of her previous history, nor 
were they asked for, out of consideration for her feel- 
ings, it being understood that her marriage had been 
unhappy. Her countenance long wore a shade of 
melancholy, but this wore ofF in time. She was per- 
fectly well educated, and had the manners of a gentle- 
woman; but though evidently superior to her Situation, 
she fulfilled all its duties, and became, as her mistress 
declared, a model nurse and a model housekeeper. 
Piain of feature, she was not without personal attrac- 
tion, for her figure was good, her hair dai^ and fine, 
her complexion very fair, and her teeth beautifully 
white and even. Her hands and feet were small and 
well formed. Such charms as she possessed she con- 
trived to preserve in a very wonderful manner, and 
indeed she seemed rather to improve thah deteriorate 
by age. She dressed very plainly and consistently, 
but was so neat that what she wore always became her. 
Mrs. Radcliffe used often to say that she could never 
get a dress to ßt her In the same way that Mis, SmIIotC^ 



30 HILARY ST. IVES. 

dresses did. Her manner was extremely quiet and pre- 
possessing. At first Mrs. Sutton had had the care of 
May, but Mrs. RadclifFe's delicate State of health de- 
manded her exclusive care, and another nurse was 
engaged. Gradually she rose to an important position 
in the house, but as she never made her power un- 
pleeisantly manifest, she was liked by the whole house- 
hold, of whom she was in effect mistress, for Mrs. Rad- 
clifFe was too feeble to attempt the management, and 
Mr. RaddiJÖfe, who was quite aware of his wife's in- 
competency, was well pleased that she should be thus 
efficiently represented. Mrs. RadclifFe entrusted her 
keys and her purse to her housekeeper, kept nothing 
from her in fact, and was constantly making her hand- 
some presents. Mrs. Sutton was her confidante and 
counseller, and as she possessed a far stronger mind 
than her mistress, her ascendancy became complete. 
But as May grew up Mrs. Sutton began to fear she 
might be supplanted. Hence her jealousy of the 
amiable and unofFending girl, to whom she had previ- 
ously been so fondly attached. She could brook no 
interference. Never would she relinquish the keys — 
never submit to have her authority restricted or con- 
trolled. The sole plan of removing her young and 
dangerous rival was to get her married, and she had 
no doubt that this could be speedily accomplished. 
Already May had plenty of suitors, but she seemed to 
care for none of them. Mrs. Sutton, however, relied 
upon Cousin Oswald. 

And now a few v;ords as to this young gentleman. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 3I 

Oswald Woodcot was the only son of Mrs. Radcliffe's 
sister Isabella, who had now been some ten years a 
wridow, Mrs. Woodcot was not very well off, her late 
busband having left the bulk of bis property to bis 
:hildren by bis first wife. Her son, tberefore, was in- 
lebted for the excellent education he had received to 
lis grandfatber, Mr. Thornton, of Chester, who was 
Jtill alive, and still in business, tbough an old man. 
Oswald was destined for the bar, and had every pros- 
pect of success, owing to bis grandfather's interest 
ind connexions; but he had a distaste to the legal 
profession, tbough he didn't care to avow it to Mr. 
Thornton. The old solicitor, who was very rieh, and. 
ialked of making bim bis heir, might change bis mind, 
f he displeased bim. Mrs. Woodcot would have liked 
:o See her son in the army, but of course this was out 
3f the question, unless Mr. Tbornton's consent could 
36 obtained, and it being quite certain he would 
Jtrongly oppose the plan, it was never mentioned to 
lim, and the idea was abandoned. It was pretty clear, 
lowever, that Oswald would never make a figure at the 
3ar, and this bis shrewd old grandfatber had already 
)egun to suspect. Mrs. Woodcot had another plan in 
egard to her son, which she persuaded berself could 
)e easily carried out, which would materially better his 
)rospects, and at the same time ensure his happiness. 
Fhis was to bring about a match between bim and her 
ovely niece, May Radcliffe. She really saw no diffi- 
:ulty in the matter. The young people seemed made 
br each other. Oswald was a very bandsome young 



32 HILARY ST. IVES. 

fellow — at least, in his mother's opinion — just three 
years older than his charming cousin, and his dis- 
position was so kind and good that he could not fail 
to make her happy. The fortune, it is true, was all 
on May's side, for she could give her son little or 
nothing; but had he not great expectations from his 
grandfather, who had almost announced his intention 
of making him his heir, and who might be induced to 
do something at once, if the marriage were arranged? 
Thus the fond mother argued, and her son was quite 
of the same opinion, for he was over head and ears in 
love with his lovely cousin. 

Aware of the danger of making a false step in a 
matter so important — aware also of Mrs. Sutton's in- 
fluence over her sister, and indeed over Mr. Radcliflfe, 
Mrs. Woodcot endeavoured to secure the housekeeper's 
assistance, and urged Oswald to conciliate her by 
every means in his power. Mrs. Sutton — for reasons 
we have already explained — met him half-way, and 
soon showed that she was ready to become his ally. 
Oswald therefore seemed in a fair way of success. 
But he had not, as yet, received sufficient encourage- 
ment from May to Warrant a formal declaration. She 
liked him very much, and was always very happy and 
cheerful in his society, but she seemed .only to regard 
him as a cousin. Oswald was therefore perplexed, but 
Mrs. Sutton encouraged him, though at the same time 
she recommended him not to be precipitate. Mean- 
time, the housekeeper had cautiously sounded her 
mistress, and had ascertained that there was no dis- 



HILARY ST. IVESli 33 

inclination on her part to the match. Mrs. RadclifFe 
thought the young people were well suited to each 
other, and she would not be sorry to have May happily 
married, though she feit sure Mr. Radcliffe would not 
like to part with her.. Nor was she wrong. When the 
plan was hinted to him by his wife, he laughed at it, 
and hoped Oswald had got no such foolish notion into 
his head. If he thought so , he should be obliged to 
forbid him the house, and he should be very sorry to 
do that, on all accounts. He had got a husband for 
May in his eye; but he did not intend her to marry 
just at present. Mr. RadclifFe was rather self-willed, 
and any immediate 'Opposition would only have made 
him more obstinate. Mrs. Sutton understood him very 
well, and knew she could get over the difficulty. But 
May's heart must first be won. That grand point had 
yet to be achieved. 

Oswald had plenty of opportunity of winning his 
fair cousin's afFections. He was always welcome at 
Hazlemere, and indeed just as much at home with his 
uncle, who sincerely liked him, though he objected to 
him as a son-in-law, as he was with his mother. He 
therefore came when it suited him, and stayed as long 
as he pleased. As we have shown, he did not trouble 
himself much about his profession. He had not even 
Chambers in town. His mother resided in a prettily- 
situated cottage at Bowdon, in Cheshire, and he made 
her house his head-quarters. He was fond of hunting 
and shooting, and as he knew a good many of the 
Cheshire squires, and visited them, he could always 

Hüary St. Ives, /. 3 



34 HILARY ST. IVES, 

get a mount, though he could not afFord to keep ä 
horse, and as much shooting as he wanted. But with 
the attraction which it now offered him, we may 
suppose that he passed most of his time at Hazlemere. 
Besides wooing his fair cousin, he paid great court to 
his aunt, made himself as agreeable as he could to his 
uncle, and did not, we may be sure, neglect Mrs. 
Sutton. He wrote, now and then, to report progress 
to his mother — but he could not send her the intelligence 
she longed for. All, however, was going on prosper- 
ously, and Mrs. Sutton was secretly at work for him. 

Such was the position of things at Hazlemere, at 
the time we are about to enter the house, and make 
acquaintance with its inmates. 

We will now return to the party in the dog-cart, 
whom we left on the way to Hazlemere. Long before 
they arrived there, Hilary became exceedingly feint, 
and his head feil upon Oswald's Shoulder. Rather 
alarmed, Mr. Radcliffe accelerated his pace, and soon 
reached his destination. The lodge gates were open, 
but instead of pursuing the drive that led to the princi- 
pal entrance of the mansion, Mr. Radcliffe took a side 
iroad to the Stahles, and committing the injured man 
to the care of his nephew, and giving some hasty 
directions to the coachman, who had rushed forth on 
his arrival, he hurried into the house to prepare Mrs. 
Sutton for her unexpected patient. 

Shortly afterwards, Hilary was led into the house, 
supported between Oswald and the coachman. He 
was now almost unconscious, but as he was borne 



HILARY ST. IVES. 35 

across the spadous hall, the vision of a lovely girl, 
who seemed to take great interest in him, flitted before 
bis swimmiiig gaze. He saw nothing more. He was 
taken up-stairs, and transported to a Chamber which 
had been hastily prepared for his reception by Mrs, 
Sutton. 

Hilary passed a very disturbed night. He slept for 
a few hours, but when he awoke fever had come on. 
He was quite light-headed, and rambled strangely in 
his talk. Mrs. Sutton, who had watched anxiously by 
his couch, and was alone with him at the time, listened 
with breathless interest to his ravings. A few words 
which he had let fall fixed her attention, and rising 
softly from her seat, she drew nearer to him, and 
gazed eagerly and inquiringly into his face. 

Had Mr. RadclifFe seen her at this moment he 
would not have known her, so changed was her aspect. 
Her usual calm expression was gone, and had given 
place to a look of intense emotion such as she never 
exhibited. 

What thoughts passed through her breast as she 
pursued this agonising scrutiny we shall not inquire. 
Her emotion became so violent that she feared it would 
master her. But she neither cried out, nor feil. Her 
senses seemed wrapped in the object before her. 
While she yet gazed at him, incapable of stirring, 
though so profoundly agitated, the sufFerer ceased to 
rave, and his breathing soon proclaimed that he once 
more slumbered. 

Her life appeared to hang upon the Step she next 

3* 



36 HILARY ST. IVES. 

took. Bending forward, and carefuUy raising the 
coverlet — so carefully that she did not disturb the 
sleeper — she laid bare the lower part of bis neck, and 
then discovered the mark she sought. 

All doubts were now removed. Her strength deserted 
her, and she sank back in the chair completely over- 
come by emotion. 

When she recovered, she found that the sufferer 
was awake and gazing at her with vacant wonder. Her 
sobs, which she could not check, had rousecj him. She 
immediately got up, and with as much firmness as she 
could command, offered him a cooling draught. He 
drank it eagerly, and as he gazed earnestly in her face 
she had great difficulty in refraining from throwing 
herseif upon bis neck. But she took bis band, and 
held it tili he again slumbered; and she then kissed 
bis buming brow. 

According to bis promise, Mr. Malham came in the 
moming to see the injured man. By this time the 
fever had increased, and Hilary's pulse was very high, 
but the surgeon declared there was no occasion for 
alarm, and proceeded to dress the sufferer's wounds, 
and this seemed to afford him sensible relief. Mr. 
Malham was rather surprised by Mrs. Sutton's anxiety 
about her patient. He assured her there was no danger, 
and she could not have treated him better. He smiled 
as he Said this, as if admitting her superior skill. Mr. 
Malham was a widower, and was looking out for an- 
other wife. Despite his assurance, she still appeared 



s 



HILARY ST. IVES, 37 

grave and anxious. *^My dear madaxn/' he said, giving 
her hand a gentle professional squeeze, *'there is really 
no cause for uneasiness. You are sure to bring him 
round." 

"I should like to have a word with you before you 
go, Mr. Malham," she rejoined. 

"As many as you please, dear madam," he replied, 
following her into a dressing-room which opened out 
of the bed-chamber. 

She then obtained from him füll particulars as to 
the attack that had been made by the gipsies upon Mr. 
St. Ives, and learnt, further, that the police had been 
hitherto unsuccessful in capturing the robbers. 

"Wormald was very confident last night," said the 
surgeon, "but I saw him only an hour ago, and he 
was still quite at fault. The rascals have got ofF. 
Don't say anything to our patient, as it may excite him 
and retard his eure, but I fear he will lose his knapsack, 
and according to his own account it contained some 
documents of great importance to him." 

"Indeed!" exclaimed Mrs. Sutton. "Then it is to 
be hoped he may recover it. Pray who is the young 
gentleman?" 

"Your curiosity about him is very natural, dear 
madam, and I regret I cannot gratify it. We are all 
in the dark about him. He gave no account of him- 
self last night, and Mr. Radcliffe was too considerate 
to ask any questions." 

"But I thought he might have said something *' 



38 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"He didn't even State where he came from. He 
merely mentioned his name — Hilary St. Ives." 

"I never heard the name before," remarked Mrs. 
Sutton. 

"Nor I/' observed the surgeon. "There is no 
family of that name hereabouts. If I had any notion 
who he is, I would write to his friends." 

"We must wait tili he is able to give the necessary 
explanation," said Mrs. Sutton. "And I think you will 
agree with me, that it is best he should not be dis- 
turbed to-day — by any one." 

"I quite agree with you, dear madam. Just what 
I, myself, should have recommended. He must be 
kept quiet — perfectly quiet. I'll enjoin Mr. Radcliflfe 
and Mr. Oswald not to come near him, without your 
sanction." 

And he again smiled tenderly, implying that he 
would do anything to please her. 

"Thank you very much, Mr. Malham," she rejoined. 
"I won't detain you any longer. Of course I shall see 
you to-morrow morning?" 

"Of course, since you desire it. Ah! dear madam," 
he sighed, "I feel sometimes very lonely in my 
widowed home." 

Mrs. Sutton took no notice of the remark, but 
ushered him to the door, and he was obliged re- 
luctantly to depart. 

Mr. Malham's injunctions were strictly obeyed. 
Neither Mr. Radcliffe nor his nephew entered the 
room occupied by the wounded man. Mrs. Sutton 



HILARY ST. IVES. 39 

remained with him all day, and attended him with 
maternal solicitude. His ravings were unheard by any 
one but herseif. 

Towards evening the fever began to abate. 



40 HXLARY ST. IVES. 



III. 

Mrs. Radclüfe. 

Mrs. Radcliffe was in her boudoir, where she 
always passed the morning, and very often the entire 
day. The room in which the invalid lady spent so 
much time was charmingly fitted up , the whole of the 
furniture being Parisian. While elegance was studied, 
comfort was not neglected. The boudoir was luxurious 
as well as tasteful. So soft were the sofas and easy 
chairs, that they seemed stufFed with eider-down. De- 
licious little groups copied from Watteau, in S^vres 
China, and the prettiest of pendules , likewise of china, 
graced the chimney-piece, which was covered with 
blue velvet, and had curtain screens of the same stuff 
to moderate the heat of the fire. The skin of a süperb 
tiger, which had been shot in India by Captain Dela- 
combe, lay upon the hearth. Beautiful bronzes adorned 
the pier-tables, and rare objects of art were displayed 
in open cabinets. Choice water-colour pictures added 
to the attractions in the room, and miniatures were 
hung on either side of the mantel-piece. Rose- 
coloured curtains subdued the light, and cast a warm 
glow on the pale cheeks of the invalid. The Windows 
looked out upon the garden, but were rarely opened, 
for Mrs, Radcliife could not endure a breath of air. 



\ 

V 

\ 



a-" 



HILARY ST. IVES. 4! 

As far as possible an equable temperature was main«^ 
tained, but it was the temperature of a hothouse, or of 
an Indian bungalow. Mrs. Radcliife being a hot-house 
plant, enjoyed this high temperature. Other people, 
however, found it inconvenient, and Mr. RadclifFe 
never remained in his wife's boudoir more than ten 
minutes, without complaining of headache. 

The invalid and indolent lady of Hazlemere passed 
her life in a pleasant dream, from which she did not 
caxe to be aroused. She did not desire rüde health, 
which would have neces^itated exertion, and she dis- 
liked all exertion; but she would fain have preserved 
her youth and beauty. She took no exercise on foot 
Occasionally she drove out in the close carriage to 
make a call; and when she went forth into the garden, 
she was wheeled about in a Bath chair. Yet she was 
really not quite so feeble as she fancied herseif. 
Owing to the great care taken of her by Mrs. Button, 
her health was partially restored. The pulmonary 
Symptoms, that had once threatened her, had disap- 
peared. But she liked to be considered delicate. It 
served as an excuse for her indolence. A great reader 
of novels — French as well as English — her mind was 
tinctured by the class of literature to which she was 
addicted, and wanted bracing as much as her body. 
As we have shown, she troubled herseif as little as 
possible about household concerns, and left the 
management of them entirely to Mrs. Suttc 
nature of a person so constituted could no^be other- 
wise than intensely selfish, yet she was amiable an4. 



1 1 
















/^ 



■, ,t ,.^^:.^*^ c:.. .».litt ' . ■- -13. -•-u'jIU^ - - ^' I-Hl " < » XT ^ 

^^ fuirM-^.i^^x /Jiiner ITiornioir oi 
V ^ '^^^ r^r-srnri^ -lact?^ TK2r-:tef 

,v,^^d iÄ Bß- ^as» Mr5* Hail- 
v*v ff V»^ xfT^niit >t iome 



( >"- 






/• <» ,'- ^'t 



ti I 



''f "T,.!-.V i" h'-^ marriedlife. Mr. 

'"' , /i /^ h'-f. *■' »iwlulfrent, so amrioos 
• '^ . i/V.;m thHt it was impossible not 

i ' '' . j#. hf na %o great an mvalid, 

f^fr/ , Mm. f' '" (IM», nK-''"^ '''*"» '^ 



»r '\ 



HILARY ST. IVES, 43 

she could not mix with society, and had no op- 

pK)rtumty of flirting as a married woman, even if she 

liad been inclined to do so. Perhaps her feeble State 

of health was rather a fortunate circumstance for Mr. 

JladclifFe. But if we must penetrate into the secret 

recesses of her breast, we shall discover that she still 

^ourished a tender feeling for Captain Seymour Dela- 

combe, who had been undoubted master of her heart. 

She had never, however, seen him since her mar- 

liage. 

Immediately after that event, he had gone out to 
India, and had been there ever since; but she had 
corresponded with him — of course, with her husband's 
sanction. Seymour had sought death, it appeared, in 
many a siege and sharp conflict, but had not found it. 
On the contrary, he had gained honour and promo- 
tion, and was now Colonel Delacombe, C.B. 

Mrs. Radcliflfe had watched his brilliant career with 
great interest, but what chiefly gratified her was that 
he never married. When they parted, twenty years 
ago, he had vowed, since he could not be blessed 
with her, never to take another to his breast. And he 
had kept his vow. 

On that affiicting occasion he had given her his 
miniature, which was now to be seen in the boudoir, 
hang near the chimney-piece, on the opposite side to 
her own. To judge from this portrait, Seymour Dela- 
combe must have been exceedingly handsome, with 
fine dark eyes, a dark complexion, and regulär features, 
marked by a very haughty expression. He was about 



^' 



44 HILARY ST. IVES. 

five-and-twenty at the time. It may seem stränge that 
Mr. RadclifFe should allow the portrait of one whom 
he knew had been desperately in love with his wife to 
hang up in her boudoir. ' He did not altogether like 
to See the miniature, but he wisely argued that it 
might as well be there, as locked up in a drawer. 

But if he disregarded this miniature , Mrs. Sutton 

had an unaccountable dislike to it. She avoided look- 

, ing at it, and never would admit that she thought it 

S' the Portrait of a handsome man. 

'. "Ah! you should have seen Seymour when this 

was taken!" Mrs. Radcliffe often exclaimed. "You 

could not Tail to have been Struck by him. He was 

thought the handsomest man of his day." 

Mrs. Sutton replied that he might be handsome, 
but she didn't like the expression of his countenance. 

Upon one occasion, however, when Mrs. Radcliflfe 
entered the boudoir unexpectedly, she caught the house- 
keeper gazing steadfastly at the miniature. 

Despite her habitual self-command, Mrs. Sutton 
Started when thus detected, her embarrassment being 
increased by her mistress's raillery. 

Mrs. Sutton had frequently — far too frequently for 
her peace — to listen to Mrs. Radcliffe's description of 
her love-passages with Seymour Delacombe. Thehouse- 
keeper manifested little interest in these tender and 
touching details. Apparently, she did not believe in 
the sincerity of the gallant captain's passion, or in his 
vöws pf eternal constancy, for she sometimes smiled 
rather contemptuously when they were repeated. 



* HILArV ST. IVES. i 45 

"You look incredulous, Sutton,'* said her mistress. 
"But you see he has never married." 

**There may have been reasons for his not marry- 
ing," remarked the housekeeper, dryly. 

"What reasons?" cried the lady. "None — save 
his vow to me." 

The same slightly contemptuous smile, that had 
just before curled Mrs. Sutton's lip, again appeared for 
an instant. 

"You would do well, I think, to forget him," she 
Said. 

"I cannot forget him," rejoined Mrs. Radcliffe. 

Mrs. Sutton gave her a look, which it was lucky 
the other did not understand. It was certainly not a 
look of sympathy. It was rather a look of ill-concealed 
hate. Had not Mrs. Radcliffe been occupied by her 
own thoughts, she must have remarked it. 

Mrs. Radcliffe, as we have said, was in her charm- 
ing boudoir, seated in a fauteuil, with her tiny feet 
supported by a velvet tabouret. With the help of a 
double eye-glass, of the most graceful workmanship, 
she was reading the Court Journal, She was dressed 
in a very becoming deshabille, and seen in that sub- 
dued light, with her back to the window, looked 
almost young. However, there was no one to behold 
her, except Annette, her lady's-maid, who was taking 
away the breakfast-things. The invalid lady's break- 
fast consisted of a cup of chocolate and a little dry 
toast^* and she desired Annette, as the latter lefl the 
room, to request Mrs. Sutton to come to her im- 



46 HILARY ST. IVES. 

mediately. For a wonder, she had not seen the house- 
keeper during the whole of the previous day, but she 
knew how she had been occupied, and therefore ex- 
cused her. Annette, of course, delivered the message; 
but Mrs. Sutton was busy at the moment, and nearly 
an hour elapsed before she complied with it. 

Meanwhile, Mrs. RadclifFe had become impatient, 
and was just about to ring the bell, and inquire what 
was the matter, when the housekeeper entered the 
room, looking graver than usual. 

"I ought to scold you, dear Sutton, for neglecting 
me so shamefuUy," said Mrs. Radcliffe; "but you look 
so ill that I cannot find in my heart to do so. I hear 
you have been sitting up for two nights with this poor 
young man. You really ought to consider yourself, 
and should have let one of the men servants sit up 
with him. How is he going on?" she added, with 
aflfected interest. 

"He is so much better this morning, that he is able 
to get up. The fever is quite gone, and Mr. Malham, 
who has just been to see him, says he will be able 
to leave his room to-morrow." 

"That 's very satisfactory. I was afraid it might be 
a tedious business. What a singular occurrence! I 
never was more surprised than when I learnt that Mr. 
Radcliffe had brought a wounded young man home 
with him. He was influenced by the kindest motives, 
no doubt; but " 

"Mr. Radcliflfe acted for the best," interrupted Mrs. 
Sutton. "I am very glad Mr. St. Ives was brought 



HILARY ST. IVES. 47 

here. And I am sure you will be of the same 
opinion." 

"Well, perhaps I shall, especially if you are pleased, 
Sutton. You must have had a great deal of trouble 
with him. You look quite worn out." 

"I am not in the least fatigued, and I should not 
have left him so long as the fever lasted." 

"You are the best of nurses. I have reason to say 
so. You seem to take a special interest in Mr. St. Ives. 
I don't wonder at it. Oswald teils me he is a very 
fine young .man." 

"Mr. Oswald's description of him is perfectly cor- 
rect. But it is not on account of his good looks that 
I am interested in him." 

"Then you own the interest, and yet deny its 
cause," remarked Mrs. RadclifFe, smiling. "Had he 
been ill-looking you would have feit very differently 
towards him. What is he like?" 

"I will show you who he is like," replied Mrs. 
Sutton, pointing to the miniature of Captain Dela- 
combe. • 

"Like Seymour!" exclaimed Mrs. Radcliffe, so sur- 
prised that her listlessness of manner at once dis- 
appeared. "Like Seymour! impossible! You are 
trifling with me, Sutton." 

"He is so like, that the miniature might be ta 
for him. Now you will understand why I take a p-^' 
ticular interest in him." / 

"What is it you would insinuate, Sutton? Bon't 
agitate me, I entreat of you. You know how uneqtial 




4^ miARV St. IVES. 

I am to the slightest excitement , and such a thing as 
this might kill me. Give me a few drops." 

The housekeeper obeyed the order, remarking as 
she did so, 

"I would not have mentioned the matter, but I feel 
certain the likeness will be noticed, and I therefore 
judged it best to prepare you." 

"Yes, I think Oswald must have noticed it, for he 
said yesterday that Mr. St. Ives resembled some one 
he had seen. He never saw Seymour, of course; but 
he has seen his portrait. What a commotion you have 
raised in my breast, Sutton ! What a tuipult of feelings 
you have roused!" 

**I want you to be calm, for I have something to 
say to you." 

"Something to say!" exclaimed Mrs. Radcliffe, 
alarmed by the housekeeper's manner. "What is it? 
Have you made a discovery in regard to this young 
man's parentage? Have you any reason to suspect — 
ha! Teil me! Don't keep me in this distracting State 
of suspense! Teil me all, there's a dear, good crea- 
ture." 

"I won't speak, unless you keep quiet. I don't 
think the likeness can be accidental." 

"You believe, then, that he is Seymour's son?" 
cred Mrs. Radcliffe. "But no — no — no! the notion 
is loo absurd to be indulged for a moment." 

•*Perhaps this signet-ring may afford some evidence," 
Said 'Mrs. Sutton, "I took it from the dressing-table 



HILARY ST. rVES. 49 

in his room, and brought it to show you. Do you 
Imo^ Captain Delacombe's arms?" 

"Yes; three tigers' heads, with a band grasping a 
falchion for crest." 

Mrs. Sutton gave her the ring, and begged her to 
examine it. 

"Yes, here they are! here are the tigers' heads, 
with the crest! This is proof indeed. He musf be 
Seymour's son. What age is the young man?" 

**Between one aijid two-and-twenty, as near as I 
can guess." 

"Then he must have been born before Seymour 
made love to me. He to whom I gave my heart was 
falsa and perjured! — oh!" And she sank back, ex- 
claiming, "More drops, Sutton! more drops, or I shall 
expire I " 

Suddenly she started up, 

" A terrible thought suggests itself to me!" she ex- 
claimed. "Was Seymour married at the time? Oh, if 
he was, he was forsworn indeed! Teil me what you 
think, Sutton." 

"I have no thought upon the subject," rejoined the 
other, coldly. 

"Do not spare my feelings. I can bear the truth. 
Do you think he was married?" 

"Well, then, since I must give an opinion upon a 
)oint of which I can know nothing, I think he was 
narried." 

"Ah!" ejaculated the lady, with an hysterical cry. 
Vnd she again sank back. 

Hilary St. Ives. /. 4 



50 ^ HBLARV ST. IVES. 

As soon as Mrs. RadcKfFe's nervous attack, which 
was rather severe while it lasted, was over, she fixed 
her humid eyes ön the housekeeper, who was Standing 
beside her with a smelling-bottle in her hand, and 
Said, 

"I must See this young man, Sutton — this Hilary 
St. Ives, as he calls himself — I must satisfy myself that 
he is the person we suppose. You may be mistaken, 
for you have never seen his — I mean, the original of 
the miniature. But it is impossible / can be deceived. 
Seymour's image is graven on my heart." 

Mrs. Sutton could scarcely hide her disgust. 

"I do not think I am mistaken," she replied. "Still, 
as I am wholly unacquainted with Captain Delacombe, 
and can judge only of the likeness by the portrait, I 
may be wrong. On all accounts, I think it most 
desirable that you should see the young man; but you 
must consider well whether you are equal to the in- 
terview. It will not do to exhibit emotion before him, 
such as you have just displayed." 

"I will not betray myself, depend upon it, Sutton. 
I can see him and converse with him, immoved — even 
though he should prove " 

"Well, then, we will go to his room. But first 
allow me to put away that accusing portrait. Its dis- 
appearance may cause some remark, but better that, 
than it should be examined just now by the servants, 
or any one eise." 

So saying, without waiting for permission, she took 



HILARY ST. IVES. 5I 

down the miniature and locked it up in the bureau, of 
which she possessed the key. 

"You are sure you are quite equal to the effort?" 
she then added. 

Mrs. Radcliffe replied that she was quite sure, and 
immediately arose with a very unwonted display of 
ardour. Her sensibilities were really aroused, and she 
was almost in a youthfül flutter of anxiety. 

Before leaving the boudoir with the höusekeeper, 
she surveyed herseif in the mirror, and slightly arranged 
her toilette and her hair. 



4» 



52 HILARY ST. IVES, 



' IV. 

The Interview. 

It was a very unusual thing indeed for the invalid 
lady to leave her room at this hour, and Annette, who 
chanced to be on the landing wondered to see her 
issue forth. 

"Mrs. Sutton wishes me to see Mr. St. Ives," re- 
marked Mrs. RadclifFe, thinking it best to give an ex- 
planation. 

"The poor young gentleman is in the dressing- 
room, me'm," replied Annette. "Boston has just left 
him." 

**I will go on first, if you please," said Mrs. Sut- 
ton, stepping forward quickly towards the further end 
of the corridor, where the Chamber they sought was 
situated. 

Hilary had left his bed an hour ago. Boston, the 
valet, had brought him a change of linen, with several 
articles of apparel, furnished by good-natured Oswald 
Woodcot, and had assisted to dress him. 

Mrs. Sutton's first business was to lay the signet- 
ring on the dressing-table. Hilary had not missed it. 

The young man was reclining on a couch, wrapped 
in a dressing-gown. As may naturally be expected, 
he looked very pale, but this did not impair his good 
looks, but rather lent interest to his countenance. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 53 

Notwithstanding her boasted firmness, Mrs. Rad- 
cKflfe well-nigh betrayed herseif by a scream, and the 
housekeeper, perceiving her agitation, stepped between 
her and the young man to give her time to recover, 
Hilary had raised himself on her entrance, and when 
informed that the lady of the house had come to in- 
quire after him, he expressed his sense of her kindness 
in suitable terms. 

Not only was the face Seymour's, but the voice and 
manner were Seymour's. Mrs. Radcliffe thought she 
beheld her old lover again. No doubt it was a trying 
moment, and it is really wonderful that she main- 
tained her self-possession at all. 

But what shall we say of Mrs. Sutton? Could the 
mingled feelings with which she looked on be dis- 
cemed in her countenance? Not in the least. To all 
outward appearance she was perfectly calm. Perhaps 
she was secretly well pleased by the effect produced 
upon her mistress by Hilary. 

On his part, the young man was most favourably 
impressed by the lady, though quite unable to account 
for the interest she evidently took in him. He thought 
her very handsome, and singularly kind and agreeable 
in manner. She put several questions to him calculated 
to elicit information as to his history and position in 
life, but he was very guarded in his answers, and she 
could only ascertain that he had been brought up at 
Exeter, and had recently been in France, and that his 
nearest living relative — he did not say his father — was 
in India. 



54 HILARY ST. IVES. 

On all points he maintained great reserve. 

He did not even explain the business that had 
brought him into this part of the country, though he 
lamented the loss of his papers. 

At last, Mrs. RadclifFe mustered courage to put a 
question to him which she had all along been dying 
to ask« 

He had said his nearest relative was in India. Was 
his mother still alive? 

The question saddened him. She was dead. 

Mrs, RadclifFe was sorry to have asked the question. 
But she ventured to inquire further if his mother had 
been dead long? 

She died many }'ears ago — doring his infancy — he 
did not CN'en remember her. He had never known a 
mother's care. 

These words, which caused a shaip pang in Mrs. 
Sutlon's breast, and nmde her put her band to her 
heait^ gaw immense rt^üeX to Mrs. Radcüffe, Seymour 
was not the insutor she had deemeil him. She giamced 
at the hou»^ket^|>i:^r, but wiui sinKiv by her e]q>ression 
of pain« aiHi iuquirttl aiuiou^y what was die matter. 
It was ouly a ^i^^i 5i|>ÄJsm^ 

**I am tlw> CÄU?if^ \Af \x>w ilhie^s, I fear," said 
Hiburw ''\\>« bÄ\>? boeu wwvhiu^ br me for two 
nights/* 

**No, il l^ n\>l lb4U \ ^\\ ^vu$^^dtttet) to norsing. 
But I Käx^^ Ux>t ^MN^n \^Tv x^t-1^ tM^ Im^ It is gone." 

,hah-^,) - (xM\\\l ^ *>Mhi^T *i^>3kxü\ NiviK 4^KV^iig, -«i have 



I 



HILARY ST. IVES, 55 

only performed the office which your mother would 
bave discharged had she been living." 

"No mother could have watched over a son more 
carefully than you have watched over me," said Hilary, 
with a deeply grateful look. "Nay, when my fever 
was at its height, I thought you were my mother come 
to life again, and Standing beside me." 

"You were delirious for a time," Mrs. Sutton 
hastened to remark, "and rambled strangely," 

"Yes, I suppose I did. Without you I am certain 
my eure would not have been so soon accomplished. 
My strength has almost retumed. To-morrow," he 
added to Mrs. RadclifFe, "I hope I shall be able to 
relieve you of any further trouble respecting me. I 
shall never forget the kindness I have experienced." 

" You must not think of leaving us tili you are per- 
fectly recovered. Besides, to-morrow is my daughter 
Ma/s birthday, and she has always a little fSte on the 
occasion, at which I hope you may be well enough to 
assist.'* 

"If Mr. St. Ives keeps perfectly quiet to-day, I have 
no doubt he will be able to come down-stairs to-mor- 
row," observed Mrs. Sutton; "but he overrates his 
strength." 

"You hear that," observed Mrs. RadcliiFe. "You 
are not yet dismissed as cured." 

"I am in too good quarters to feel any anxiety to 
leave them," rejoined Hilary. "I need scarcely say 
that it would delight me to be presented to Miss Rad- 
cliffe, but " 



56 HILARY ST. rVES. 

"I will take no refusal. I shall be hurt if you leave 
to-morrow, and so will Mr. Radclüfe. You are his 
guest, you know. Unless you have some particular 
reason for early departure, stay with us a few days to 
recruit." 

"The invitatio!! is so kindly given, and is in itself 
so tfempting, that I must accept it. I cannot offer the 
excuse of business. Since I have lost my papers, I 
have really nothing to do." 

"It is too soon to despair of recovering them. 
They will tum up again, I have no doubt. And now 
you will understand that you are to make yourself 
quite at home. Mrs. Sutton will take every care of you." 

"That I will," Said the housekeeper, smiling. 

The arrangement was precisely what she desired. 

"I feel as if I were in a dr6am — ^and a very plea- 
sant dream it is ! " cried Hilary. "All sorts of stränge 
fancies possess me," he added, gazing alternately at 
Mrs. Radcliffe and the housekeeper. 

"Your brain is still a little heated, I perceive," said 
the lady. 

"Yes," observedMrs. Sutton, signifying by a glance 
that they had better withdraw. 

. Mrs. Radcliffe, therefore, rose to depart, but before 
she left the room, she said, 

"I hope you will be able to join the breakfast- 
party to-morrow, Mr. St. Ives. I will teil May that she 
may expect to see you." 

"I will come, if my kind nurse will allow me," he 
repliedi 



HILARY ST. IVES. 57 

"What do you think of him?" inquired Mrs. Sut- 
ton, as they retumed to the boudoir. 

**He is the very image of Seymour. I did not 
venture to question him about bis father; but I am sure 
he is Seymour's son. I think I did right to ask him 
to stay. The impulse was irresistible." 

"You couldn't have done otherwise." 

"I am glad you think so. Do you know, Sutton, 
I almost feit towards him as if he were my own 
son." 

"The feeling was not unnatural. I am sure he is 
sensible of the interest you take in him." 

"He seemed so. I shall never be able to part with 
him." 

Mrs. Sutton smiled. The right efFect had been 
produced. 

"Perhaps he has been neglected by bis father from 
some cause," she remarked, "and you may be the 
means of setting him right. Who knows?" 

"His Coming here looks like fatality," said Mrs. 
Radcliffe, who had become unusually pensive. "We 
shall leam more of his history in time, and then I will 
consider how to act. Try to find out if he wants any- 
thing, Sutton. I am afraid he is poor." 

"I am afraid so. But unless I am mistaken in him, 
he is too proud to accept assistance." 

"Still, we may help him. Something may be done. 
I teil you I feel like a mother towards him." 

"That is clear; and he could not scruple to receive 
a mother's aid. But it would be difficult to makß l\v\^ 



58 HILARY ST. IVES. 

intelligible to him. However, I will do my best to , 
carry out your wishes. I suppose you will breakfast 
with the party to-morrow? " 

"I shall make an efFort to do so — on bis ac- 
count." 

"You promised to have a little conversation with 
Mr. Radcliffe about Mr. Oswald's suit." 

"I did. But I think I shall defer it. There is no 
hurry. Mr. Radcliffe does not like the subject, as you 
are aware." 

"I promised Mr. Oswald to remind you." 

"I did not require to be reminded. But I shall 
have too much to do to-morrow to attend to the mat- 
ter. To be piain, I want to ascertain what May thinks 
of young St. Ives before I stir further in Oswald's 
favour. Perhaps, she may like him." 

Mrs. Sutton secretly exulted, but was careful to hide 
her exultation. 

"I do not think May cares much for her cousin," 
she remarked. 

"You appeared to think otherwise a few days ago. 
Have you altered your opinion?" 

"I am still as favourable as ever to Mr. Oswald's 
suit But I repeat I do not think May cares much 
about him." 

"I am glad to leam that her heart is disengaged. 
That leaves me free to act. When you go down-stairs 
send her to me." 

"Pray be careful what you say to her, or you may 
do nuschle f/' 



\ - 



HILARY ST. IVES. 59 

**Don't fear me. I shall talk to her chiefly aböut 
young St. Ives. She is curious about him, She saw 
him when he was brought into the house, and was in- 
terested by bis appearance." 

Shortly afterwards Mrs. Sutton quitted her mistress, 
and sent May to her, as desired. 



60 HILARY ST. IVES, 



V. 

May and her Mother. 

A SWEET musical voice in the passage. The door 
opened, and May entered the boudoir, bearing a little 
basket of flowers. Flora herseif could not have looked 
more fresh and blooming. 

She had just been summoned from the garden by 
Mrs. Sutton, and had not taken ofF the dainty little 
straw hat with which her blonde tresses were crowned. 
What a winsome smile upon her rosy lips. Änd what 
pearls those lips revealed. 

Mrs. RadclifFe regarded her with pride, not un- 
mingled with a slight feeling of envy. Her own faded 
charms sufFered sadly by contrast with those of her 
lovely daughter. 

"Good morrow, dearest mamma," cried May, kiss- 
ing her afFectionately. "I hope you are quite well this 
morning. You look so. I have brought you a few 
flowers. Oh, it is such an enchanting day. There 
has been a slight shower — the last shower of April — 
and now the sun is shining so brightly, and the birds 
are singing so blithely, and everything is looking so 
deliciously spring-like. Do let me persuade you to 
take a turn in the garden. You will enjoy it so much, 
and I am sure it will do you good. Shut up in this 
dose room you can have no idea of the beauty and fresh- 



HILARY ST. rSTES. 6l 

ness of the morning. Oh! how I long to open the 
window." 

^*On no account," said Mrs. RadclifFe, checking 
her. "The air is far too chilly for me. At your age 
I delighted in a walk on a fine spring day like this, 
but now I am a poor invalid, and must be content 
with my boudoir. Thank you for these flowers, my 
love. They are very beautiful, but the odonr of these 
jonqnils is too strong to be agreeable. Put the basket 
aside, please. Now, come and sit near me, and let us 
talk." 

May obeyed, drew a chair towards her mother, 
and fixed her large blue eyes inquiringly upon her. 

"To-rmorrow is the first of May," said Mrs. Rad- 
cliffe, taking her band. "To-morrow you will be nine- 
teen, the brightest and happiest season in a woman's 
existence — at least, it is generally so considered, though 
in my own instance it proved otherwise. At nineteen 
I was far from happy." She sighed, and then added, 
^*But I am sure you are happy, darling." 

"Indeed I am, dearest mamma — truly happy. I 
have not a wish ungratified." 

"Not one?" asked her mother. "Take care, I am 
about to catechise you. But before I begin I will make 
a little confession which may encourage' you to deal 
frankly with me. It may make you smile, but I shall 
not smile at any avowal it may elicit from you. Don't 
interrupt me. At nineteen — I may say it now, since I 
am an cid woman — I was very much admired, and I 
am afraid you wiJJ think I must have beeu excö^^w^Vj 



62 HILARY ST. IVES. 

silly when I own that I was pleased with the admira« 
tion I excited. I was thought a great flirt. I see you 
are beginning to laugh already, and you have a peffect 
right to do so, for you are entirely free from the 
faults which I have just admitted." 

"Dear mamma, I am not laughing," remarked May, 
trying to look grave. 

"Listen to me," resumed Mrs.RadclifFe. "Amongst 
my host of admirers there was only one who really in- 
terested me, and before I was aware of it he had con- 
trived to win my heart. Your grandpapa, who was 
resolved that I should never, with his consent, marry 
any other than a man of fortune, forbade me to think 
of the person on whom I had foolishly fixed my aflfec- 
tions. Ahl what a straggle it cost me to obey. Re- 
collect that this was at nineteen — your own age, dar- 
ling. I had no tender mother into whose pitying 
breast I could pour my grief. Sympathy from my 
father I had none." 

Here she paused for a few moments, overpowered 
by her recollections. 

"Of course," she continued, "all has turned out 
for the best. I was very silly then. Your grandpapa 
— Stern as I deemed him — was quite right, and I was 
quite wrong. But I did not think so at the time — and 
I was wretched. Now, my dear child," she added, 
looking into her daughter's face, "you will not, after 
this confession, withhold your confidence from me. 
You are not circumstanced as I was, darlijig. Your 
papä will never oppose your inclinations — nor will !♦ 



HILARY ST. IVES* 63 

We both love you tenderly. You are not a flirt — but 
a pretty girl, with a good fortune, must have admirers. 
I had no fortune. If you have a preference for any 
of your pretendanis — as I fancy you have — do not he- 
sitate to avow it." 

"Really, dear mamma," replied May, who had 
listened with some surprise to this address, "I scarcely 
know how to ans wer you. It would be ridiculous in 
me to pretend I am not aware that some young men 
who come here do pay me attention. But I have never 
thought seriously about any of them." 

"But there is a young man who is in the house — 
what of him?" 

"Make yourself qiute easy, dear mamma. I have 
not lost my heart to cousin Oswald." 

"Cotisin Oswald — or I am very much mistaken — 
thinks otherwise." 

"So he may — so, perhaps,. he does — but he is a 
silly fellow so to delude himself. I like Oswald. He 
has excellent qualities, and a disposition that might 
attach any one to him. I know he is devoted to me; 
but for all that I cannot love him — except as a cousin. 
There, mamma, do you now understand?" 

"Perfectly, my love," replied Mrs. RadcliiFe, dis- 
sembling her satisfaction. "I am rather sorry for poor 
Oswald/' 

" Yes , I am sometimes sorry for him myself. But what 
am I to do? How am I to eure him without giving 
him pain? Whenever I am about to speak seriously to 
him, he looks at me so imploringly that I cannot find 



64 HILARY ST. IVES. 

in my heaxt to crush his hopes altogether. So we go 
on. He follows me about like papa's great water- 
Spaniel, Neptune, and I treat him much as I treat 
Neptune. I believe if I were to throw a stick into the 
lake, and bid Oswald fetch it, he would plunge in at 
once as readily as Neptune." 

And she laughed heartily at the notion. 

Mrs. Radcliffe smiled secretly, but remarked, "I 
am shocked to hear you compare your good-natured 
and devoted cousin to a water-spaniel." 

"I am a friend to dogs, for they are honest crea- 
tures, as Pierre says in the play, mamma. Oswald is 
as honest and good a creature as ever lived, and has 
the fidelity and attachment of a dog, so I think the 
comparison is not so very inappropriate. Have you 
finished your catechism?" •• 

"Quite; I find I shall have nothing to say to your 
papa on your birthday." 

"Papa won't be sorry for that, I think," remarked 
the young lady, archly. 

"Well, let US change the topic, my love. I have 
just been to see poor Mr. St. Ives. Thanks to Mrs. 
Sutton's care, he has almost recovered from the in- 
juries he received from the robbers. All the circum- 
stances attending his arrival here are so Singular that 
my curiosity has been greatly excited about him." 

"So has mine, mamma. Teil me what he is like, 
in the first place?" 

"You saw him when he was brought into the house, 
and can judge of his appearance." 



HILARY ST. rVES. 65 

"True; but he looked so dreadfully pale then. I 
thought him dying. He appeared to be very hand- 
some." 

**He has quite what the French call ^Tair d*un 
grand seigneurJ I was very much strack, I assure you, 
and from the first moment feit an interest in him, fbr 
which I find it difficult to account. This sort of thing 
is very unusual with me, for I rarely take an interest 
in a perfect stranger. But Mr. St. Ives is not an or- 
dinary person." 

"He seems a very mysterious person, mamma. Papa 
and Oswald can teil me nothing about him. Have you 
learnt any particulars?" 

"The principal features of his history, so far as I 
can ascertain them, are these: He has been brought 
up at Exeter, and has recently been in France, where 
I fancy he has relatives. He lost his mother in infancy; 
and his father, I believe — for this is mere surmise on 
my part — is in India." 

"How came he to be crossing Wootton Heath on 
the night when he was robbed?" 

"He seems to have been on his way to town, and 
had with him, in his knapsack, some important do- 
cuments, of which, unluckily, he has been deprived by 
the robbers." 

"So I heard," cried May. "I want to know what 
those documents relate to." 

"Then you must suspend your curiosity tili to- 
morrow, when you will probably see him, and can 
question him, if you think proper. If he is able to do 

HÜarv St, Iv€s, I. 5 



66 HILARY ST. IVES. 

>. 

SO, he will come down to breakfast in the moming. I 
took care to teil him that it is an interesting anni- 
versary." 

"The anniversary can have no interest to him," 
observed May. 

"Pardon me, my love; he was much flattered by 
being allowed to join the family party on such an 
occasion." 

At this moment the door was partially opened, and 
a good-humoured, good-looking face was seen at it. 

The face was Oswald's. He asked if he might 
come in« 



HII.ARY ST, IVES. 6j 



VI. 

Oswald. 

Receiving petaission, he shut the door and ad- 
vanced, but his aimt motioned him to keep off. 

**Yoii have been smoking, Oswald. Give him some 
eau-de-Cologne, May." 

Instantly retiring, Oswald took a seat on a causeus'e 
on the opposite side of the fireplace. 

Undoubtedly, he was a very handsome young fellow, 
tall, well built, and well set on his lower limbs, which, 
as he wore knickerbockers, could be seen to be re- 
markably well turned. He had an open countenance, 
brown curling locks, whiskers a few shades lighter than 
his hair, and brushed back according to the prevailing 
mode, regulär features, light grey eyes, and a fresh 
complexion, denoting the most perfect health. Not, 
perhaps, a very intellectual face, but a very pleasant 
one, nevertheless. Considering his personal advantages 
and his devotion, ii is rather surprising that May should 
care so little about him. 

"What has brought you here, Oswald?" inquired 
his aunt. 

"I have a piece of news for you," he replied. "I 
have just got a letter from my mother. Who do you 
think is Coming here to-morrow?" 

"Your moüierl" cried Mrs. Radcliffe. 

5* 



'68 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"I hope so," added May. "I shall be deüghted 
to See her." 

"No," rejoined Oswald, laughing. "Your grand- 
papa is Coming. Perhaps you won't be quite so de- 
üghted to see Am." 

Exclamations of surprise were uttered both by 
mamma and daughter. 

Oswald easily perceived, from the expression of his 
aunt's face, that the intelligence was not altogether 
agreeable to her. At any other time she would have 
been glad to see her father; but at this particular 
juncture, when Hilary St. Ives was in the house, and 
when she had a little project on foot in regard to him, 
the shrewd and suspicious old gentleman was very 
likely to be in the way, and might interfere with her 
plan. Besides, he had known Seymour Delacombe in- 
timately in days gone by, and would naturally be 
Struck by the likeness borne to him by Hilary. These 
reflections passed rapidly through her mind, and gave 
to her countenance the expression noticed by Os- 
wald. 

"I wonder your grandpapa has not written to me 
to announce his Intention," she observed, in a tone 
that showed she was a little put out. 

"He feit sure he would be welcome, as he will be, 
mamma," said May. "It is long since dear grand- 
papa has paid us a visit. I am glad he is coming at 
last." o 

"Yes; I only wish he had deferred his visit for a 
week," objected her mother. "Poor Mr. St. Ives has 



HILARY ST. IVES. 69 

got his room, and, as you know, your grandpapa is 
very particular, and won't be satisfied with any other 
room than the one he is accustomed to." 

"Why shouldn't he have it?" cried Oswald. "St. 
Ives must turn out. Luckily he's well enough, or will 
be well enough to-morrow to take his departure." 

"I've asked him to stay here for a week to recruit," 
Said Mrs. RadclifFe, in a tone of rebuke. "Sutton will 
find him another room." 

"Very kind of you indeed, aunt," said Oswald, a 
Kttle abashed, and secretiy wishing that the young man 
had never got into the house at all. 

"Have the robbers been caught, Oswald? Has 
Mr. St. Ives's knapsack been recovered?" inquired 
May. 

"No. Wormald, the police-officer, has just been 
here. Still at fault, though he is not without hopes of 
capturing the gipsies; for he thinks they are concealed 
in the neighbourhood. Poor St. Ives, I fear, has said 
good-bye to his precious documents." 

"Apparently, they are a great loss to him," ob- 
served May, in a sympathising tone. 

"If he wants them back he ought to oifer a joUy 
good reward for them," cried Oswald. "But I say, 
aant, what has become of the miniature that used to 
hang up there? I mean the portrait of " 

Seeing firom his aunt's looks that he had asked the 
wrong question, he stopped short, though he had some 
observations to make. 

"You have no business to be so inquisitive, sir," 




yb HILARY ST. IVES. 

Said Mrs. Radcliife, in a tone calculated to check 
further remarks on the subject, and it had the effect 
desired. 

"Aunt Bell, I trust, gives a good account of her- 
seif?" interposed May, Coming to the rescue. 

"You shall See her letter," he repKed, giving it 
to her. 

*iWhat a very long letter! Must I read it aloud?" 
she inquired. 

"By all means," he replied, with aifected non- 
chalance. "There are no secrets in it. It relates 
chiefly to yourself. I ought, perhaps, to have kept it 
back tili to-morrow — ^but no matter." 

May then read as foUows: 



"Your time seems to have been so fuUy and 
agreeably occupied, you dear, undutiful boy, that you 
appear not to have had a moment to spare for your 
poor mother, who has been anxiously expecting a letter 
from you for the last fortnight, and has been doomed ' 
to constant disappointment. After so prolonged a - 
silence you ought to have something pleasant to com- 
municate. 

"Your last letter, now nearly three weeks old — « 
think of that, sir! — was füll of rapturous descriptions 
of May — as if I didn't know how lovely and amiable ^ 
she is — and the impression it conveyed, whether de- — 
signeä or not on your part, is that you have fallen * 
j'n Jove with your charming co\ism." 



HILARy ST, IVES. 71' 

^'I think I had better not read any more/' said 
May, stopping. 

"Oh yes, pray go on," Oswald entreated. 

"I shaU not be surprised if it tnms out to be so, 
for it is scarcely possible to be constantly in the society 
of so adorable a creature as May without becoming 
passionately enamoured of her. Such, at least, is my 
notion. And I remember the time when your aunt, 
who was quite as pretty as May now is, could not 
avoid making conquests of all who came near her." 

"What do you think of that, mamma?" äsked May, 
pausing. "I hope you are flattered.'' 

Gross as it was, the flattery was not a whit too 
strong for Mrs. Radcliffe. But she said, 

"I wonder your Aunt Bell could write so silly a 
letter. But let us hear it out." 

"I think I have divined your secret, my dear boy, 
but you do not throw any light on a point that is 
naturally of the utmost interest to me. You teil me 
you are May 's constant companion, in her walks, in 
her rides, in her drives. You say she sings and plays 
so divinely, that you could listen to her for ever. You 
say you act as her head-gardener, and would act as 
her groom if she would let you; and you mention 
several other particulars that prove how devoted you 
are to her; but you do not teil me the one thing I 
most desire to know. You do not even hint that your 
charming cousin, with whom you are evidently smitten, 
manifests the slightest predilection for you." 

Here Oswald coughed * slightly. May, however, 



72 HILARY ST, IVES. 

would not raise her eyes from the letter to löok at him, 
but went on. 

"A mother's vanity may inislead me, but I cannot 
think, from the opportunities she has of knowing them, 
that May can be insensible to your many good quali- 
ties; or, shall I say it? — indifferent to your personal 
advantages. I fondly persuade myself that the attach- 
ment must be mutual. You have a noble and true 
heart, my dear boy, if you have not the cleverest head 
in the World. In some respects, and these not the 
least important to her happiness, May will not find 
your superior. That I can affirm. I have long enter- 
tained the idea that you are formed for each other. 
Heaven grant you may be united!" 

"Amen!" ejaculated Oswald, fervently. 

"Is there much more?" inquired Mrs. Radcliffe. 

"Yes, a good deal, mamma." 

"Pray stop, if you have had enough," said Os- 
wald. 

But May went on. 

**As I cannot divest myself of the impression, that 
you and your fair cousin will make a match of it (or, 
as your Aiiii? Radcliffe used to say, when a girl, *put 
up your horse^s in the same stable'), I have written to 
your grandpapa to press him to make a settlement 
upon you. He is very rieh, and lives so inexpensively, 
that a few thousands can be no object whatever to 
him. You are certain to be his heir; but he is 
hale and hearty, and has such a capital Constitution, 
that he may, and I sincerely hope, will, last for 



HILARY ST. IVES. 7J 

several years. May is a great favourite with him, 
and since there is every prospect of your being 
nnited to her, I feel pretty sure he will place you 
in an independent position, and remove any ob- 
stacles that might otherwise arise on that score. As 
he is as punctual as the Duke of Wellington used to 
be, and sure to reply without delay, I won't send ofF 
this letter tili I hear from him." 

"Has she got his answer?'* inquired Mrs. Rad- 
cliflfe. 

"Yes, dear aunt, yes," replied Oswald, eagerly. 
"Do finish the letter, May." 

"I told you I should not be kept long in suspense. 
To my great surprise, and no less to my delight, your 
grandpapa has answered my letter in person, and is 
now with me at Dunham Lodge. He is in very good 
humour, and apparently much pleased with the idea 
of the match. He won*t make any positive promise, 
but I think he will do what we desire. That he means 
to do something is certain, for he has determined to 
Start for Hazlemere House at once, and ascertain by 
personal inspection, as he says, 'how th^ii^^^.' 

"To-morrow he will be in town, aÄ^s^Ki the 
Langham Hotel, and on the following morniii^ i st of 
May, will run down to Hazlemere. He is an odd man, 
as your aunt knows füll well, and his design is to take 
her by surprise; but I think she ought to be prepared 
for his Visit. 

"It now only remains for me, in concluding this 
long letter, to wish dearest May many, many Yva.^^^ 



74 mLARY ST. IVES. 

returns of her birthday. May the day prove auspicious ; 
and a long and blissful term, in which she and yqu 
will be principally concerned, date from it. How proud 
and happy your mother will be, if her fond anticipa- 
tions are realised." 

"That is all,'* observed May, putting down the 
letter. 

"And enough too," said her mother. 

Small need, we think, to State that Mrs. Woodcot's 
letter was meant to be shown to Mrs. Radcliffe and 
May, but that clever lady never supposed her son would 
allow it to be read under such absurd circumstances 
as those recorded. The comical intonation given by 
May to certain passages, on which he had most relied, 
entirely destroyed their effect, and before the letter 
was ended, he perceived the mistake he had made, 
and became very hot and confused. Not knowing what 
to say, he cast one of those imploring looks, to which 
she was accustomed, at his fair cousin; but she was 
not to be moved now. 

At l ast he stammered out, "I should never have 
venttHMiP|L a declaration, if I had not been prompted 
by tha^|nluffly letter. But do let me learn my fate.'* 

"Your fate is not in my hands," replied May. "I 
have no other answer to give to such a question. What 
can you have been saying about me to Aunt Bell to 
cause her to write to grandpapa as she has done? You 
have placed me in a very ridiculous position." 

'I will ask pardon on my bended knees, if that 



^^ 



HILARY ST. IVES. 75 

will soften you," he cried, about to suit the action to 
the Word. 

"Remain where you are, sir. I cannot treat this 
as a jest. Grandpapa is Coming. How is he to be 
undeceived?'* 

"I don't know," rejoined Oswald, driven to his 
wits' end. "But, upon my hononr, I had no idea my 
mother would write to him, still less that the old gen- 
tleman would come here to perplex us." 

"No, you could not possibly foresee that, Oswald," 
observed his aunt. "Your mother should not ha^fle 
been so precipitate. But • I understand her feelings, 
and can excuse her. You must make allowances for 
Oswald, May. It was natural that he should delude 
himself." 

"Thankyou, aunt, thank you," he cried, gratefully. 
"I certainly believed — that is, I fancied May was not 
quite indifferent to me." 

**Perhaps I have been to blame," said May, re- 
lenting. "You are not the only person who has been 
deceived by my manner," she added, glancing archly 
at her mother. "So take my forgiveness^^^^ 

And she extended her band toward^|pV^i^h he 
pressed eagerly to his lips. ^^"TJr 

"I suspect she loves him, in spite of her denial," 
thought Mrs. Radcliffe. 

"I hope grandpapa's errand won*t be altogether 
fhiitless," said May. "Mamma, you must try and 
persuade him to do something for poor Oswald." 

"Nay, my Jove, it rests with you, and nolm\X\tCÄ;, 






76 HILARY ST. IVES, 

- '' j 

On one condition, no doubt your grandpapa will do 
something.'* ^ 

"But that condition I cannot agree to," she re- 
joined. 

"Ah!" exclaimed Oswald, despairingly. "Don't 
trouble yourselves about me," he added, with a broken- 
hearted expression. "I care for nothing now. I shall 
go abroad. I don't know what I shall do. But I shall 
not remain longer here." 

"Not if I beg you to stay?" said May, in a coaxing 
töne that was quite irresistible. 

"I will do whatever you bid me," he replied, with 
the Submission of a slave. 

"Then I order you to remain over my birthday," 
she said. "You shall go when you please afterwards." 

Just then an interruption was offered by the en- 
trance of Mr. RadclijQfe, who came in quest of Oswald. 

"I thought I should find you here,'* he said, clap- 
ping his nephew on the Shoulder as he advanced to 
greet his wife, whom he had not seen before on that 
moming. 




HILARY ST. IVES. ^^ 



VII. 

Mr. Raddifife. 

Mr. Radcliffe was tumed sixty, rather above the 
middle size, and had the portly figure and large features 
which Punch is wont to assign to John Bull. He looked 
the picture of good health, and, though stout, he was 
active, and took a great deal of exercise, living as 
much as he could in the open air. He wore rather 
large whiskers, which, with his snow- white locks, con- 
trasted forcibly with his rosy complexion. He did not 
wear the traditional John Bull top-boots, but his sturdy 
legs were clothed in a pair of Mr. Bowley's incom- 
parable cool gaiters. He had a loose blue coat with 
brass buttons, and a baggy waistcoat. Mr, Radcliife's 
manner towards his wife was singularly deferential, and 
it was evident she had lost none of her influence over 
him. Years had in no degree diminished his admira- 
tion of her beauty. 

Mrs. Radcliffe thought it best to let himluiow im- 
mediately that her father was Coming on the jfbllowing 
day, and though much surprised, he was greatly pleased 
by the intelligence. The difficulty in regard to the 
room in which Hilary St. Ives was lodged at once oc- 
curred to him, as it had done to his wife. But this 
was soon got over. 

All being settled, Mr. Radcliife chuckled, andt>i\Ä>^^ 



78 HILARY ST. IVES* 

his hands with satisfaction at the thought of seeing his 
father-in-law, whom he liked very much. 

"I must get out some of my '20 port for him," he 
cried, smacking his lips. "He will want a glass of it 
to drink your health, May, and so shall I — ha! ha!" 
And he laughed his resonant laugh. "Oswald must 
drink it in claret, since he can't stand port. By-the-by, 
I had forgotteii what I came about," addressing his 
nephew. "Mrs. Sutton wants to go to Guildford on 
some business of her own. You must drive her in the 
dog-cart to the Gomshall Station. I can't very well 
spare the time myself. Besides, I expect some people 
to call upon me." 

"I shall like it of all things," replied Oswald. "But 
I suppose I shan't have to wait at the Station tili she 
comes back from Guildford." 

"No — no — she won't return tili late. A fly will 
bring her home." 

"This must be a sudden idea," exclaimed Mrs. 
RadclifFe, surprised. "Sutton was with me just now, 
and Said nothing about going to Guildford. What is 
to happen to poor Mr. St. Ives?" 

"Ohl' he'U take no härm," replied her husband. 
"Boston will look afler him. He has got the Times ^ 
and a book to amuse him — and can have a cigar if he 
likes. No, I beg pardon, my love, I know you don't 
aUow Smoking in the bedrooms." 

"I wish I oould prevent it everywhere eise in.\he 
house. But I want to know why Sutton is going to 
Guildford:' 



HILARY ST. IVES. 79 

"She wants to go to the bank, I believe, my dear. 
You had better not keep her waiting, Oswald. The 
dog-cart has been ordered a quarter of an hour ago." 

"Oh! I didn't understand that," cried the young 
man. And with an expressive look at May, he quitted 
the room. 

Mrs. Radcliffe was puzzled, but she fancied this 
sudden expedition to Guildford had some relation to 
Hilary St. Ives. What surprised her most W2is, that 
Mrs. Sutton had not consulted her before taking the 
Step. However, she could not ask further questions, 
without appearing too curious. 

"I fancy Sutton has saved money," observed Mr. 
Radcliffe. 

"I dare say she has," she replied. 

This was a very evasive, and by no means truthful, 
response. She knew perfectly well that the house- 
keeper had saved what Oswald would have called "a 
pot of money." 

"Well, May," said her father, looking at her, "now 
that Oswald is gone, I have something to teil you." 

"What is it, dear papa?" she inquired. "Why 
should it be a secret from Oswald?" 

"I scarcely know why," he replied, smiling. "But 
you shall judge whether I have acted discreetly, or not. 
I have just received a proposal of marriage for you. 
Now, was I right in reserving this commui^ication for 
your own ear, and for that of your mamma?" 

"You were quite right, papa," she replied. 

"Does the offer meet your approval, my de^i*i" 



8o HILARY St. IVES. 

inquired Mrs. Radcliffe, not feeling at all certain from 
her husband's manner that it did so. 

**I can raise no objection to it. On the contrary, 
I am bound to say that, viewed in a certain light, the 
oifer is highly advantageous. Not to keep you a mo- 
ment longer in suspense," he added to May, "it is 
Sir Charles Ilminster of Boxgrove Park, who, through 
me, oiFers you his hand.*' 

May did not make a remark, but, from having 
blushed deeply, she became quite pale. 

"I shall not attempt to influenae you one way or 
the other, my love," said her father, kindly. "You 
must consider well before you decide." 

"■S;qu are the kindest papa in the world," she cried, 
flingiilg her arms round his neck. 

JJrs. Radcliife thought it behoved her to say a few 
words. 

"Most girls would think that an offer from a hand- 
some young baronet, with a fine place, did not require 
much consideration*' she observed. 

"Sir Charles Ilminster is thirty-five, mamma." 

"I like that. Thirty-five is young for a baronet. 
Sir Charles is in the prime of life. He belongs to an 
old family — one of the oldest in the county. His 
estates are unencumbered, I believe. To add to his 
numerous recommendations , he Stands quite alone. 
There is no Dowager Lady Ilminster. He has only a 
sister, Lady Richborough, a widow, and a most charm- 
ing person.^^ 



mLARY Sr. IVES. V 8x 

I 

"I quite agreö with you, mamma, Lady Richborough 
ü charming." 

"Is not Sir Charles charming?" 

"Agreeable, gentleman-like, good-looking — yes. 
Charming: — no." 

"Boxgrove, I repeat, is an exceedlngly fine place." 

"Granted. But I like Hazlemere quite as well." 

"Absurd. The two places cannot be compared. 
I Boxgrove is an ancient mansion, with a noble park. 
Our*s is — ^but I won't depi'eciate it. You are sadly 
wanting in taste, my love, and I fear in discrimination. 
The main point it, whether you at all like Sir Charles." 

"I neither like him, nor dislike him, mamma. I 
am simply indifferent about him." 

"You will have to make up your mind by tor 
morrow, my dear," said her father. "He is coming 



( 



over with Lady Richborough and will expe<^ an 






answer." 



"I will give Lady Richborough my answer," said 
May. 

"Incomprehensible girl!" cried her mother. 

"Well, do as you please," observed Mr. Radcliffe. 
"IVe said I won't influence you, and TU keep my 
word. But I am bound to confirm all your mamma 
has said about Sir Charles Ilminster. A wrong con- 
clusion might be drawn from my silence. And now, 
my dear," he added to his wife, "you must excuse me. 
I can't stand the heat of this reom any longer. It 
feels like a fumace." 

Hilary St. Jv^s. /. 6 



82 HILARY ST. IVES. 

**I feel it very warm, too, papa," cried May. "I 
must have a turn in the garden." 

And they quitted the room together. 

"We shall see what ejQfect Hilary will produce," 
mused Mrs. RadclijQfe, as she was left alone. "He is 
jfar handsomer than Sir Charles, and much younger. 
,But then he has nothing. I wonder why Sutton has 
gone to Gmldford." 

May. and her father reached the garden just in time 
to see thfe dog-cart, with Mrs. Sutton and Oswald 
inside it, dash through the lodge-gates. The young 
man waved his hand to them. 

Änother person, stationed at the window of an 
Upper Chamber, watched them as they moved slowly 
across the lawn. 

Ihis person was ravished by May's beauty. Never 
had^e beheld a countenance so enchanting, nor a 
figure so light and graceful. His heart was lost to her 
at once. 



tf 



HILARY ST. IVES. 83 



VIII. 

Sir Charles Ilminster and Lady Richborough. 

The dog-cart was on its way to the Station. 

Those within it ought to have been enlivened by 
the rare beauty of the moming, and by the smiling 
aspect of nature; but they were not. The conversation, 
commenced by Oswald, soon dropped. Mrs. Sutton 
was evidently preoccupied, and would not give he6d to 
bis talk. 

They had crossed a breezy common — not the heath 
upon which Hilary had been lost, but an equally 
picturesque tract — and soon afterwards entered a long 
defile, if it may be properly so termed, which led them 
between the North T)owns. 

Nothing could exceed the beauty of the pass. A 
small river took its course through Ihe narrow Valley, 
and the road skirting its banks offered charming points 
of view. In many cases the sides of the downs were 
clothed with^timber, while the mansions to which those 
Woods belonged could be descried through openings 
amid the trees. 

One of the most extensive and most beautiful of 
the parks in question belonged to Sir Charles Ilminster. 
of whom mention has just been made. Sir Charles's 
noble ancestral mansion occupied a commanding situa<^ 

6» 



84 HILARY ST. IVES. 

tion, and overlooked the whole of the lovely surround- 
ing district. 

Drawn by Spanker, the dog-cart was going at a 
rattling pace past the tall grey palings that served to 
keep the deer within Boxgrove Park, when a tum in 
the road showed Oswald ä lady and gentleman on 
horseback, followed by a groom, about a quarter of a 
mile ahead. 

In these persons he had no difficulty in recognising 
the owner of the adjoining property, and his sister, 
Lady Richborough. 

As Sir Charles and the lady with him were proceed- 
ing very leisurely, the intervening distance was soon 
cleared by Spanker. The groom touched his hat as 
the dog-cart passed him, and his master and Lady 
Richborough, hearing the sound of wheels, tumed to 
See who was Coming on. 

Both were extremely well mounted. Sir Charles 
had a decidedly military look and bearing — not sur- 
prising, since he had been in the — th Lancers, and 
had served with distinction. He had a tall, symmetrica! 
figure; handsome, but rather pronounced features; and 
wore thick moustaches and a long imperial. 

High-bred, high-minded, high-spirited , chivalrous, 
Sir Charles was the soul of honöur, and had a spiee of 
romance in his composition. 

Ten years younger than her brother, Lady Rich- 
borough was in the füll 6clat of her resplendent beauty. 
jy^agnificent black hair, eyes of almost Oriental size and 
splendom, veiled by long daik ey^lashes, ckssically cut 






HILARY ST. IVES. 85 

featuros, a fuU moutb, and roimded chin, these con- 
stituted some of her charms. To her personal attractions 
she added most fasdnating manners, and a remarkable 
power of pleasing wheni she cared to exert it. A per-* 
fect Amazon, she never looked better than on horseback. 
She sat her steed well, and her riding-habit brought 
out the best points of her süperb figure. 

The widow of Sir Algemon Richborough, a York- 
shire baronet, who unfortunately had a son by a former 
marriage, besides other children, her charming lady* 
ship had a tolerably good jointure. But, alas! a very 
harsh restriction was attached to it. 

Sir Algernon was of a jealous nature, and had. not 
sufficient confidence in* his lovely wife. Not believing 
she would be faithful to his memory, he decreed that 
her jointure should depart from her if she married 
again. But for this proceeding, wfaich we cannot too 
strongly condemn, it is certain Lady Richborough 
would not have remained two years a widow. 

How dreadfiilly mercenary are the young men of 
the day! A thousand charms, without money, will 
not fix them. The report that Lady Richborough 
would lose her jointure on marriage scared all her 
young admirers. Some more mature pretendants, with 
better taste and largef means, would not have minded 
the loss. But they did not stiit Lady Richborough» 
who was determined upon having a young partner in 
her second noces* 

It remains only to State that the lovely widow had 
a house in Eaton-place. But she only occupied it 



« i' 



86 HILARY 6t. iVES. 

during the season, and generally took cäre of her 
hrother at Boxgrove. 

Only of late, Sir Charles Uminster had become in- 
timate with the RadclifFes, and the intimacy was brought 
about by the great fancy taken for May by Lady Rich- 
borough. 

Sir Charles, who was said to have had an early 
disappointment, from which he had never entirely re- 
covered, and which had hitherto prevented him from 
marrying, was not proof against the charms of the 
youthful beauty. May's freshness and vivacity en- 
chanted him, and though the connexion was not 
exactly one he would have sought if his feelings had 
not been strongly engaged, he began seriously to 
entertain the idea of making her his wife. 

Before taking the decisive step, however, he con- 
sulted his sister. She had already perceived the efFect 
produced upon him, and in reality had helped to fan 
the flame by her praises of the object of his regards; 
and, as may be supposed, he met with no Opposition 
from her. On the contrary, she applauded his choice, 
and counselled him not to lose time, but secure the 
prize, lest it should slip through his fingers. 

This argument, of which he recognised the füll 
force, prevailed, and induced him to make the formal 
proposal just reported to the reader. The groom 
having delivered the letter containing the proposal, 
had rejoined his master, who had ridden on to Woot- 
ton, and Sir Charles was returning to Boxgrove, when 
overtaken by Oswald. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 87 

On reaching Sir Charles and hls sister, who had 
reined in their horses, Oswald pulled up, and greet- 
ings were exchanged. 

After favouring the young man with one of her 
most bewitching smiles, and allowing him to touch the 
tips of her gloved fingers , her ladyship addressed her- 
seif to Mrs. Sutton , of whose influence with all parties 
at Hazlemere she was quite cognisant^ and bringing 
her horse as close as she could to the housekeeper, 
began to chat with her in the most aflfable and friendly 
manner, making all sorts of affectionate inquiries re- 
specting May and Mrs. RadcUflfe. 

Mrs. Sutton knew that Sir Charles's groom had 
brought a letter that morning from bis master to Mr* 
Radcliflfe, and her ladyship's attentions, coupled with 
the haughty baronet's altered manner, led . her to 
suspect the truth. ^ 

While Lady Richborough was thus employed, Sir 
Charles took Oswald in band, and ascertained, much 
to bis relief, that he was merely conveying Mrs. Sutton 
to the Gomshall Station, We say to Sir Cbarles's relief, 
for, with all a lover's doubts and trepidation, he had at 
first imagined that the young man and bis companlon 
were on the way to Boxgrove, charged with some sort 
of reply to bis proposal. A little reflection would have 
shown bim the absurdity of the supposition, but time 
for reflection had not been allowed him. 

With unwonted courtesy, he then pressed Oswald 
to take luncheon with him on bis way back, and the 
young man readily accepted the invitation, Like all 



8&^ HILARY ST. IVES. 

who came near her, Oswald was charmed witb Lady 
Richborough, and was delighted at the prospect of 
passing an hour in her society. 

Hilary St. Ives formed the next topic of discourse, 
in which everybody took part. Of course, her lady- 
ship had heard of the stränge circumstances of the 
ease — ^how the young man had been robbed and half 
murdered on Wootton Heath, and brought to Hazle- 
mere. How was he going on? Was he still alive? 

Mrs. Sutton was able to assure her that Mr. St. Ives 
was not only alive, but going on so well, that he would 
most probably come down-stairs on the morrow. 

Lady Richborough was astonished. Never was 
anything so wonderful. He owed his life to Mrs. 
Sutton. But they all knew what an excellent nurse 
she was. 

Mrs. Sutton acknowledged th^ compliment, and 
Said she should not have left her patient if there had 
been the least danger in doihg so. 

Her ladyship next inquired if it was true that Mn 
St. Ives was very hand^ome. Whereupon, Oswald im- 
mediately called out that he was the handsomest fel-> 
low he had ever seen. 

On this, Sir Charles pricked up his ears, and 
^anted to know all about him, but no satisfactory an- 
swer could be given to his inquiries. 

"Well, we are Coming over to Hazlemere to-mor- 
row, and then we shall probably see him, and learn 
something more," observed her ladyship. "A pleasant 
jbumey to you, dear Mrs. Sutton/' 



HILARY ST. IVES; 8g 

^^Dear Mrs. Sutton," thought the housekeeper, as 
she bowed adieu. "I see how it is, clearly enough. 
But they are mistaken, if they calculate on me." 

"We shall see you at luncheon, Mr. Woodcot," 
Said Sir Charles, waving his band to Oswald. 

The young man nodded , raised his hat to Lady 
Richborough, and just touching Spanker with the whip, 
quickly disappeared. 

"You will laugh at what I am going to say, 
Myrtilla," observed Sir Charles to his sister, as they 
rode towards the handsome park lodge; "but I have 
an unaccountable feeling that the arrival at Hazlemere 
of this mysterious St. Ives, at this particular juncture, 
bodes ill to me. I fear a rival in him — a successful 
rival." 

"A rival!" exclaimed her ladyship, displaying her 
pearly teeth, as she^^laughed heartily. "I know you 
are excessively superstitious, Charley, but I didn't 
think you so bad as this. Dismiss such idle fears. 
Handsome as they say he is, St. Ives is not likely to 
cxAyou out. He has appeared on the scene in a very 
Strange manner, I allow; but he will very soon make 
his exit. You have far more reason to fear rivalry 
from Oswald Woodcot. He is in love with his fair 
Cousin, that's certain. But, as I have told you, I don't 
think he has made the slightest impression upon her 
heart. As to St. Ives, I will undertake that she shan't 
fall in love with himJ^ 

Meanwhile, the dog-cart pursued its way. 

Having now recovered in some degree from Vv\a 



90 HIi;,ARY ST. IVES. 

depression, Oswald unbosomed himself to his com- 
panion, confessing that he had shown his mother's 
letter to Mrs. RadclifFe and May. Mrs. Sutton looked 
grave, and told him he had pursued an exceedingly 
injudicious course, and need not be surprised at the 
result, adding that it would be very difficult to repair 
the error he had committed. While blaming his im- 
prudence, she promised him her best assistance to set 
matters right; and the promise raised the poor down- 
hearted fellow's hopes. 

Mrs. Sutton W2is secretly much vexed on learning 
that old Mr. Thornton was Coming to Hazlemere next 
day, as his visit threatened to embarrass her plans. 
But she took care not to let her annoyance appear. 

They reached the Station just ten minutes before 
the arrival of the Guildford train. Oswald would have 
waited to see Mrs. Sutton off, if she would have al- 
lowed him. She told him she should not return tili 
late, as she had a good deal to do at Guildford. So 
he lighted a cigar, and drove off to Boxgrove, anti- 
cipating a pleasant luncheon. 

When the train came up, Mrs. Sutton entered a 
first-class carriage. 



HILART ST. IVES. 9I 



IX. 

Why Mrs. Sutton went to Guildford, and whom she met ther«. 

A PLEASANT old town is Guildford — none pleasanter 
in England — and on that sunshiny spring day it wore 
an unusually cheerful aspect. The Square tower of the 
ancient Norman Castle, reared upon itis lofty mound in 
the centre of the town, looked proudly, yet smilingly, 
on the many picturesque edifices, halls, churches, 
Hospitals, and quaintly-gabied habitations clustered 
around it. Bright and beautiful looked the hills near 
the town — fairest of all being St. Catherine's Hill, 
which now looked so lovely and inviting that a devotee 
might have been tempted to climb to the desecrated 
chapel on its brow. Fair looked the woods, wherein 
lies buried antique and storied Losely — fair looked the 
groves around Compton — fair looked the Valley, through 
which wanders the Wey. 

As Mrs. Sutton passed rapidly through the lovely 
Valley of the Wey, and approached the picturesque old 
town, she could not help casting a glance at the tower- 
ing keep; but otherwise, we regret to say, she was in- 
sensible to the beauties of the scene. Her mind was 
fully occupied with the business she had to do. 

Quitting the large and bustling Station, at which 
two important lines unite, she took her way up the 
High-street. It was rather crowded at the time, and 



gZ HILARY ST. IVES. 

many carriages passed her, but she looked at none of 
them. She bought her own dresses, and most of Mrs. 
Radcliffe's dresses, atGuildford; but she was not going 
to the draper's or the milliner's now. She had exten- 
sive dealings with several other tradespeople, but she 
did not enter a Single shop. She went on tili she 
came to the London and Coünty Bank. 

As she entered the bank, a very respectable middle- 
aged man, rather bald, and wearing spectacles, who 
was engaged with his books at a desk at the back, 
happened to turn his head, and catching sight of her, 
he immediately quitted his occupation, and saluted her 
deferentially. 

"Good moming, Mrs. Sutton. Glad to see you, 
ma'am. What can I have the pleasure of doing for 
you?" he inquired, in bland tones. 

"I want to draw out a little money, Mr. Price,'* 
she replied. 

"How much will you take, ma'am?" said Mr. 
Price. "I will write out the draft for you, if you 
please." 

"Thank you. Be good enough to write it for six 
hundred pounds." 

Mr. Price looked a little surprised, but made no 
remark, and having written out the cheque, he passed 
it over the counter for her signature. 

"How will you take the money, madam?'' was the 
next inquiry. 

**In five bank notes, each for one hundred. The 



F 

\ 
f 



HILARY ST. IVES. 93 



remaining hundred in smaller notes. Stay, I should 
like twenty pounds in gold." 

<*Veiy good/' 

And the bank notes and gold being at once pro- 
duced and delivered to her, she proceeded to secure 
them in her portmonnaie and pocket-booki — for she 
needed both. 

While she was thus employed, Mr. Price told het 
) he had been reading in the Surrey Gazette an account 
of the robbery of Mr. St. Ives on Wootton Heath, and 
he prestimed the newspaper was correct in stating that 
the unfortunate young gentleman had been conveyed 
to Hazlemere, by Mr. RadclifFe. Being informed that 
the Statement was exact in all its particulars, Mr. Price 
next expressed his surprise at the great remissness oi 
the police. What were they about? The robbers ought 
long since to have been captured. In this Mrs. Sutton 
entirely concurred. But Mr. Price did not stop here. 
He next ventured to observe — and he made the remark 
with a peculiarly soft smile — that he thought he knew 
how Mrs. Sutton intended to invest her money. Mr. 
Malham had been at the bank the other day, and 
mentioned casually that a very desirable house was to 
be seid at Wootton for six hundred pounds — a great 
bargain — cheap as dirt. Mr. Price hoped she was 
going to buy that house. Mrs. Sutton's smile might 
have signified either "yes" or **no," at the c^tion of 
the observer; but she made no dired; response, and 
bowing to Mr. Price, prepared to depart. 

Just as she was going two persons entered the 



94 HILARY ST. IVES. 

bank. Unmistakably military men, and probably from 
Aldershot camp, which, as the reäder need scarcely be 
infonned, Js not very far from Guildford. The fore- 
most of the two — a youngish man, under thirty, ap- 
parently — scarcely merits description. But his com-» 
panion must not be thus passed over. He was a very 
distinguished-looking person indeed, fifteen years at 
least older than his friend, but still strikingly hand- 
some. His aristocratic and refined demeanour did not 
savour of the camp, though his bronzed visage, marked, 
but not disfigured, by a large cicatrice, and grey 
moustache proclaimed that he had served long under 
an Indian or African sun. If he had so served, his 
health did not seem much impaired. His dark eye 
was still füll of fire, and his tall thin figure perfectly 
erect. A dark-blue frock-coat was buttoned tightly 
across his ehest. 

Both officers removed their cigars from their lips as 
they entered the bank. 

"Pray come in, colonel,'* cried Captain de Vesci, 
the younger of the two. "I won't keep you longer 
than is required to cash a cheque." 

"I will wait for you as long as my cigar will keep 
alight," replied the colonel, laughing. 

That voice! — that well-known voice! which she had 
not heärd for many, many years, and never expected 
to hear again, thrilled through Mrs. Sutton's frame, and 
suspended for the moment the action of her heart, 
causing such evident emotion that she well-nigh sank 
to the ground. 



X 



HILARY ST. IVES. 95 

All the colour fled from her cheeks. Even her lips 
became white; and Mr. Price, noticing her haggard 
looks, thought she must have been taken suddenly ill, 
and feh half inclined to spring across the counter to 
her assistance. 

She raised her eyes towards the Colone! , regarding 
him as steadfastly as she dared. Yes, it was he! But 
little changed — despite his grey hair and the honourable 
scar lipon his cheek. She would have known him any- 
where, and under any circumstances. 

Did he know her? He stared hard at her — Struck 
by the likeness to a long-forgotten and once dear face. 
But how should he know her? He believed — firmly 
believed — that she whom he had loved in years long 
gone by was dead. Nevertheless , this stränge likeness 
to the lost one greatly startled him. 

Mustering all her courage — and she had need of it 
— ^Mrs. Sutton passed him as firmly as she could. Her 
dress brushed him slightly as she went by, though he 
moved out of her way. How she sustained herseif at 
that trying moment she could scarcely teil. 

The colonel's curiosity being excited, he stepped to 
the counter, and addressing Mr. Price said, 

"Can you oblige me, sir, with the name of the lady 
who has just gone out?" 

"Mrs. Sutton," was the laconic reply. 

"Good God! what a streng likeness!" mentally 
ejaculated the colonel, too much disturbed to ask any 
further questions. 

Mrs. Sutton feit so extremely faint, that she was 



QÖ HILARY ST. IVES* 

obliged to enter a chemist's shop and procure some 
gal-volatile. The stimulant presently revived her, but 
she was still seated in the shop when tke colonel and 
Captain de Vesci passed the door. Neither of them 
noticed her. They were talking loudly, and she dis^ 
tinctly heard the colonel observe to his friend» 

"I wonder where the deuce that woman has gone 
to!" a remark that elicited a iaugh firom the captain. 

Waiting tili they were gone, she proceeded to her 
milliner's, whose shop was close at hand, and pur- 
chased one of those thick black veils which are as 
eifectual a disguise as a loo-mask used to be to our 
great-grandmothers. Shrouded by this veil she feit 
more easy, and repaired to the White Hart, where, 
being well known, she was at once ushered to a private 
room up-stairs by the landlady, who seemed very glad 
to See her. She ordered a little luncheon, and at the 
same time asked for writing materials. 

Left to herseif, and having in some degree regained 
her composure, she strove to reflect on the extra- 
ordinary events that had recently taken place. The 
last occurrence seemed to her the strängest of all, and 
quite confounded her, upsetting all her schemes, and 
filling her with uneasiness. 

She had every reason to suppose the colonel was 
in India, and could not comprehend what had brought 
him back. He could only have just retumed, for she 
was certain she should have heard of his arrival from 
Mrs. RadclifFe if any mention had been made of it in 
the public Journals. Yet he had retumed. She had 



HILARY ST* IVES« 9/ 

heard his voice — had seen him. Here he was— on the 
spot. 

How was this unlooked-for danger to be goarded 
against? A few days might possibly elapse befbre Mrs.^ 
Radcliffe heard of his retarn — bat she was sare to hear 
of it ere long — in all probability from himseif. Nothing 
more certain than he would be invited to Hazlemere. 
Eqoally certain that he woald come. 

Distraction was in the thoaght. Fate seemed at 
work. The perepeties of the dark drama in which she 
enacted the principal and not whoUy goiltless part 
might be at band. 

From these meditations she was roused by the. 
waiter, who placed writing materials on a small table 
beside her, and then proceeded to lay a cover for 
luncheon. 

Her plans were now so disconcerted that she feit 
inclined to abandon her task; bat at last she resolved 
to bid defiance to fate, and go on. 

After" tracing a few lines on a sheet of paper in 
bold, masculine characters, totally anlike her osual 
handwriting, she enclosed the bank*notes of large 
amount which she had just received, and secured the 
letter in an envelope, which she directed in the same 
bold band. 

She had just completed her task, when the waiter 
infonned her that luncheon was ready, and asked if he 
shoald send het letter to the post. She thanked him, 
bat declined, and put the letter in her bag. 

She ate veiy little luncheon, but drank a glass of 

HUary St Ivet. /. 7 



qß mLAJBLY ST. IVES. 

Sherry, as she still feit rather faint, and then ringing 
the bell, paid her bill and prepared to depart. 

Voices in the entrance-hall beneath Surested her on 
the stairs. The colonel and De Vesei were there, 
Hghting their dgars before going out. A nanrow escape. 
A moment sooner, and she must have come upon them. 

As soon as the coast was clear she descended, said 
a few civil words to the hostess, who was all smiles 
and politeness, and begged her respectful duty to Mrs. 
Raddiffe, and then proceeded to the Station. 

Not with the Intention of returning to Gomshall, 
though. Her day's work was not yet done. She had 
anbther and a longer journ^ fo periorm. 



HILARY ST. IVSS. 9^ 



X. 

Colohel Deläcombe. 

She took a tictet by the South-Westem Railway to 
London, and rcmamed in the ladies' waiting-room tili 
the train from Godalming came up. Then selecting a 
first-class carriage, which was nearly füll, she got into it. 

Till this moment she had dreaded another en- 
counter with the colonel, but she now feit secure. But 
just when the train was about to Start the door opened, 
and the very person she sought to avoid got in, and 
took the only vacant seat, which happened to be op- 
posite her own. 

Captain de Vesci, who had accompanied him to 
the door, muttered a word at pai:ting, which caused 
the colonel to glance inquisitively at his vis-ä-vis. 

Mrs. Sutton's features were completely masked by 
her veil. Her eyes only could be distinguished, and 
she shrank back in her seat as far as she could. 

Notwithstanding this, the colonel lost no time in 
addressing her. Assuming a most respectful manner, 
he observed that he fancied he must have seen her at 
the bank. No answer. He ventured to make the in- 
quiry, because he had been Struck by her extraordinary 
resemblance to a lady, whom he had known very in- 
timately in former years. Under such circumstances 
she would excuse him. A slight inchnation of the 

7* 



lOO HILARY ST. IVES. 

head, but no fiirther response. He next spoke of Guild- 
ford and Abbot's Hospital, which he had just visited 
— a very curious place — uncommonly curious. She 
had no interest whatever in Guildford, or in Abbot's 
Hospital. Finding all his attempts futile to engage her 
in conversation, he was compelled to desist. 

He opened a newspaper, and while feigning to be 
occupied with it, stole an occasional glance at her. 
She feit he was watching her, but though trembling in- 
wardly, did not betray the slightest emotion. 

After awhile he changed his tactics , and began to 
converse with an elderly gentleman next him, and she 
fancied some parts of his discourse were intended for 
her ear. He informed this gentleman, who proved to 
be the rector of Woking, that he had just retumed 
from India, and had landed at Southampton in the 
Poonah, He had since been at Aldershot, where his 
old regiment was stationed. He had been so long in 
India that everything appeared stränge to him. Most 
of his friends were dead, and the few who were left 
must have forgotten him. As he made the latter re- 
mark, he glanced at Mrs. Sutton; but though listening 
attentively, she did not appear to notice what he said. 

The rector and his son got out at Woking, and the 
colonel had again recourse to his newspaper. At 
Weybridge, the two other persons quitted the train, 
and he was left alone with the mysterious lady. Now 
he was determined to have an answer from her, 

J^ather abruptly, and in a somewhat difFerent tone 
from that which he had previoMsly adopted, he asked 



9ILARY ST. IVES. lOl 

if she had ever been in India. She answered faintly, 
"Never." 

"Where can we have met then?" he cried. "That 
we have met before to-day I am certain. If not in 
India, it must have been in this country, upwards of 
twenty years ago. I have only had a momentary 
glimpse of your features, madam» but they recalled so 
vividly the face of one very dear to me, that if she 
were not lost to me for ever, I should have believed 
you were she herseif. Even now I cannot whoUy 
divest myself of the idea " 

"No more of this, I beseech you, sir," interrupted 
Mrs. Sutton. "I cannot — will not — listen to it. You 
are quite mistaken in me. We have never met before." 

"By Heaven! the very voice!" cried the colonel. 
"If you have a spark of pity in your composition, 
madam, you will raise your veil." 

But she showed no signs of compliance, though 
the request was still more passionately urged. 

"Why do you refuse me?" he cried. "My con- 
duct may appear impertinent, but, on my soul! I am 
influenced by no idle curiosity or improper motive. 
Doubts have been created in my mind that must be 
set at rest." 

"I shall think you crazed if you continue in this 
strain, sir," she rejoined. "If I happen to resemble 
some one you have known, that is no reason why I 
should be subjected to annoyance. You are a perfect 
stranger to me." 



I02 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"I am Seymour Delacombe. Does that name 
awaken no recoUections in your breast?" 

"None," she rejoined, firmly. 

The colonel fdl back in his seat, with something 
like a groan. 

Looking tip, shortly afterwaids, he perceived that 
she had tumed aside, and was hastily removing a 
handkerchief from her eyes. 

"By Heaven! she is weeping," he mentally ex- 
claimed. And his doubts being again roused by the 
discovery, he added, "I see you are moved, madam. 
I assure yoü it has not been my wish to distress or 
oflfend you. Far from it. I owe you an explanation 
of my conduct, and if you will permit me, I will give 
you such particulars of my history as relate to the un- 
happy lady, whose loss I deplore, and whom you so 
strangely resemble in feature, voice, and person." 

"Pray spare me the recital, sir," she rejoined, with 
freezing coldness. "Doubtless the history is curious, 
but it can have no interest for me. I have no desire 
to be made the depositary of your secrets." 

"I fear I have really ofFended you, madam — but it 
has been most inadvertently. I beg you to accept my 
excuses." 

"I cannot accept them, sir. Either you or I must 
descend at the next Station," 

"I will relieve you of my society," he rejoined, 

haughtily. "It will not put me to much inconvenience 

to obey you, since I have no luggage with me. My 

tninks have heen sent on to London, I deem it right 



HILAlOr ST. IVES/ 103 

to acquaint yöu that I learnt your name at the Guild- 
ford bank — ^your name, and nothing more," he added, 
observing her Start. 

"If we ever meet again, it must be as entire 
strangers," she cried, in an agitated voice. "Promise 
me this, and we part friends.*' 

"I proinise it." 

"On your word of honour?" 

"Ott my word of honour." 

"Enough." 

On reaching Kingston, Colonel Delacombe badß 
her a ceremoniöus adieu. His tall, thin figure cpuld 
be Seen on the platform as the train departed. 

He was vexed at being thus defeated, but he pro- 
mised himself speedy revei^ge. 

Mrs. Sutton pursued her journey in comparative 
tranquillity, and reached Waterloo-bridge Station with- 
out further adventure. 



104 HILARY ST. IVES. 



XL 
Mr. Page Thornton. 

Taking a cab, she drove at once to the General 
Post Office at Charing-cross, and registered the letter, 
in which she had enclosed the bank-notes at Guild- 
ford. She smiled with satisfaction when this was 
done. 

She next told the cabman, who had waited for her, 
to proceed to Silver's, in Comhill, and there dismissed 
him. At this large establishment, where every kind of 
habiliment, of every size and quality, can be had, she 
purchased articles of wearing apparel of the best de- 
scription, sufficient to constitute a complete outfit, stat* 
ing they were required by a young gentleman who was 
going out to India immediately. As she was provided 
with the requisite measure, there was no difficulty in 
the matter. Messrs. Silver supplied her with all she 
wanted. Having paid the bill, which was made out to 
Hilary St. Ives, Esq., she desired that it might be for- 
warded to him with the goods, to the address given. 
Messrs. Silver promised that her directions should be 
carefully attended to, and she departed. 

This affair occupied some time, for she had been 
solicitous to choose such articles as would best suit 
Hilary, and she pleased herseif with the idea of how 
much surprised he would be when he received the 



HILARY ST. IVES. IO5 

packages. Her business was now ended, and her mind 
more easy. It would have been quite easy, if she had 
not encountered Colonel Delacombe. But she had his 
promise not to molest her, and she thought she could 
prevent him from Coming to Hazlemere, at least, for 
the present. 

Mrs. Sotton was very rarely in London, and still 
more rarely in the city, but, being there, she thought 
she might as well look about her. 

Countryfolk are always attracted by shops, and she 
stopped to gaze at several richly-garnished Windows as 
she passed along Comhill. At last, she entered a 
jeweller's for the purpose of purchasing a birthday gift 
for May, and had just chosen a simple, pretty ring, 
set with an emerald, when an elderly gentleman came 
in, and, on beholding her, uttered an exclamation of 
astonishment. Unluckily, her veil was raised at the 
moment , and she could not let it fall. 

A very gentlemanlike-looking old gentleman. About 
seventy— perhaps a trifle more — but looking very hearty 
for his years. His features had a sardonic expression, 
not devoid of humour, which lurked about his mouth, 
and his keen searching grey eyes, peering from under 
bushy brows, betokened great shrewdnes^. His round, 
red cheeks were scrupulously shaven. His attire was 
extremely neat; but it was the neatness of the old 
school, not of the new. He wore a low-crowned hat 
tumed up at the sides, a chocolate-coloured coat with 
a velvet coUar, and a white cravat. Though the day 
was particularly fine, he was armed with an umbrella. 



J06 HILARY ST. IVBS, 

To her infinite dismay, Mrs, Sutton recognised her 
mistress's fatiier, old Mr. Page Thornton, of Chester. 

"Grod bless me! Mrs. Sutton," he exclaimed. 
'*Who wotdd have thought of seeing you! How are 
you? And. how are they all at Hazlemere?" 

"All quite well, thank you, Mr. Thornton. I needn't 
äsk how you are, sir. You are looking uncommonly 
iveU," 

"Thankee — yes — quite as well as an old fellow 
caa expect to be. But what are you doing in town, 
madam?" 

Mr. Thornton was very inquisitive, 

"Why, to teil you the truth, sir, I wanted to buy 
a little present for Miss May — to-morrow is her birth» 
day, as you are aware — and not being able to meet 
with anything I liked at Guildford, I ran up to town." 

"Exactly my own errand. I have come here to 
buy May a birthday present Odd, ain't it? What 
have you bought, ma'am?" 

Mrs. Sutton showed him the emerald ring. 

"Ah! very pr^yl But I must choose something 
eise. Give me the benefit of your taste ma'am. You 
know what May would like," 

"Anything from her grandpapa will please her, sir. 
But I see no reason why you should not give her a 
ring as well as myself." 

"None on earth — ha! ha! I will. Girls load their 
fingers with rings now^a-days* Can't have too many 
— ^ha! ha! Help me to choose one." 

On this hint a glittering assortment of jewelry was 



HILÄR7 ST. IVES. IQ7 

placed before him, from wEiich, with Mrs. Satton's aid, 
he selected a diamond lodcet, a däamond star, a lovely 
sapphire ring, the prettiest little watcb and chain 
imaginable, witii some other Ornaments , costing alto* 
gether nearly two hnndred ponnds, which he veiy cheer- 
fully paid. 

He tfaen gave directions that his grand<langhter's 
name with the date, ist May, i86 — , should be en^ 
giaved inside the watch. 

The jeweller promised that this should be done in 
the course of a few hours, and asked where he should 
send the things. 

''Pack th^n up carefully in a little box, and send 
them to me — ^Mr. Page Thomton — at the Langham 
Hotel, Portland-place. The box must be delivered 
into my own hands. I shall be at dinner at half-past 
seven." 

Ilie jeweller promised faithfuDy that the box should 
be brought to him at the Langham, at the hour ap^ 
pointed. 

''A Word with you, ma'am," said the old gentle- 
man, taking Mrs. Sutton aside. 'Tm ooming to Hazle- 
mere to-morrow, But don't mention it. Don't say 
you've seen me," . 

"I won't eiven say that Tve been in town, sir." 

''Ah! I see," he cried, with a knowing look. ''Run 
up on the sly, eh? Never mind, I won't peach« But 
teil me! how does my grandson Oswald get on? In 
favoor with his fair cousin, ^? You're in their secrets« 
ru be swom, Sutton/' 



I08 HILARY ST, IVES. 

"Indeed, I am not, sir. Mr. Oswald and Miss 
May are constantly together — that's all I know, But 
I think — mind, I only think — my young lady has had 
an ofFer this very moming from Sir Charles Ilminster," 

"Sir Charles Ilminster of Boxgrove! Zoundsl she 
must accept him,^'' 

^^Must accept him, Mr. Thornton! You know very 
little of your grand-daughter, sir, to say so." 

"Well, I mean she ought io accept him. Oswald 
must be thrown over. Mrs. Woodcot will be wofully 
disappointed, but that can't be helped. We must find 
some one eise for the poor lad. Sir Charles has a 
sister — a widow — young and very handsome, I am told. 
She might do. I'll talk it over with Mrs. Radcliffe. 
But I'm keeping you here, ma'am. Where are you 
going, if it's fair to ask?" 

Mrs. Sutton replied that she was going to the Can- - 
non-street Station, whereupon he oflfered to escort her 
thither, and they left the shop together. As yet, Mrs. 
Sutton had said nothing respecting Hilary St. Ives; but 
as they walked along in the direction of Cannon-street 
— after a little debate with herseif as to the prudence 
of alluding to him — she told the old gentleman of the 
guest they had got at Hazlemere, and under what 
Strange circumstances he had been brought there. 

Mr. Thornton listened to her narration with sur- 
prise and some displeasure; but when he leamt that 
Mrs. Radcliffe had invited Hilary to remain a few days 
to recruit, he became redder than ever in the face. 

"Why ask him to stay?" he exclaimed, angrily. _ 



HILARY ST. IVES, lOg 

"Because Kfr. Radcliffe chose to play the Good Sama- 
ritan, why shonld she play the fool? Who is he? 
Some wretched adventurer — a strolling play er, I'U be 
bound." 

Mrs. Sutton strove to appease him, but he continned 
grumbling all the way tili they reached the gates of the 
Station. 

While thanking him for his escort, Mrs. Sutton 
thought it well to caution him that he must know 
nothing about Mr. St. Ives on his arrival at Hazlemere 
on the morrow. 

Mr. Thomton promised to be careful, and bidding 
her adieu, got into a hansom-cab and drove to the 
Langham Hotel. 

As he was whirled rapidly through the crowded 
streets, he could not help thinking about Mrs. Sutton« 
"A very superior woman, indeed," he said to himself, 
"quite a lady. Upon my soul I can't make her out." 

As he entered the large coffee-room of the Langham, 
he observed a gentleman seated at one of the tables, 
whose striking appearance at once attracted his attention. 
Feeling certain he knew the face, he applied to a 
waiter, and leamt that the gentleman was the very 
person he supposed — Colonel Delacombe. He at 
once marched towards him, and the coloiiel, looking 
iip from his newspaper as he advanced, after a mo- 
ment's hesitation recognised him, and arose. Expla- 
nations ensued, and they shook hands very cordiaily 
together. The meeting was as agreeable as unexpected, 
— particularly agreeable to the colonel, who immediately 



C 10 HILARY ST. IVES. 

began to make inqniries about Mfs. Radcliffe^ and 
appeared enchanted with the good accounts g:iven him 
of her by the old gentleman. Mr. Thomton, who was 
very proud of his daughter, assured him she was looking 
just as well as ever, which the colonel was qtdte ready 
to belleve. Then the old gentleman began to talk 
about his grand-daughter, and expatiated on her beauty, 
but the gallant colonel would not admiit that she could 
be so beautiful as her mother. 

"Most people think May far better-looking than her 
mother," cried Mr. Thornton, "but I own -" 

"Impossible!" exclaimed the colonel. "Esther 
Thomton — pardon me for calling her by that name! — 
was the most charming creature ever beheld. Her 
daughter mäy equal her, but cannot p>ossibly surpass 
her. I am not going to be sentimental. Sentiment is 
not in my line now. But I assure you I was a long 
time in getting over that cruel disappointment. I suffered 
more from it than from any bodily wound, and I have 
received a good many." 

"I can easily believe it, colonel. I know how much 
you were attached to Esther. I was obliged to act 
harshly in breaking off that engagement^ — contrary to 
my own feelings — but I did what I conceived to be my 
duty to my daughter.*' 

"You acted very properly, Mr. Thomton — ^vary 
wisely. Mr. RadclifFe has made her a devilish deal 
better husband than I should have done." 

"Radcliffe has certainly made her an excellent hus- 
band, and perbaps all is for the best. She might have 



HZLAR7 ST. IVES. 1 1 1 

been a great anxiety to yon. You are aware she has 
had very poor health for years, aiid is now a confimaed 
invalid — ^when I say an invalid/ 1 mean that she thinks 
herseif oae, and lives Hke one. I call her sl malade 
imaginaire. And so she is; for she looks as well as 
ever, as I have just told you. Run down to Hazlemere 
when you have a few days to spare. Esther will be 
delighted to see you, and so will Radcliffe — he is a 
deuced good fellow, and not tbe least bit jealous — and 
you will make the acquaintance of my pretty little May. 
I am going tiiere to-morrow, and will teil them I have 
Seen you." 

"You will do me a great kindness, Mr. Thoraton. 
I intended to drop Mrs. Radcliffe a line to inform her 
of my return, which, as I have explained, was much 
sooner than I anticipated, but you will say all that 
for me." 

They then had some further friendly chat, and as 
the colonel had no engagement, they agreed to dine 
together at seven o'clock. Mr. Thornton was rather 
fond of good cheer, and like Baron de Brisse, piqued 
himself upon his skill in arranging a menu. 

The colonel left the matter entirdy to him, and 
having ordered what he hoped would turn out to be a 
nice little dinner, he proposed a short promenade, and 
they went forth together, strolling down Bond-street 
and St. James's-street, looking in at the Carlton, to^ 
which club Mr. Thornton bek>nged, and proceeding to 
the Senior United Service Club, of which the colonel 
was a member, and where he announced his retum. 



112 HILARY ST. IVES. 

During their walk, Colonel Delacombe met several 
acquaintances, all of whom seemed as much surprised 
as delighted to see him. The colonel was very chatty 
and agreeable. If his obje<^t was to ingratiate himself 
with the old gentleman, he succeeded to a marvel. 

The dinner was first rate — at least the colonel said 
so. He had not eaten such a good dinner since the 
last time he dined with Mr. Thomton, he wouldn't say 
how many years ago. The old gentleman was much 
flattered. They managed to get through a bottle of 
perfectly-iced Clicquot, with a slight admixture of fine 
old Sherry, and had just begun to test the merits of a 
bottle of Laffitte, of a famous vintage, which was placed 
upon the table when the cloth was drawn, when the 
waiter introduced a young man charged with a small 
box, which he said he was ordered to deliver into Mr. 
Thornton's own hands. The old gentleman Sciid it 
was all right, and the messenger withdrew. 

After explaining what the box contained, Mr. Thom- 
ton begged the colonel to excuse him for a moment 
while he locked it up. 

On his return he remarked, "Apropos of that box 
of trinkets, I must relate an odd circumstance that 
occurred to me to-day. Chancing to be in Cornhill, 
quite by accident, I entered a jeweller's shop^ with the 
design of purchasing a birthday gift for May, when 
whom should I stumble upon but my daughter's house- 
keeper, Mrs. Sutton. She had come there on the same 
errand as myself. Odd, wasn't it?" 



HILARY ST. IVES. II J 

"Very odd," remarked the colonel. "Did you say 
Mrs. Sutton?" 

*'Yes, that's the housekeeper's name, and a very 
superior person she is — not like a housekeeper at all 
— quite a lady, in fact. It appears that she went over 
to Guildford this mornlng." 

"To Guildford!" exclaimed the colonel. 

"Yes; and not finding exactly what she wanted for 
May, she came on to town, little dreaming she would 
meet me^ 

"And little dreaming that / shoul4 hear of her, 
and learn all about her," thought the colonel, greatly 
surprised. 

Filling a bumper, he said, "Let us devote this glass 
to Mrs. RadclifFe. To-morrow you will drink your 
grand-daughter's health. To-day let us drink her 
mother's." 

"With the greatest pleasure," replied Mr.Thomton. 

Reason was done to the toast. 

Cheered by the generous wine, the old gentleman 
remarked with a droU look, "IVe a proposition to make 
to you, colonel, which I hope you may find agreeable. 
Run down with me to Hazlemere to-morrow, and sur- 
prise Mrs. RadclifFe, ha! ha!" 

"Are you serious, sir?" asked the colonel. "Or 
is this a jest? If you are in earnest, I'm more than 
half inclined to take you at your word. But all respon- 
sibility must rest with yourself." 

"I'll ensure you a hearty welcome from Radcliffe; 
that's all you need trouble yourself about. Madame 

JlJirry S/. /zf^s. /. o 



114 HILARY ST. IVES. 

>vill certainly be charmed to see you. Gad, it will be 
a surprise to her^^ 

"And to Mrs. Sutton as wfell," thought the colonel. 

Nothing could have pleased the colonel better, and 
he was quite as much tickled by the jest as the old 
gentleman was. Indeed, there was more in it to him 
that to Mr. Thomton. 

Settled that they were to start for Hazlemere at a 
tolerably early hour in the moming. 

Their bottle of claret finished, they adjoumed to 
the smoking-room, where they continued to talk of by- 
gone days, of old friends, and of events that had oc- 
curred during the coloneFs prolonged absence. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 1 1 5 



XII. 
In what manner Mrs. Sutton obtained possession of the Documents. 

On Consulting the time tables, Mrs. Sutton found 
there was no train that would ans wer her purpose be- 
fore six o'clock, and having more than an hour to 
spare, she repaired to the refreshment-room, and par- 
took of a slight repast. 

Though quite unconscious of the danger that 
threatened her on the morrow, and never dreaming of 
the meeting that had taken place between Mr. Thorn- 
ton and Colonel Delacombe, she was uneasy, and had 
a presentiment of Coming ill. 

While travelling homewards in the train, she re- 
volved the stränge Qvents of the day, weighing the dif- 
ficulties they were likely to give rise to, and which she 
might have to encounter. 

The train was late, and it was not far from eight 
o'clock when she reached the Gomshall Station. A fly 
was in waiting, for she had mentioned in the morning 
that she should require one on her retum. 

The night was clear and starlight, but, as we 
know, she had to pass through a district abounding in 
fine timber. Where the road was overshadowed by 
wide-branching trees, as it not unfrequently was, it was 
profoundly dark. The fly proceeded slowly, being 
dravm by a miserable horse. 



Il6 mLARY ST. IVES. 

A courageöus woman, and possessing streng nerves, 
Mrs. Suddon did not feel any alarm, as she proceeded 
at the slow pace we have mentioned along the some- 
what lonely road. She tried to compose her mind be- 
fore her re-appearance at Hazlemere, and nothing oc- 
curred to disturb her nntil she had passed the lodge 
of Boxgrove Park. 

The vehicle in which she sat was crawling up an 
ascent at a foot pace, when two men, whose appear- 
ance she did not like — though she could scarcely dis- 
tinguish them through the gloom — saddenly emerged 
from the side of the hedge, where they seemed to have 
been lurking, and addressed a few words in rather 
gruff tones to the driver. 

Involuntarily, the thought of the gipsies, by whom 
Hilary had been robbed, crossed her. These might 
be the very men — she knew the police suspected that 
they were still in the neighbourhood. The idea 
frightened her, for she had still a considerable sum of 
money about her, and she hastily concealed the notes 
about her person, leaving some ten or twelve sovereigns 
in her portemonnaie. 

Her alarm, however, seemed groundless. After a 
few words with the driver, which, owing to her trepi- 
dation, she could not catch, the two men went on at 
a quick pace, and were soon lost to view. 

Putting her head out of the window, she inquired 
of the coachman what they had said. 

"They asked if I came from the Gomshall Station," 
he replied; "and one on *em wanted me to give him 



HILARY ST. IVES. 1 1 7 

a Hfl as far as Blackthorn Common, but I refused, not 
much üking their looks." 

Tfais explanation did not altogether relieve Mrs. 
Sutton's uneasiness, but nothing more happened tili 
they got to the edge of the common, when the poor 
jade that had brought her thus far stumbled over some- 
thing on the road, and when he got on his legs again 
it was evident he could go no fiirther. 

Presently the coachman appeared at the window, 
and, touching his hat, said: 

"Sorry to teil you, ma'am, that you'll have to get 
out. My horse is dead lame. Accidents will happen, 
you knows, ma'am." 

"Yes, but this is extremely vexatious. You have 
brought a very bad horse, and I shan't employ you 
again." 

"The horse ain't a good un, I admit, ma'am. But 
it warn't exactly his fault. He feil over a great stone 
that seemed left in the road o' purpose." 

"Well, I suppose I must walk. Luckily, we're not 
ßiore than two miles from Hazlemere. Open the door, 
and let me out." 

"Shall I go with you across the common, ma'am?" 

"No," she replied in a decided tone, "I can take 
care of myself." 

She had got about half way across the common 
without .meeting with anything to alarm her, when 
faucying she heard footsteps, she turned her head, and, 
to her indescribable dismay, perceived the two men 
about a bowshot oflf, running fleetly and noiselessly 



Il8 HILARY ST. IVES. 

along the turf , with the evident design of overtaking 
her. 

On seeing them she instantly started ofF, though 
with very slight chance of escape. Terror, instead of 
lending her wings, as it is said to do, on fearful emer- 
gencies like the present, seemed to deprive her of all. 
strength. 

Her purstiers gained rapidly upon her, and called 
to her to stop, loudly and menacingly. 

Finding escape impracticable , and feeling, more- 
over, that she should speedily drop, she turned and 
faced them. 

By the time they came up, she had regained her 
breath, and something of her courage. 

"What do you want?'* she cried, in as hold a tone 
as she could assume. "But I needn't ask. Your de- 
sign is to roh me." 

"No, we means you no härm, missis," replied the 
foremost of the two, who was no other than Reuben. 
"We have been on the look out for you. We saw yoü 
go to the Station this morning, and managed to find 
out how you meant to return. We wants to have a 
Word with you, if you please, missis," he added, doff- 
ing his cap, and speaking as civilly as he could. 

"Say on then," rejoined Mrs. Suttton, who had 
now recovered her composure. 

"Cut it Short, Reuben," cried Seth Cooper, im- 

patiently. "Ciwility's well enough in its way, but we 

am't time for it just now. Come to the pint. Teil 



HILARY ST. IVES. IIQ 

Madam Sutton plainlj as 'ow we wants to make a bar- 
gain wi' her." 

^'What! you know my name?" she exclaimed. 

''Ay, and we knows summat more nor your name, 
missis/' rejoined Seth. 

''We also know how to hold our tongues, missis/' 
observed Reuben, more courteously. 

''If you know me, I am equally aware whom I 
have to deal with," said Mrs. Sutton. "You are the 
two men who robbed and maltreated Mr. Hilary St. 
Ives on Wootton Heath the other night." 

"Granted," replied Reuben. "We don*t deny the 
fact. We wos lucky enough to light on Mr. St. Ives 
t'other night. We wos lucky enough to get hold of 
his papers, and we now counts on selling 'em to ad- 
vantage." 

"Werry walerable they is to you, Madam Sutton, 
as you'll find," remarked Seth, significantly. "Secrets 
is safe wi' us. But you mightn't like to trast other 
folk wi' 'em. WeVe run great risks in stayin' here- 
abouts — wi' the perlice at our 'eels — chiefly on your 
account, and we must be compensated. Wot are we 
to get for the papers?" 

"Have you got them with you?" she demanded. 
"Ay," he rejoined. "We don't trust 'em out ov 
oar own keeping." 

"You shall have twelve sovereigns — ^all my purse 
contains," she replied. 

"That's very little," said Reuben. "Them docky- 
ments is worth hundreds to you, raissis." 



f 20 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"Twelve suvrinsl" cried Seth, scomfuliy. "We 
can't take it. Consider the risk we've run to sarve 
you, Madam Sutton. Be you sartin youVe got no 
more about you?" 

"A great chance that I have so much," she replied, 
now convinced that it was needless to offer more. 

The villains held a brief consultation together, 
during which Mrs. Sutton watched them anxiously. To 
her infinite relief and satisfaction she saw they meant 
to comply. 

Pulling out a large packet from bis pouch, Seth 
stepped towards her, holding it in bis band. 

"Here's the papers," he said; "not one on *em 
a-missin', I'U take my Bible oath on it." 

**And here*s my purse," she replied, giving it to 
bim. 

"Count the money, Reuben," cried Seth, handing 
the purse to bim. 

**A dozen suvrins, all right," said Reuben. 

"Then take the papers, missis," cried Seth, deliver- 
ing the packet to her, "and good luck go wi' 'em. 
You've got the best o' the bargain." 

"And now we'U wish you good night, Madam Sutton," 
said Reuben. "You'U hear no more of us. Long 
afore daybreak we shall be n^les away from Woot- 
ton." 

And they flew with the swiftness of hunted deer 
across the common. 

"Now, indeed, I feel secure," cried Mrs. Sutton, 
pressing the packet exultingly to her breast. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 121 

Half an hour afterwards she arrived at Hazlemere, 
pale and exhausted. Naturally, her first business was 
to lock up the precious packet, reserving its examina- 
tion for another season. 

After giving such orders as were necessary, she re- 
paired to Hilary's room, and was glad to find that still 
fnrther improvement had taken place in him since 
moming. He was in very good spirits, and looking 
forward with pleasurable anticipation to the morrow. , 

She sat with him for some little time, and then 
proceeded to the boudoir, where she had a long con- 
versation with her mistress. 

But she did not teil her why she went to Guild- 
ford, nor whom she had seen there. Neither did she 
explain what had subsequently befallen her. 



122 SOLARY ST. IVES. 



XIII. 
May's Birthday. 

Very pleasant to be nineteen, as many of my fair 
readers must have experienced. Especially pleasant to 
a lovely girl füll of health and spirit — no cloud on her 
past existence, and a bright future before her. 

She who could now count nineteen Springs arose 
betimes on that bright auspicious morn — for everything 
seemed to smile on her — and arraying herseif in white, 
descended to the housekeeper's room to bid her good 
morrow, before going out into the garden. 

A very nice Httle parlour indeed. TastefuUy 
furnished, and well provided with cupboards and 
store-closets. 

Mrs. Sutton was by herseif, busily occupied in pre- 
parations for the day, but she discontinued her task as 
May came in, and embracing her with more than her 
usual warmth, offered her every good wish proper to 
the occasion. 

Rarely was the housekeeper so demonstrative. 
Gazing fondly in May's fair face, and still holding her 
in her arms, she exclciimed, 

"How well you are looking on your birthday, dear. 
Ah!" she added, vainly trying to repress a sigh, "I 
wish I had a heart as light as yours. I once had — 
though not at nineteen. My morn of life was soon 



HILARY ST. IVESL I23 

overcast. All good angels guard you, dear! May 
you long continue as blithe and free from care as you 
are now!" 

May was sensibly moved by the housekeeper's evi- 
dent emotion, but Mrs. Sutton speedily recovered her 
usual serenity. 

"I have a little present for you, dear," she said. 
"It is of slight value, but I hope you will accept it as 
a token of your old nurse's affection. Wear this for 
my sake." 

And she gave her the emerald ring. 

Thanking her with efFusion, May told her, as she 
put the ring on her taper finger, that nothing could 
have pleased her better than the gift, adding that she 
would always wear it. 

"Always, dear?" 

"Always," replied May, earnestly. "And now, dear 
Sutton," she continued, taking a chair, "I have some* 
thing to say to you." 

First closing the door, the housekeeper sat down 
beside her, putting on a look calculated to invite con- 
fidence. 

She understood at once the nature of the commu- 
nication about to be made to her, when May men-. 
tioned — not without a blush — ^that Lady Richborough 
and Sir Charles Ilminster were Coming over to Hazle- 
mere in the course of the moming. 

"Merely to offer you compliments and good wishes, 
I presume?" observed Mrs. Sutton. 



J24 UILARY ST. rVES. 

r 

"Not exactly. I dare say they are quite Ignorant 
that it is my birthday." 

"Perhaps, then, Sir Charles may be Coming for 
an answer to a certain letter which he sent yesterday." 
And she added, with a smlle, '^A little bird has told 
me all about it, you see, dear." 

"That little bird teils you everything, Sutton." 

"Your mamma told me this, because she knows 
how much I am interested in all that concerns you, 
dear. Well, what is the answer to be? Have you 
made up your mind?'* 

"Not yet," replied May, shaking her head. "That 
is why I desire to consult you. I know you will give 
me good advice." 

"That I will, darling — the best in my power. The 
offer requires consideration." 

"Mamma declares it requires no consideration. I 
am not of her opinion." 

"Nor I. But I mean that such an offer ought not 
to be hastily rejected. Would you not like to be Lady 
Ilminster?" 

"A title does not dazzle me, Sutton." 

"But Sir Charles has many recommendations be- 
sides his high position. He is a perfect gentleman-^ 
distinguished in appearance and manner. I saw him 
yesterday, and thought so. What is your objection to 
him?'' she asked, regarding her fixedly. 

"I have really no objection to make to him — ex- 
cept that he does not interest me. Frankly, Sutton, I 
do not think I could ever love him." 



HILARY ST. IVE^ 125 

Much relieved by this avowal, but carefully dis- 
sembling her satisfaction, the housekeeper rejoined, 
"If such is your firm determination, dear, you will do 
well to decline Sir Charles's offer. Otherwise, you will 
run the risk of entailing unhappiness on yourself and 
on him. Mutual affection I hold to be an indispensable 
ingredient in married life." 

"You are right, Sutton," observed May, completely 
duped by her artful counsellor. "The risk in unner 
cessary, since I am perfectly happy as I am." 

"Well, I cannot but applaud your determination, 
though I own I am surprised at it. Rank has gener- 
ally an irresistible attraction to our sex. And now, 
since Sir Charles is disposed of , may I venture to say 
a Word in favour of some one eise — of one who pro- 
fesses to love you dearly?" 

"I guess what is Coming," cried May, smiling. 
"But proceed." 

"Your Cousin Oswald unbosomed himself to me 
as we drove to the Station, and told me what yon had 
Said to him. But I fancied on second thoughts you 
might change your mind. May I console the poor 
young gentleman? May I give him a hope?" 

May shook her head. 

"He had his final answer yesterday," she re- 
marked. 

"Then I am to understand that your heärt is quite 
disengaged? Look me in the face, and teil me so— 
if you can." 

"I can, Button. *My heart is my own,' as the 



;i26 HILARY ST. IVES. 

song says," cried May, fixing her clear truthful eyes 
upon her as she spoke. "Take this assurance also: I 
will never wed any man unless I love him." 

Mrs. Sutton smiled approval, and reflected for a 
moment. A favourable opportunity seemed to have 
occurred for bringing np Hilary St. Ives, and she de- 
termined not to let it slip. 

Somewhat changing her manner, she remarked, 
"Laugh, if you please, at what I am going to say to 
you , dear — laugh , but listen. While I was nursing the 
young gentleman who has been so strangely placed 
under my care, a singular idea occurred to me, and I 
have not been able to divest myself of it since. Pos- 
sibly his good looks — he is extremely good-looking, 
dear — may have prompted the notion. At any rate, 
it came into my head." 

Pleased to find her listener's curiosity excited, she 
went on, after a well-calculated pause: 

"Fate, I thought to myself, must have brought 
him here for a special purpose. What can the pur- 
pose be? The answer came immediately. He must 
be destined for May." 

Great was the young lady's surprise. Throwing 
herseif back in her chair, she laughed aloud. "For 
meT* she exclaimed. "Did you say for me, Sutton?" 

"For you, dear," replied the housekeeper,' in no 
way disconcerted. "Such w<is the idea that forced 
itself upon me. There is such a thing as destiny." 

"There may be," replied May, still laughing. "But 



' HILARY ST. IVES. 127 

mine is not mixed up with that of Mr. Hüaxy St. 

Ives." 

With affected gravity, thongh she could scarcely 
maintain a serious countenance, she then added, "Are 
you quite sure, Satton , that the whole affair is not a 
contrivance of your own to get this young man into 
the house? It looks very, very suspicious." 

**/ bring him here!" ejaculated the honsekeeper, 
petrified by the accusation. "What next? If there has 
been a plot, your papa and Mr. Oswald have been the 
Chief actors in it, and I don't think you will suspect 
ikemr 

"Neither do I suspect ^(?tt, you dear, kind, absurd 
creature. Don't you perceive I was only jesting? You 
deserve to be laughed at for your foUy. Mamma is 
just as silly. She raves about this young man's good 
looks. He seems to have turned both your foolish 
heads. But don't say a word more in bis praise I beg 
of you, or I shall positively dislike him, and I don't 
desire to do that. By-the-by, is he Coming down to 
breakfast?'' 

"I believe so. I have heard nothing to the con- 
trary. He wished to be called early, and Boston has 
gone np to his room some time ago." 

"That reminds me you will have to change his 
room to-day, since grandpapa is Coming." 

"Yes, I mean to give him the little bachelor's 
room, next to Mr. Oswald's. It looks upon the garden, 
and will suit him to a T. Perhaps you will assert next 



128 HILARY ST^ IVBS. 

that I have invited him to stay, in piarsoance of my 
deeply-laid scheme." 

**No, I won't, dear Smtton, for I am aware it was 
mamma who asked him. Foigive me for tea^it^g you. 
You must not be cross with your little pet on her 
birthday, Come with me to the garden." 

"Not just now," replied the housekeeper, rising, as 
if with the intention of resuming her work. "I've a 
great deal to do." 

"Nay, you shall come, or I shall think you really 
angry. I'll gather you the prettiest nosegay possible 
in retum for the ring." 

Mrs. Sutton yielded. Indeed, she required very 
little persuasion. So they went into the garden to- 
gether. 

The gardens and grounds at Hazlemere were toler- 
ably large — large enough, at all events, to require the 
attention of three or four gardeners besides extra, 
hands. Laid out in the landscape style by a disciple 
of Payne Eaiight, they were extremely well kept, for 
Mr. Radcliffe spared no expense upon his place. He 
had plenty of "glass," and his head-gardener, Kennetln 
M*Donald, a Scotsman, as his name imported, had 
won no end of prizes for grapes and pineapples. Ma^- 
nificent were the show peaches and nectarines — supert> 
the strawberries grown by Kenneth M'Dondd, gardeaer 
to Theobald RadcKIFe, Esq., of Hazlemere. Our busi-. 
fiess, höwever, is not with the produce of the gardens 
but with the gardens tbemselves, of which we mnsi 
attempt to give the reader some slight notion. 



HILARY ST. IVES, l^Z^ 

A broad terrace, or rather platform , ' artificially 
raised several feet above the lawn, extended in front 
of the house, and led on past arabesque parterres, 
embroidered with box, «md filled with flowers and 
dwarf flowering shrubs, towards an inclosure latticed 
with wire, and appropriated to gold and silver phea- 
sants and ring-doves. Further on were the green- 
honse and hoithouses. A splendid wistaria, a couple 
of fine magnolias — one of which, a **consptcua,'* was 
in füll flower- — with roses and jasmines, covered the 
walls near the terrace. 

A flight of stone steps led down to smother broad 
gravel walk which followed the course of the terrace, 
and open^d upon the smooth-shaven lawn , or rather 
series of lawns. Near the house the ground was level, 
but fiirther on it sloped gently down to a small but 
well-timbered park, from which it was only divided by 
iron hurdles. The lawns were interspersed with 
scattered trees, clumps of rhododendrons , which grew 
to great size, and other early flowering shrubs, with 
countless beds of roses. Pleasant walks led to pleasant 
Spots, disdosing fresh beauties at every tum — a 
summer-house half hidden in a bosquet — a rustic 
bench beneath a spreading tree. Nothing was neg- 
lected. A large green patch of smoothest turf, flat 
as a billiard-table, served the double purpose of a 
bowHng-green and a ground for croquet. A long 
shady walk brought you to the coppices skirting the* 
pairk. Another walk led thro^h the intricacies of a 
thicket to a seq^iestered glen, abounding m Yi^ä^^^ 



(IJO HXLART ST. IVBS. 

fernSf and alpine plants, and where an abtindant spring, 
gushing forth amid the rocks, immediatdiy formed a 
rivulet At the end of the ravine was the miniature 
lake, whence Mr. Radcliffe's residence derived its 
name. 

Retuming from this sequestered glen to the sun- 
shiny tenace from which we have strayed, we shall 
find, on Casting our eyes around, that it commands a 
diversified country, wild and heathy in parts, but 
generally well cnltivated, covered for the most part 
with timber, and embellished by many a stately man- 
sion. On the left the prospect is bounded by the 
North Downs — on the right by a lower ränge of chalk 
hills. 

But let US confine ourselves to Hazlemere. We 
need not search elsewhere for beauty. It lies before 
US. Gardens and pleasure grounds aHke are charming, 
and could not be seen in greater perfection than on 
this enchanting May moming, when the smooth lawns 
are flooded with sunshine, when the air is filled with 
the perfume of flowers, and the groves aire vocal with 
melody. The blackbird and the speckled thrush ven- 
ture near us, plainly manifesting by their tameness how 
kindly treated they are by the fair young mistress of 
Hazlemere, whese natal day we celebrate. Poets — the 
greatest of poets — have sung tiie delights of May Day 
morn; but Milton himself never hymned a May mom 
more exquisite. 

On issuing forth upon the terrace, May and her 
companion stood still to inhale the balmy odours 



HILARY ST. IVES. 331 

arising from the flower-beds^ and listen to the choristers 
in the groves. Both were enraptured by the beauty 
of the day. May feit joyous as the mom itself;* and 
even Mrs. Sütton, exhilarated by the genial influences^ 
was able for the moment to cast off her cares. 

"Look, Sutton, here come my pretty pets to bid 
me good morrow/' cried May, as a pair of blackbirds 
ran along the lawn as if to greet her. 

Other birds foUowed, and after properly rewarding 
the attentions of her feathered favourites, May pro- 
ceeded to gather the promised nosegay for the house- 
keeper. They then descended to the lawn, and took 
their way towards some distant parterres, wh^e 
McDonald and another gardener were engaged in 
filling a basket with flowers for the decoration of the 
breakfast-table. The lovdy queen of the fSte was 
attended in her march across the velvet turf by her 
faithful blackbirds and thrushes. M'Donald, a good- 
looking man with a fiery-red beard, took off his cap as 
she approached, and in his racy Doric, and with a 
heartiness that bespoke sincerity, offered her his best 
wishes on the occasioii. The basket being nearly fuU, 
he asked if he should take it to the house. Mrs. Sutton 
bade him do so, giving him at the same time some 
directions as to the arrangement of the flowers. She 
also reminded him that he and the under-gardener 
were expected at dinner in the servants' hall, where 
they would have an opportunity of drinking the health 
of their young mistress. 

Just as the gardener was departing, May iiic\uired 

9* 



Ij^ HILARY St. tVES. 

if he had Seen her cousin, and M*Donald rejoined that 
Mr. Oswald had been there not ten minutes ago, but 
had gone down towards the lake to smoke a cigar, and 
giwe Neptune a swim. 

McDonald and his man then took the basket and 
proceeded towards the house, while May and the 
housekeeper walked on in the opposite direction. 

They were chatting togeth» near a rose-bed, when 
May chanced to turn her head, and perceived M*Donald 
Coming back. He was supporting a tall young man, 
who walked rather feebly, and who certainly could not 
have got so far without the aid of the gardener's strong 
arm. 

In this young man she had no difficulty in re- 
cognising Hilary St. Ives. 



\ 



HILARY ST. rVES» fJJ 



XIV. 

Hilary's Story. 

HiLARY, it appeared, had seen them from his cham« 
ber window, which commanded the terrace and lawn, 
and unable to resist the Impulse that prompted him to 
join them, hastily completed his tollet, and made his 
way to the garden. When he gained the terrace they 
were göne, but perceiving them at a distance,. he was 
{noving slovi^ly in that direction, when McDonald came 
up, and noting his debility, at once offered him his 
arm. Naturally, the gardener was aware of the circum- 
stances under which Hilary had been brought to the 
honse, and as they walked along he expressed his 
satisfaction at the young man's recovery. He also 
thought it right to communicate the fact that it was 
Miss May 's birthday, adding, "She is the bonniest 
young leddy in all England, and as gude and kind- 
hairted as she is bonnie." 

"Why, I declare, there is Mr. St. Ives," cried May, 
on seeing him. 

"Yes, 'tis he, sure enough,'' rejoined the house- 
keeper. And though secretly pleased, she added, 
"How very foolish of him to venture forth in this 
way. I must scold him. He quite miscalculates his 
strength." 

"Yes, he seems veiy feeble. Go to him, Sutton»" 



IJ4 HELARY ST. IVES. 

The housekeeper immediately hurried forward, while 
May foUowed more Idsurely. 

As Mrs. Sutton came up, M'Donald feit that his 
Services were no longer needed, and, touching his cap, 
he retired. 

The housekeeper blamed her patient for Coming 
out without her permission, but her looks belied her 
words, and showed she was not much displeased. 

"I merely wished to pay my respects to Miss Rad- 
cliflFe," observed Hilary, in a deprecatory tone. "May 
I beg you to present me to her?" 

Mrs. Sutton smiled graciously, and, giving him h^ 
arm, led him towards the young lady, who had stopped 
at a Short distance from them. 

As they slowly advanced, May had an opportunity 
of scrutinising Üie young man's appearance, and she 
mentally admitted that her mother's and Mrs. Sutton's 
praises of his good looks were not undeserved. He 
was still very pale, and evidently suifering from the 
effects of the injuries he had received» but this ex- 
pression was calculated to excite sympathy. 

On his part, Hilary experienced sensations hitherto 
unknown to him. Dazzled by May's beauty, he scarcely 
dared to raise his eyes towards her, and trembled at 
the thought of entering into her presence. His emotion 
became so great that he was obliged to halt for a vao^ 
ment, and May, attributing the pause to increased de- 
bility, stepped quickly forward*, and in a few kind and 
sympathetic words expressed her concern. 

Her accents vibrated through Hilary's frame, and 



\ 



HILARY ST* rVES« I35 

made the blood rush to bis heart, tending tö heighten 
bis confiision ; but her gentle looks soon reassured bim. 
Thanking ber for tbe interest she displayed in bis con- 
dition, be assured ber be was better, and forced a 
smile to corroborate bis words. Mrs, Sutton, wbo 
watched tbem botb narrowly, tben introduced bim. to 
tbe young lady, and tbe ice being now fairly broken, 
he qai(^y recovered bis self-possession , and was able 
to converse in a manner tbat left tbe anxious bouse- 
keeper no doubt as to tbe impression be was likely to 
prodnce. Decidedly May was pleased with bis manner. 
Nor did tbe interest with which be had at first inspired 
her at all decrease on furtber acquaintance with bim. 
Tbe few words in which be besought ber to accept bis 
best wisbes were appropriate and earnest, and he was 
lavish in bis expressions of gratitude for tbe extra- 
ordinary kindness and consideration sbown bim since 
his arrival at Hazlemere. 

After stating tbat tbe misadventore tbat had occurred 
to bim, combined with the loss of his papers, had up^ 
set all bis plans, he added, with some little gallantry, 
that he could not regret it. At Mrs. Sutton's Suggestion 
they proceeded to a rustic bench beneath a tree, where 
they all sat down, and tbe discourse continued. £n- 
cooraged by bis manner, May ventured to ask bim a 
few questions about himself , to which he replied with 
great firankness. 

'*I am afraid I shall sihk very much in your esteem, 
Miss Radcliffe, when you leam my bistory," he said; 
"but it is only proper you should be made acquainted 



I 



136 HILARY ST. IVES. 

with it. Do not be staortldd if I ani oblfged to coofess 
that I do not know my origin, I am not even certam 
that the nJame I bear is my rightfiü one. A mysterj 
hangs over my birth, wbich I had hoped to uniavel, 
but which may now be never cleared up since those 
papers are gone. With them I fear I have lost all 
chaiice of penetrating the secret." 

"Since the papers were in your own possession, 
what prevented you from referring to them, and ascer- 
taining the secret?" inquired May. 

"The packet was entrusted to me on the express 
condition that it should not be opened, except in the 
presence of a person whom I was to meet at a certain 
place and at a certain hour in London. With his per- 
mission — -and his permission only — were the seals to 
be brokeii. The packet is irrecoverably lost, and the 
time of meeting häs long since past." 

"And you faithfully observed your engagement?" 
remarked'May. "Had I been in your place, I do not 
think I could have resisted the temptation to open the 
packet. What say you, Sutton?" 

"I think Mr. St. Ives deserves great credit for his 
forbearance," rejoined the housekeeper. "Few per- 
sons wiiuld have acted so welL" 

"Havmg given my promise, I could not violate it," 
Said Hilary. 

"But you know the name of the person whom you 
were to meet in London, aiid though you failed in the 
appointment, owing to unforeseen circumstances, you 
can Still find him?" observed May. 



I 



l 



HILARY ST, IVES. tj; 

'^I amienürelj unacquainted with his name or ad- 
dress/' replied Hilary. "The per&ön was carefuUy de- 
scribed to me. , The place of rendezvous was St. James's 
Park. Had I met him and satisfied him, I have reason 
to believe that a new career would have been opened 
to me, which might have led eventually to fortune. At 
any rate," he added, in a sombre tone, "I should have 
learnt who I am." 

After a moment's pause he continued: 
"I fear yöu will despise me, Miss Radcliffe, after 
the disclosure I have just made to you, but I could 
not allow you to remain in ignorance of my exact Po- 
sition, and I beg yoUi'wiil explain it to Mrs. Radcliffe 
and your father. Say that I am a mere nameless ad- 
venturer — I am really nothing more — whom chance has 
brought beneath their roof , and that I am prepared to 
quit it at once, should they desire me to do so, füll of 
gratitude for tibeir kindness. My history may be summed 
up in a few words. Its details would have little interest 
for you. That I have been abandoned by my parents 
is certain — from what causes I can only cönjecture." 

Mrs. Sutton, who had become deathly pale during 
his recital, averted her gaze as he looked at her. 

"I know nothing but what has been told me. Those 
who had Charge of me stated that my mother was 
dead, but that my father was living and in India. 
However, I should never be allowed to see him or 
learai his name. In other words, I was given plainly 
to understand that he would never acknowledge me." 
"But you were not utterly abandoned?" cried May, 



138 HILARY ST. IVES. 

in a compassionate tone. ^^I will not think so badly 
of human nature as to suppose so.'' 

**No. In some respects I have had no reason to 
complain. Money was regularly sent for my mainten- 
ance and education, and the amount was increased, as 
occasion required. Mr. and Mrs. Courtenay, the persons 
with whom I was placed, dwelt in Exeter, near the 
South Gate. They were perfectly faithful to their tnist. 
At no time, however closely questioned, would they 
reveal by whom the allowance was made. Perhaps 
they were kept in ignorance themselves. 

"The Courtenays were very respectable people, not 
in a very exalted Station in society, but tolerably wdl 
to do, and strictly honest. They had no family, and 
treated me with almost parental afifection. Indeed, in 
my earlier years I looked upon myself as their son. I 
was educated at a public school in the city. Mr. 
Courtenay, who had my welfare at heart, wished me to 
take a Situation, which he would readily have procured 
me. But business did not suit me. By this time I 
had become acquainted with my position. Believing 
myself to be a gentleman bom, I determined to do 
nothing inconsistent with the character of a gentleman. 
I have since seen the absurdity of my notions, and 
regret that I did not follow Mr. Courtenay's ad\dce. 
But I was then a hot-headed boy. I became restless 
and dissatisfied, and, not knowing what to do with me, 
Mr. Courtenay supplied me with funds to go abroad; 
S^ad, I make no doubt, to get rid of me, for with my 



} 



HILARY ST. IVES* 13g 

foolish fancies and pretensions, I must have been a sad 
tronble to him. 

"I spent three years in various parts of France — 
chiefly at Toulouse, Tarascon, and other towns near 
the Pyrenees, where I could live cheaply. I ought to 
have mentioned that I was always fond of drawing, 
and have some little talent in that line, which I now 
began to cultivate assiduously. I turned artist. My 
Sketches of picturesque scenes among the Pyrenees, 
with groups of peasantry, were sufficiently admired 
to seil. 

**I next proceeded to Paris, intending to establish 
myself there as a professional artist, and I might have 
succeeded in my design, for I had no lack of encourage- 
ment, if my unlucky pride had not stood in my way. 
I could not stoop to certain things that are indispens- 

* able to success. 

I "Quitting Paris in disgust — disgusted with myself 

♦ I ought to say — ^I went to the Channel Islands, where 

(I lingered for some months pursuing my avocations, 
and then returned to England. Resting at Southampton 
for a couple of weeks, I crossed over to Ringwood, 
and occupied myself in sketching the romantic scenery 
in the neighbourhood of that town. 

"During this time I had communicated with Mr« 
Courtenay, and he came over to Ringwood to see me, 
bringing with him the all-important packet of which I 
have been unluckily deprived. He gave me the in- 
structions which I have recapitulated to you, and I at 
last promised myself a Solution of the mystety Ibai baa 



I40 HILARY ST. IVES* 

hitherto hang over my birth. Yoa know how I have 
been disappointed. However, let that pauäs. I must 
finish my tale. 

^'Bßing a good pedestrian, I detennined to proceed 
to London on foot. To accomplish this without 
hindrance, I consigned my luggage and portfoHos to 
Mr. Courtenay. I allowed myself three days for the 
walk. On the fourth day I undertook to be in St. 
James's Park at the hour appointed, You know the 
rest." 

May had listened to his narration with an interest 
which she did not care to dissemble. A slight melan- 
choly in the tone of his voice iouched her feelings, 
while the romantic cast of his countenance banoonised 
with the account he gave of himself. She seenxed |o 
understand him better now she knew he was an artist. 

"My pride would not allow me to make this con- 
fession to your mother," he said; "and I therefore 
retumed somewhat evasive answers to her queätions, 
But to jfouy Miss Radcliife, I would not appear other 
than I am — a poor nameless artist.'' 

"What better can you be than an artist?" she 
cried, with an enthusiasm that channed him. "And 
you will soon win a name. Do not relinquish your 



career." 



"I will not since you enjoin me to pursue it." 

"I have no right to give you any adviee," she said, 

blushing deeply, and feeling she häd gone too far; 

"but if you possess the genius for which I give you 

credit, you ought not to be diverted by any consideration 



HILAR7 ST. IVES. I4I 

irom the path whicb is piainly pointed out to yoa, and 
which maj lead to renown. Hereafter, the misfortane 
that has just occurred to you will appear as noithing.'' 

*^I have akeady said that I do not regaacd the oc- 
currence as a misfortune. How can I feel otherwise 
than elated by tiie enconragement you deign to give 
me. If I rise in xny profession to the height you have 
assigned me, I shall date my success from this day." 

The words were uttered with so much fervour, and 
accompanied by a look expressing such profound 
homage, that May almost involuntarily cast down her 
eyes. 

Mrs. Sutton, who had listened to what had passed^ 
with deep but r^ressed emotion, now deemed it neces- 
saiy to interp>ose, and afiter a few remarks upon the 
singularity of Hilary's story, said, 

**Excuse the liberty I am about to take in putting 
a question, but I observe that you wear a signet ring 
with a coat of arms engraved on it. Whose are the 
amis?" 

"I cannot teil you. The ring was given me the 
other day by Mr. Courtenay, but without any explana« 
tion. He charged me to show it to the gentleman who 
was to meet me in St. James's Park, in proof of my 
identity." 

May uttered an exclamation of surprise, and asked 
to look at the ring. He took it off to show it her. 

She had just retumed it to him, äfter a mioment's 
ezammation of the armorial bearings, when Boston, 
the valet, was seen advancing towards them. He was 



142 HILARY ST. ITES. 

the bearer of some letters» three or fonr of which he 
delivered to Maj, and then to Hilary's great surprise, 
handed one to him. 

''For me! " ezclaimed the yomig man. ''Impossible! 
who can know that I am here?" 

Boston smiled. He could o£fer no explanation. It 
was a r^;istered letter, and with it was a smaU slip of 
paper, which Hilaiy signed with a pendl, and the valet 
departed. 

The yoong man gazed in astonishment at the letter. 
It was unquestionably addressed to himself , in bokl 
masculine characters — Hilary St Ives, Esq. — ^with Theo- 
bald Radcliffe, Esq., Hazl^nere Hoose, Wootton, Snirej. 
His astonishment, however, was increased in a tenfold 
degree, when, after bowing to May, he open^ the 
letter, and perceived its contents. 

''Bank notes!" 'he ejaculated, scarcely able to credit 
his senses. ''Bank notes to the amount of five hundred 
pounds! I must surely be dreaming." 

"No, I will answer for it you are awake," cried 
May, who was almost equaüy surprised. "I can see 
the bank notes plainly myself." 

Mrs. Sutton, who had risen from her seat, under 
the pretence of gathering a flower, now retumed, feign» 
ing quite as much astonishment as the others. 

"This letter may afford some explanation," cried 
Hilary. 

And he read aloud as follows: 

"The friend who watches over you has heard of 
the disaster that has befallen you. Do not be down- 



aiLART ST. IVS6. I43 

cast. All will be well. The enclosed remittance of 
five hundred pounds is made that you may not be in- 
convenienced in regard to money. You shall have 
more» should you require it. You will hear again from 
me before long. Meantime, a supply of wearing apparel 
and other necessaries will be sent you." 

"Have you ever heard from the writer of that letter 
before?" asked Mrs. Sutton, in the most natmal manner 
imaginable. 

"Never," he replied. "I do not know the hand«- 
writing. It is certainly not Mr. Courtenay's." 

"You are not neglected, you see," cried May. 
"What an extraordinary drcumstancel" 

"•Eztraordinary indeedl" echoed Hilary. "But by 
no means disagreeable. I never had so much money 
before." 

They were still talking the matter over when Boston 
reappearedy and informed Hilary that a large ehest had 
just arrived for him. 

"Another wonder!" he exclaimed. 

"Of cx>urse it contains the wearing apparel and 
oth^ things mentioned in the letter/' observed May. 

"No doubt," observed Mrs. Sutton. "Let the ehest 
be taken to the room next to Mr. Oswald's/' she added 
to Boston. 

And the valet again departed. 



144 fflLARY ST. IVBS» 



XV. 

The Sketch. 

S£CR£TLY delighted with the success of her scheine, 
and equally ^ell pleased with the favourable. Impression 
whicb shc saw Hilary had produced on her young lady, 
Mrs. Suttön declared she could not remain out a moment 
longer, as she had a great deal to do. On this hint 
May immediately rose to accompany her, and Hilary 
rose likewise, having first secured his letter with its 
valuable contents. The housekeeper was just about to 
ofFer him her arm when they were arrested by the 
cheery voice of Oswald, who was hastening towards 
them, and came up the next moaxient. He was attended 
by Neptune, the water-spaniel, whose dripping coat 
showed he had been in the lake. Mrs. Sutton availed 
herseif of this opportunity to escape, and with a glance 
at May hurried towards the house. Neptune bounded 
towards his young mistress, and barked joyously as if 
ofFering her a greeting. A. slight fee ng of jealousy 
was awakened in Oswald 's bosom when he.perceived 
Hilary. However, he nodded gopd naturally to him, 
but addressed himself in the first instance to May, as 
in duty bound. 

"Good morrow, fair coz," he cried. "If I were a 
poet I would have prepared a sonnet for the occasion, 



HILARY ST. IVES; I45 

but as I häve no talent in that line, you iriust accept 
my good wishes clothed in the plainest prose." 

May thanked him^ but told him she had expected 
to find him. in the garden when she first came out. 

"Do not suppose I have missed you," she added. 
**I have been very much interested by some details 
which Mr. St. Ives has been giving me of his history. 
Are you aware he is an artist?" 

"An artist!" cried Oswald, looking at the young 
man with an undefinable expression. "Pfrhaps I ought 
to have guessed it, but I really did not- — an artist, 
eh?" 

"Yes, an artist, though not a very distinguished 
one," replied Hilary, bowing. 

**You know how fond I am of drawing, Oswald," 
cried May. "Mr. Stc:Ives must give me a few lessons." 

The young man säid he should be charmed to dö 
60. "But I suspect you have very little to learn from 
me, Miss Radcliffe," he added. 

"By Jove, you are right," cried Oswald, laughing. 
"My Cousin May draws wonderfully, and has qoite a 
tum for caricature. She made a sketch of me and 
Neptune t'other day, that is worthy of a place in Punch. 
I have it with fne, and will show it you." 

"I foT /id you!" cried May. 

But at an imploring look from Hilary she relented, 
and the sketch was produced. 

Very clever and very droU. Oswald was certainly 
caricatured, but the likeness was unmistakable. Neptune 
was admirably drawn. 



146 HILARY ST. IVES, 

"What do you think of it?" said Oswald. "Clever, 
eh?" 

"Capital!" exclaimed Hilary. "You do not require 
any Instructions from me, Miss Radcliflfe. I despair 
of rivalling this sketch, but I will attempt to make a 
companion to it, if you will give me two or three 
minutes." 

May graciously assented, curious to test his skill. 

"Ah, I forgot," he exclaimed, with a look of dis- 
appointment, "I have no materials with me." 

"They are easily procured," said May. "I won't 
let you ofF. Fly, Oswald. My sketch-book is in the 
drawing-room. Bring a pencil with you." 

A Word from his fair cousin was a command for 
Oswald. He ran swiftly towards the house, and was 
back again almost immediately, bringing with him the 
things he had been sent for. 

"Now, then, let us see what you can do," he cried, 
as he gave them to Hilary. "Ten to one you don't 
equal May's Performance." 

"I should lose the wager if I took it," replied 
Hilary. "I won't tax your patience too severely, Miss 
RadclifFe," he added. "You can't be better placed 
than you are." 

"Pray introduce Neptune." 

"And yoiu* humble servant," added Oswald. 

Seating himself upon the bench, Hilary opened the 
sketch-book, and finding a blank page, at once set to 
work, with a rapidity and freedom of touch that augured 
well for the successful execution of his task. Conscious 



HILARY ST. IVES. 147 

of his own power he had no misgiving. With the 
quick eye of a tnie and practised artist, he seized upon 
all May's charms of feature and person, and transferred 
them with almost Photographie accuracy, and yet with 
a grace that no photograph can reach, to the sheet of 
paper before him. May's colour rose as she feit his 
keen dark eye fixed upon her, but she did ^ot alter 
her Position. Couched at her feet, Neptune remained 
quiet, though looking up at her face. 

In an inconcdvably short space of time Hilary had 
completed his task. A masterly sketch. May was re- 
produced to the life, in all her grace and beauty. She 
blushed with pleasure as the sketch was submitted to 
her. 

"I have not done you justice, but that is impos- 
sible," observed Hilary. 

"You have flattered me very much," rejoined May. 

"No such thing," cried Oswald. "The sketch is 
wonderfully like. Ton my soul, you are a devilish 
clever artist, St. Ives, that I must say. But I bargained 
for a place, and you have left me out altogether. Too 
bad." 

"I will take you some other time," rejoined Hilary, 
smiling. 

"You think I should have spoiled the sketch, eh?" 

"I did not say so, or mean so. You will see that 
I have dated the sketch, Miss RadclifFe. May I ven- 
ture to beg your acceptance of it as a trifling memorial 
of the day." 

Graciously accepted. 

10* 



148 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"I must show the sketch to mamma," cried May. 
"It will enchant her. I am going to her room. Have 
I permission to relate your history to her? She will 
be ßo much interested by it." 

"You will oblige me by doing so," replied Hilary. 

And she tripped off towards the house, followed by 
Neptune. 

Certain it is that Oswald had already become jealous 
of the handsome young stranger, who had somehow 
contrived to. interest his fair cousin; but he was very 
good-hearted, and tried to keep down the feelings of 
dislike and distrust which he feit rising in his breast. 
After all, he thought, the young chap is only an artist. 
So as soon as May was gone he put on rather a 
patronising manner, and said, 

"That sketch of Miss Radcliffe is capital. I must 
have a copy of it — hang the price." 

"I shall be very happy to copy the sketch for you. 
But I cannot accept payment," replied Hilary, rather 
haughtily. 

"Too proud, eh?" 

"No, not too proud," rejoined the other. • "But I 
am under great obligations to you, and shall be de- 
lighted to make any little return in my power." 

"I teil you what it is, my dear fellow," cried Os- 
wald, who, though very good-natured, was apt to com- 
mit Wunders. "I think I can find you a good job." 

"I do not require a job," rejoined the other, coldly. 

"Hear what it is, before you decline it. There's a 
devilisb handsome woman Coming here this moming— 



HILARY ST. IVES. 149 

Lady Richborough. Perhaps you may have heard of 
her, or seen her?" 

Hilary shook bis head. 

"Well, she's a stunner — handsome enough to take 
away your breath. Hasn't she a seat on horseback? — 
Miss Reynolds is nothing to her. Can't she handle a 
cue?, I rather think so. I played with her at billiards 
yesterday. Every attitude was a study. I couldn't 
strike a ball, and got knocked to pieces in no time. I 
think I could get her to sit to you — or you might 
Sketch her ofF-hand, as you took my cousin May just 



now." 



"Anything you wish. Command me." 

"Thanks. I know you'U be Struck of a heap when 
you see her ladyship. Her brother, Sir Charles 
Ilminster, wouldn't make a bad portrait, and I dare 
say he'd sit, if I asked him. I will, if you like. They 
were both talking about you yesterday — wondering 
who you were; but I couldn't teil them you are an 
artist, for I didn't know it myself then." 

"Don't fancy for a moment that I am ashamed of 
my profession. But I don't care to obtrude it." 

"Exactly. I understand. No man need be ashamed 
of his profession — whatever it may be — provided it's 
respectable. Perhaps Sir Charles may invite you to 
Bojfgrove. If he does, go. Picturesque old place. 
Just suit you. Lots of artists go to see it. Maclise 
and Calderon went to see it a few weeks ago. Nash 
has it in his *Mansions of the Olden Time/ All in 
perfect preservation. Magnificent banquet hall^ witb 



150 HILARY ST, IVES. 

great carved oak screen, gallery, möulded ceiling and 
pendants. Grand old oak staircase. Long corridors 
filled with old family portraits — dames and knights. 
Not one of the former beauties half so lovely as Lady 
Richborough, though. And for that matter, Sir Charles 
is better looking than any of his ancestors. What with 
portraits, carved chimney-pieces , tapestried Chambers, 
and antiquated furniture, you'U find a great deal to 
your taste at Boxgrove, I can promise you." 

"From what you say I make no doubt I should," 
replied Hilary. "You give me an excellent idea of 
the old place, and your description of Lady Rich- 
borough is quite captivating." 

"Does no justice to the original, as you'U admit 
when you see her. She's a beauty — and no mistake. 
But come! we must be moving towards the house. 
The gong will soon sound for breakfast. I think my 
aunt will make her appearance. A very charming 
person — but I forget you've seen her." 

"I have," replied Hilary, "and I quite agree with 
you. She ü charming." 

"Thinks herseif still twenty-five — that's her only 
fault," replied Oswald, laughing. "Apropos of pic- 
tiu-es! you'U see her portrait, by Grant, in the dining- 
room. Land it to the skies, and you'U win her heart." 

With this he ofFered his arm, and they walked at a 
very leisurely pace to the house. 

Just as they reached the terrace, Mr. Radcliffe came 
forthr withput his hat, looking very cheerful and hearty* 



HILARY ST. IVES. 151 

Shaking hands cordially with Hilary, he congratulated 
him upon his recovery. 

"He's curious to know who and what you are," 
whispered Oswald. "Shall I enlighten him as to the 
artistic profession?" 

"By all means," replied the young man. 

Oswald then imparted all he knew to his uncle, 
who did not seem surprised to leam that Hilary was 
an artist. 

"Glad to hear it," he cried. "You could have no 
better reconmiendation to me. A man of talent is al- 
ways welcome at Hazlemere." 

More might have been said, but the gong squnded, 
and they went in to breakfast. 



.V 



152 mLAHY ST. IVES. 



XVI. 

Breakfast. 

The dining-room, in which breakfast was served, 
was large and well-proportioned, being designed for 
hospitality on a grand scale; but Mr. Radcliflfe, owing 
to bis wife's delicate health, only gave small dinners, 
never exceeding ten or twelve, With its round table, 
massive sideboard, thick Turkey carpet, folding screens, 
portraits and pictures, the room had a very comfort- 
able air, French Windows opened upon the terrace, 
and a side window looked out upon the parterres and 
walls covered with magnolias, which we have pre- 
viously described. Over the chimney-piece hung a 
fuU-length portrait of the lady of the house, with her 
then infantine daughter — the work of an eminent 
artist, since elevated to the chair of the Royal Academy. 
Other noticeable pictures graced the walls, the chief 
among them being a pony and a Scotch terrier of the 
Dandie Dinmont breed, by Sir Edwin, a marine piece 
by Stanfield, and the high altar in the church of the 
Holy Apostles at Rome, by Roberts. 

Such was the ordinary appearance of the room; 
but this being an extraordinary occasion, it had quite 
a floral aspect, befitting the day. Flowers everywhere 
— on the chimney-piece, and on the comers of the 
sideboard. Choice plants from the greenhouse and 



HILARY ST. IVES. I53 

conservatory were placed on temporary Stands. A 
beantifully arranged flower vase occupied the centre of 
the table; and the initials of the young May Queen, 
traced with great skill on the snow-white cover in 
flowers of various hues, produced a charming effect. 
The atmosphere was warm and odorous, Mrs. Rad- 
cKfFe having ordered a fire, and enjoined that no 
Window should be left open. 

May and her mother were in the room when the 
gentlemen entered. For a wonder Mrs. Radcliflfe had 
come down thus early, more, we think, from the 
desire to please Hilary, than frpm regard for her 
lovely daughter. May was occupied at the breakfast 
table , at which she alwäys officiated. Her mother 
was Standing by the fire, looking slight, delicate, grace- 
ful, carefully got up with an eye to effect, and holding 
an embroidered kerchief in her band. Hilary's quick 
eye took in at a glance the decorations of the room, 
the persons within it, and the pictures. Oswald set 
up a shout, and fairly clapped bis hands. Having first 
tenderly embraced bis daughter and given her bis 
blessing, the old gentleman began to look around, and 
expressed his satisfaction at the arrangements , though 
he secretly wished he could let a breath of air into the 
room. 

Meanwhile, Hilary had advanced to Mrs. Radcliffe, 
by whom he was very graciously received, though she 
rallied him on his want of candour towards her on 
their first meeting. 

"Why did you not teil me you are a painter, Mr* 



154 HILARY ST. IVES. 

St. Ives? What need of concealment? Artists are 
my delight. I am proud to number Sir Edwin and 
several others of note among my friends." 

Hilary excused himself as he best could, adding 
that he was not worthy to be classed with the dis- 
tinguished painters she had mentioned, being merely 
a tyro. 

"Do not disparage yourself," said the lady, with 
one of her most captivating smiles. "Your sketch of 
my daughter proves you have consummate skill. I 
must put your power to a severer test." 

"I shall never dare to try my feeble band, after 
seeing the matchless Performance," he replied, glanc- 
ing at the portrait. "You have been fortunate in 
finding a painter capable of appreciating you and 
doing you justice. Ah! if I could ever hope to rival 
that." 

"Why should you not?" 

"Because it is perfection, and unapproachable. Its 
beauty drives me to despair." 

"You have one requisite for success in your pro- 
fession," remarked Mrs. RadclifFe, smiling. "You can 
flatter gracefuUy." 

"You should see Sir William Newton's miniature 
of my aunt," interposed Oswald. "That's something 
like a portrait. It's an out-and-out better likeness than 
this." 

"That I must take leave to deny, though I have 
not Seen it," replied Hilary. "A miniature may be 
ßxqiüsite, but it will not bear a moment's comparison 



HILARY ST* IVES. 155 

with a finisheci oil-painting such as we have be^ 
fore US." 

"I can take no part in this discussion as to the 
relative merits of the pictures," observed Mrs. Rad- 
clifFe, smiling. "But I am rather partial to the minia- 
ture, I must own." 

**It is considered Sir William's chef-d'oeuvre, and 
by very good judges," remarked Mr. Radcliffe. 

"I must defer to the general opinion," said Hilary. 
"But " 

**You maintain your own," observed Mrs. Rad- 
cliffe. "Well, you shall see the miniature by-and-by, 
and then you can fairly decide." 

"Meantime, I must beg you to bestow a glance on 
my pony and dog," cried May, joining the group near 
the fire-place. "Are they not charmingly painted?*' 

As may be supposed, Hilary was enchanted with 
the picture, which was really admirable, and was still 
extoUing it, when Mr. Luff, the butler, who was almost 
as portly as bis master, and about the same age, wad- 
dled into the room, followed by Boston, bearing a 
chased silver cofFee-pot, which emitted a grateful odour, 
cutlets, broiled salmon-trout, and all the et ceteras re- 
quisite for^a good breakfast. 

Hereupon, the whole party sat down at table. 
Hilary was assigned a seat between the two ladies, and 
feeling now quite at ease, since füll explanation had 
been given, he conversed naturally and agreeably. 
There was certainly a fascination in his manner, which 
both mother and daughter experienced in an almost 



156 HILARY ST. IVES. 

equal degree. Even Mr. Radcliflfe was delighted with 
him. Oswald had a keen appetite that morning — in- 
deed, he was a famous trencherman at all times — and 
devoted himself to the cold chicken and Montanches 
ham, with which Mr. Luflf, who knew his tastes, sup- 
plied him, leaving the talking to be done by Hilary, 
and only now and then putting in a word. But he 
began to think the young man was getting on rather 
too well with his aunt and his fair cousin, and that it 
behoved him to put a stop to it, but he didn't Isee 
exactly how the thing was to be done at the moment. 
No such feelings iniluenced Mr. Radcliffe. Nothing 
pleased him better than to see his wife and daughter 
pleased. And they evidently were so. If the tnith 
must be told', the worthy old gentleman, who was not 
insensible to the importance of rank, was secretly much 
disappointed that May could not make up her mind to 
accept Sir Charles Ilminster. He had talked the matter 
over with her quietly on the previous evening, and had 
dilated on the advantages of the alliance, which were 
palpable enough, as well as on Sir Charles'ä merits, 
which were equally palpable, but he could not induce 
her to alter her decision. All he could obtain was a 
promise that she would not give the baronet an ab- 
solute refusal. Just now, when they first met, he had 
taken her aside for a moment and questioned her, but 
her sentiments remained unchanged. 

He feit half disposed to be angry, but as he gazed 

at her fair face, and saw how happy she seemed, the 

feeling quickly vanished, and he tried to reconcile 



HILARY ST. IVES. 157 

himself to his disappointment. He saw plainly enough 
that her charms had produced an effect upon Hülary; 
but that May would ever bestow a seriöus thought upon 
a poor artist, however handsome and agreeable he 
might be, never entered his head. So he ate his 
breakfast tranquilly, and joined in the conversation 
whenever opportunity offered. 

May was of the same opitiion as her father. Not 
conceiving it possible she could entertain a feeling 
stronger than that of comnion interest for a nameless 
artist, she did not think it necessary to be on her 
guard, or to adopt a distant manner towards him, 
which might at once have crushed his hopes, if he 
ventured to indulge any. Unconsciously, therefore, 
she encouraged him, so that the flame, already kindled 
in his bosom, began to burn more fiercely, and, be- 
fore breakfast was over, he was desperately in love 
with her. 

Mrs. Radcliffe, who had watched him narrowly, 
and was gifted with very quick powers of Observation 
in such matters, quite understood the State of his 
feelings. 

She also thought May was slightly touched; but on 
this point she did not feel quite sure. 

Before she came down stairs, Mrs. Radcliffe had 
had a brief conversation with her daughter respecting 
Sir Charles, but had not — doubtless from the best 
motives — attempted to dissuade her from declining his 
ofFer. 

Inquiring about the plans for the day , Os^Äd ^^s» 



158 HILARY ST. IVES. 

informed that nothing (X)uld be settled until after the 
arrival of grandpapa, 

*'We must wait at home for him, of course," re- 
marked May. 

"Besides, you will have visitors, in all probability," 
observed her mamma. 

"Yes, I think you may expect Sir Charles and his 
sister at luncheon," said Oswald, innocently. "Her 
ladyship told me they meant to ride over this morning 
to offer their compliments to May." 

"Very kind," said the young lady, glancing at 
mamma. 

"I shall be very glad to see them," remarked Mrs. 
Radcliffe. "I hope we may prevail upon them to stay 
dinner." 

"I don't think that at all likely, mamma," said 
May. 

"At any rate I shall ask them," observed papa. 

Breakfast, which had been somewhat profuse, was 
now nearly over. Already Mrs. Radcliffe had begun to 
complain of fatigue. Begging Hilary to excuse her, 
she rose with the Intention of retiring to her boudoir. 
Oswald flew to open the door, when who should come 
in but Mr. Thomton — in his hat and great-coat, just 
as he had arrived. 

He stöod still for a moment or two, to give füll 

effect to his appearance, chuckling inwardly at his 

daughter's well-feigned surprise, and at the exclamations 

of astonishment that rose from the breakfast-table. 

He then burst into a lo\id laugh, and called out, 



' HILARY ST. IVES. ISQ 

"Didn't expect to see me, eh? Grandpapa couldn't 
be absent on bis darling May's birthday. Where is 
she? — where is my child? Let her gladden my eyes." 

**Here I am, dearest grandpapa," cried May, rush- 
ing towards him, and flinging her arms round bis 
neck. "Thank you so much for coming to see me 
to-day." 

"I coTildn't keep away, I teil you, thougb you 
didn't invite me," he rejoined, pressing bis lips to her 
smooth brow. "Bless you, my love! Many, many 
happy returns of the day. I haven't forgotten you," 
he added , giving her the box of trinkets. 

"Another birthday present!" exclaimed May. 

"Only a few trifles. Look at them by-and-by." 

He then advanced into the room, embraced bis 
daughter, who professed to be charmed by bis wholly 
unexpected visit, and shook hands very cordially with 
Mr. Radcliffe and Oswald. He did not pay much at- 
tention to Hilary, who had got up to examine the 
pictures, and whose back was towards him. 

"Just in time," cried Mr. Radcliffe. "We haven't 
half done breakfast, and if we had we could begin 
again. Hot coffee in a minute." 

"Let me help you off with your great-coat, sir," 
Said Oswald. 

"Stop a minute!" cried Mr. Thornton, assuming a 
mysterious air. "Fact is, Tve brought a friend with 



me. 



"Delighted to hear it," replied Mr. Radcliffe. 
"Bring him in at once. Has your friend bie^kS.^sJüeid'^^ 



l60 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"No, we left town early," replied Mr. Thornton. 
Becoming still more mysterious, he added to his 
daughter, "An old friend of yours, my dear- — ^an old 
and valued friend — has come purposely to see you." 

"An old friend of mine!" she exclaimed, Struck 
by his manner, and having a stränge presentiment of 
the truth. "Oh! good gracious, papa — how could you? 
Why not let me know beforehand? I can't be taken by 
surprise in this way. You know how frightfully nervous 
I am, and the sudden apparition of an old friend 
whom I didn't expeet might kill me. Don't teil me 
who he is — don't. Bring him to my boudoir after you 
have had breakfast. By that time I shall be prepared." 

"But my dear " 

Mrs. Radcliffe would not listen to a word more, but 
hurried away. 

Not to the boudoir, however, but to Mrs. Sutton's 
room. She trembled lest she should find any one in 
the hall — but she did not. Where could he be? 

The door of the housekeeper's room was closed, 
but voices could be heard within. Her presentiments 
were correct. It was he. She knew his voice. She 
would have taken flight instantly, if she had had the 
power to move. But her strength was gone, and she 
was obliged to lean against the wall for support. 



.H3LARY ST. IVES. l6l 



XVII. 

What passed in the Housekeeper's Room. 

Not many minutes before Mr. Thomton presented 
himself at the dining-room door, as previously related, 
he and Colonel Delacombe had arrived at Hazlemere. 
Determined to carry out his plan in his own way, the 
old gentleman would not allow the servants to give any 
intimation of their arrival; but directing Mr. Luff to 
look after the luggage, and pay the coachman who 
had driven them from the Station, he begged the colonel 
to wait for him for a few moments, and lefl him. 

Colonel Delacombe was Standing near the door, 
finishing his c;gar, and wondering within himself 
whether all would go ofF smoothly, when a livid face 
appeared before him. The expression of the face was 
80 deadly and menacing, that a drill of apprehension 
shot through his frame. 

Mrs. Sutton had witnessed the arrival of the two 
gentlemen from a back window that looked upon the 
yard, and though filled with rage and terror on be- 
holding Colonel Delacombe, for whose appearance she 
was unable to account, she resolved at once to have 
an explanation with him. 

The opportunity was oflfered her by Mr. Thomton. 
With wonderful self-command under the circumstances, 
she approached the unwelcome visitor, and begged him 

Hilary St, Iv€S, /, ' * 






162 HILARV ST. IVES. 

to Step into her room for a moment. Though he 
would have gladly avoided the interview just then, the 
colonel could not refuse, but, throwing away his cigar, 
followed her immediately. 

Closing the door, she put no further constraint upon 
herseif, but fixing a determined look upon him, de- 
manded, in threatening tones: 

"What brings you here? To come hither to molest 
me is an act of madness on your part, as you ought to 
feel. If there is to be war between us, I shall not 
shrink from it, and be sure you will not come off 
victorious. I will use all the weapon3 I possess against 
you, and I have many, without scruple." 

The colonel, who was a very cool band, did not 
seem alarmed, and she proceeded yet more fiercely. 

"What has brought you here, I ask again? Do 
you wish to expose me? Take care. I am dangerous 
— more dangerous than you suspeet. Utter a word, 
and I will retaliate. Mark what I say — retaliate. 
Certain papers have just fallen into my hands«, which 
place you completely in my power. Now do you under- 
stand?" 

"Poh! poh!" cried Colonel Delacombe. "This is 
mere raving, and only makes me doubt your sanity. 
You ask if I have come to expose you. Knowing nothing 
about you, what can I have to expose ? You ask what 
has brought me here. I will teil you in a word. l 
have come at the special invitation of my worthy old 
friend, Mr. Thomton, simply for the pleasure of renew- 
j'ng- my acquaintance wlth his daughter, Mrs. Radcliffe, 



HU-ARY ST. IVES, 163 

and with no Intention whatever of troubling you. In« 
deed, I only accidentally learnt you were here. Having 
so fax satisfied you» I must beg to put an end to this 
interview — entirely unsought on my part — unless you 
can be content to talk rationally and calmly. Recrimi- 
nations are ridiculous. I have no accusation to bring 
against you. To the best of my knowledge» I never 
saw you before yesterday. I then fancied — ^mind, it 
was only fancy — that you resembled one whom I dearly 
loved in former years, hut whom I know to be dead. I 
am sorry to see the likeness has wholly disappeared, 
and has given place to something totally different. I 
acknowledge my mistake, and apologise for it." 

"It is no mistake, Seymour," she rejoined, in a 
more subdued tone» and with something even of sad- 
ness. "She whom you fonneriy professed to love still 
lives." 

"I know better," he said, coldly. "She has been 
dead these twenty years." 

"I could easily convince you to the contrary. But 
there is no need, since you are fully aware of the fact." 

"Excuse me, madam," said the colonel. "I don't 
see why this discussion should be prolonged, or to 
what it can possibly lead. I have given you my positive 
assurance that I do not design to n^eddle with you, 
and you may depend upon it I will keep my word. 
Even if there were any secret between you and myself 
— and there is none — it would be my interest to keep 
it. You can, therefore, have nothing to apprehend 
from me. So far from desiring to molest you, if I can 



u» 



164 HILARY ST. IVES. 

tender you any Service, I shall be delighted to do so, 
and you have only to command me." 

Mrs. Sutton looked at him for a moment with ir- 
repressible tenderness, and, in spite of her eflforts, 
tears sprang to her eyes, but she checked her emotion* 

"I am very sorry on all accounts that you have 
come here at this juncture," she said. "Your presence 
cannot fail to produce awkward complications, and may 
lead — in spite of all my care to prevent them — to un- 
toward consequences." 

"I will leave immediately, if I find I am in tho 
way," he said. 

"That would not mend matters," she rejoined. 
"Undoubtedly, you are in the way — very much in the 
way — but your immediate departure would provoke re- 
mark, and excite suspicion. Since you have come it 
is best you should stay. You owe me much. I will 
not reproach you. I will not threaten you more. I 
will not appeal to the past. But I implore you to 
compassionate me — to serve me." 

"Since you adopt this tone, I will do anything^you 
require," replied the colonel, attempting to take her 
band, which she withdrew with a shudder. 

"Promise me, then — promise me solemnly," she 
cried, "that, during your stay here, whatever you may 
learn, or whomsoever you meet, you will give no ex- 
planation that can in the remotest degree compromise 
me. Above all, promise that you will make no allusion 
to our past connexion." 

*'Though for the life of me I cannot imagine what 



HILARY ST. rVES. I65 

you allude to, I promise implicit secrecy on all points," 
Said the colonel, lightly. 

"There must be no trifling," said Mrs. Sutton. 
"My existence hangs upon your caution. Swear that 
you will not breathe a word." 

"I swear it," replied the colonel. "Have you any- 
thing more to say to me? Any further directions to 
give?" 

"None. Be cautious. Do not betray me or your- 
self. RecoUect that I am merely the housekeeper — 
nothing more. You must not stay longer here. Mr. 
Thornton will be looking for you. I will gO'with you 
to the hall." 

As they issued forth they saw a retreating figure at 
the end of the passage. 

"Heavens!" ejaculated the housekeeper, "there is 
Mrs. Radcliffe. Can she have been here and over- 
heard us?" 

"Diable! I hope not," replied the colonel. "That 
would be a bad beginning." 

When they reached the entrance hall, Mrs. Radcliffe 
had disappeared. 

She had flown up-stairs to her boudoir with a pre- 
cipitancy that perfectly electrified Annette, who chanced 
to witness the Performance. 



l66 HILARY ST. IVES. 



XVIII. 
A second Breakfast. 

Mrs. Sutton was still with the colonel when the 
dining-room door opened and Mr. Thornton came 
forth with Mr. RadclifFe. The latter shook hands very 
heartily with his unexpected visitor, welcomed him to 
Hazlemere, and told him how delighted his wife would 
be to see him. Orders were then given to Mrs. Sutton, 
who had resumed her customary röle, to prepare a 
room for the colonel. Mr. Thornton having his own 
room, there was no occasion to say anything about 
that. Further Orders were given to the butler to serve 
a second breakfast as quickly as possible; and [these 
matters being arranged, Mr. Radcliffe conducted the 
colonel to the dining-room, and introduced him to 
May. 

No one eise was in the room at the time. The 
Windows had been thrown open by Mr. Radcliflfe, and 
Oswald and Hilary had stepped out into the garden. 

May's charms surpassed any notions that the colonel 
had formed of them. She was Struck by his dis- 
tinguished appearance and manner, but yet more 
Struck by a certain resemblance which she fancied she 
detected between him and Hilary. It could scarcely 
be fancy, for the resemblance seemed to increase as 
she saw more of him. 



HILARV ST. IVES. I67 

After making all the complimentary Speeches proper 
to the öccasion, admiring the floral decorations of the 
room and the table, the colonel inquired, with an ex- 
pression of great interest, about mamma, and learnt 
that she had just retired to her boudoir, but would be 
delighted to see him after breakfast. The portrait over 
the chimney-piece next invited his attention, and he 
was expatiating with rapture upon its beauty, and ex- 
claiming, " Yes, there she is, just as I beheld her last," 
when his rhapsodies were checked by a summons to 
the breakfast-table from Mr. Thomton. 

"Sit down, colonel, pray sit down!" cried the old 
gentleman. "I'm sure you must be hungry. I am 
desperately so. A cup of coffee if you please, May." 

"Here it comes, grandpapa," she rejoined, as a 
fresh supply of hot coflfee, broils, tea-cakes, and toast 
was brought in by the butler. 

Meantime, Mr. RadclifFe had been busy at the side- 
board carving cold fowl, ham, and tongue, so that his 
guests had wherewithal to make a good breakfast. 
The colonel differed from Oswald. While satisfying 
his appetite, he contrived to converse most agreeably, 
and May was never more entertained than by his lively 
discourse. 

They were still at the breakfast-table when the two 
young men, who were smoking their cigars on the 
terrace, passed rather slowly in front of the window. 

"Who the deuce have you got there, May?" de- 
manded Mr. Thornton^ Jooking after them» 



l68 HILARY ST. IVES, 

"Oswald's companion is Mr. Hilary St. Ives, grand- 
papa," she replied. 

"And who may Mr. St. Ives be? — what is he?" 
asked the old gentleman. 

"An artist," retumed May. 

"An artist!" echoed Mr. Thornton, with a strong 
expression of contempt. "Then he has no business 
here." 

"Why not, dear grandpapa?" she rejoined. '"Be- 
sides, Mr. St. Ives was not invited." 

And she then proceeded to explain how the young 
man chanced to be at the house. Mr. Thornton knew 
all about it, as we are aware; but he feigned ignorance, 
and when May had finished her recital, signified his 
disapproval, and told Mr. RadclifFe plainly he had been 
far too kind. 

"Nay, indeed, I must defend papa, if a kind action 
can require defence," cried May. "It would have been 
quite inconsistent with his character to act otherwise. 
If he had done so, I should not love him half as well 
as I do." 

"Humph!" exclaimed the old gentleman. "You 
mean to insinuate, you pert little minx, that grandpapa 
has not the common feelings of humanity, eh? May 
be not. His compassion certainly does not proceed 
to this extent. Possibly, he might bring a wounded 
man home with him — though I think he would have 
taken him to an inn — ^but when the fellow had got 
well enough to walk about and smoke a cigar, he would 
have given him immediate notier to quit." 



HILARY ST. IVES. l6^ 

"AU depends upon the t>erson, deax grandpapa," 
rejoined May. "Mr. St. Ives is very clever, and Very 
gentletnanlike, and when you see him, you won't wonder 
that mamma has invited him to remain a few days and 
recruit. He has not quite recov^ed yet." 

"He wouldn't be well npw, if Sutton hadn't nursed 
him so carefiilly," observed Mr. Radcliffe. "She has 
done more for him than the doctor." 

"I dare say," rejoined the old gentleman. "But you 
know nothing about the young man, except that he's 
an artist, and I don't approve of his remaining in the 
house. I shall talk to your wife about him presently." 

"You may spare yourself the trouble, sir. You 
won't produce much efFect," laughed Mr. Radcliffe. 

"From the glimpse I caught of him just now, the 
young man appears to be good-looking and gentleman- 
like," observed the colonel. 

"Remarkably so," said Mr. Radcliffe. 

"Let US go and häve a look at him," cried the 
old gentletaan, rising. "Have you finished breakfast, 
colonel?" 

"Quite," replied the other. 

"I am sure you will be pleased with the young man, 
colonel," remarked Mr. Radcliffe. 

"Why so, sir?" 

"Well, I have a reason. But see him first, and then 
rU teU it you." 

"Since he has won the good opinion of Mrs. Rad- 
cliffe and your daughter, I am sure to be pleased with 
Wm," Said the colonel. 



1 70 HILARY ST. fvES. 



The whole party then went out upon the terrace. 
Colonel Delacombe was enchanted with the prospect 
oflfered to his view. While he was indulging in the 
raptures naturally called forth by such a charming scene, 
Mr. Radcliffe looked about for the young men. They 
had quitted the terrace. Presently Oswald made his 
appearance, but he was alone. 

"What have you done with St. Ives?" inquired his 
uncle. 

"Left him in the summer-house sketching," replied 
the young man. 

Oswald was then presented in due form to Colonel 
Delacombe, who expressed particular pleasure on mak- 
ing his acquaintance. As the young man drew back, 
he remarked in a whisper to his uncle, 

"Very odd! Don't you perceive the likeness?" 

"Likeness to whom?" said his uncle, with a droll 
look. 

"Why to St. Ives, of course. Don't you perceive 
it? Surprising!" 

"Hush! not a word of that just now. I want to 
see them together." 

"Shall I bring St. Ives here?" asked Oswald. 

"No; we'll go to the summer-house." 

The plan, however, was defeated by Mrs. Sutton, 

who brought her mistress's compliments to Colonel 

Delacombe. Mrs. Radcliffe did not feel quite strong 

enough to come down-stairs, having rather over exerted 

herseif that morning, but 'woxsld be daUghted to see the 



\ 



HELARY ST. IVES. 1 7 1 . 

colonel if he would take the trouble to Step up to her 
boudoir. 

"My mistress is all impatience to see you, sir," 
added the housekeeper. 

Of course the colonel was happy to obey the sum- 
mons, and bowing his excuses to May, foUowed the 
housekeeper, who waited to conduct him to her mistress. 

This interposition destroyed Mr. RadclifFe's anti- 
cipated joke — at all events postponed it. So he took 
Mr. Thornton to the summer-house. 

Not for a moment did Mrs. Sutton forget her part. 
The servants were moving about, and she knew their 
eyes were upon her. Her demeanour to the colonel as 
they went up-stairs was most respectful. She told him 
a room had been prepared for him, and that Boston, 
the valet, would attend upon him. 

But just before they reached the boudoir, she said, 
in a low tone, 

"Reassure yourself. She was there as we supposed. 
But she heard nothing.*' 



172 HILARY ST. IVES.« 



XIX. 

How Üiey met after long Years. 

Not for the universe would Mrs. Radcliife have 
had the meeting with her old lover take place in the 
presence of any other person than the housekeeper, to 
whom she had confided her heart's secret. 

"Oh! he is come, Sutton!" she cried. "Seymour 
is come! What am I to do?" 

Scarcely able to repress her own feelings of aversion 
and scom, the housekeeper replied, that whatever she 
might feel, she owed it to her husband and her daughter 
to keep calm. There must be no outward manifestation 
of emotion — no fainting — no hysterics — no scene. 

"There shall be nothing of the kind, I promise you, 
Sutton." 

"Treat him merely as an old ftiend, whom you are 
rejoiced to see again. That is what you ought to do 
— must do." 

"I mean to do so. There shall be no display of 
emotion. But I must see him alone. I dread the first 
meeting. That over, I shall be myself." 

The housekeeper objected to this very strongly, but 
sufFered herseif to be overcome, perceiving, probably, 
that Mrs. Radcliffe would have her own way. 

She was occupied for the next half hour in the un- 
grateful, to her almost revolting, task of preparing her 



HILARY ST. IVES. I73 

mistress for the interview. Mrs. Radcliffe made many 
alterations in her toilette, and was scarcely satisfied in 
the end. 

"How would he like to see me, do you think, But- 
ton ?" she asked, with the anxiety of a girL "Will 
this do?" 

The housekeeper muttered a reply, in which con- 
tempt was thinly veiled. 

"Now you can bring him to me, Sutton/* she 
cried. "Stayl we have forgotten one thing — his minia- 
ture ! '* 

"What of it?" asked the housekeeper, sharply. 

"Restore it to its place. I would have him no- 
tice it.*' 

Mrs. Button reluctantly complied, and the miniature 
was hung up again. 

"Now do have pity upon me, there's a dear crea- 
ture, and bring him to me directly," entreated Mrs. 
Radcliffe. "No one eise, mind." 

"Pity!" ejaculated the housekeeper, as she left the 
boudoir, and could give vent to her feelings. "Miser- 
able woman, expect no pity from me. When the time 
comes, I will have payment in füll." 

As soon as she was alone, Mrs. Radcliffe surveyed 
herseif in her mirror, with the eye of an experienced 
coqnette, glanci«g at her coifiure, and exEunining the 
minutest details of her dress. A trifle of rouge being 
given to her cheek, she thought she would do. She 
then seated herseif in her fauteuil in the most graceful 
attitude she could assume. A flutter of excitement 



174 HILARY ST. IVES. 

agitated her breast, as she heard his footsteps in the 
passage. 

The door opened. Mrs. Sutton ushered ih the 
colonel, and immediately retired, though not without 
Casting a bitter and vindictive look at her mistress. 

Mrs. RadclifFe did not rise. With an exclamation 
of pleasure, she extended her band towards him. 

He took it, and pressed the delicate fingers to his 
lips. • 

A brief interval ensued, during which both were 
silent. In thought they had flown back to former d^ys. 
Both were young again. He still retained her band, 
and the thin fingers trembled in his grasp. She be- 
came perceptibly agitated, and her lips quivered, but, 
determined not to give way, she motioned him to take 
a seat opposite her, and he complied. 

"This is indeed a pleasure to me, Seymour," she 
Said, with a tenderness of expression which she could 
not control. "I never expected to behold you again." 

"And I never expected — never intended to return 
to my native country," he replied, in much the same 
tone. "But circumstances have brought'me back, and 
my first visit is to you, Esther." 

She smiled faintly. 

"I am truly glad to see you. Accept my con- 
gratulations upon your brilliant achievements in India, 
and upon the honours you have won. All your friends 
must feel proud of you. I do." 

^'If you are proud of me, Esther, I am content I 



HILARY ST. IVES, I 75 

care more for your esteem than that of any other. I 
have won distinction, but I am not happy." 

"You ought to be happy, Seymour." 

"You know well why I am not, Esther. Fbu are 
happy, I presume. You have a charming daughter — 
a most lovely girl — ^your Image. The sight of her 
almost unmanned me." 

"May is far lovelier than I ever was, Seymour. I 
hope you like Mr. Radcliffe?" 

"I appreciate his good quallties and his bonhomie; 
but I cannot forgive him for robbing me " 

"No more of this, Seymour. Not a word against 
my husband, or you forfeit my friendship entirely." 

"You quite mistake me. I have not the slightest 
idea of disparaging him. I am sure Mr. Radcliffe is a 
pattern husband. Well, you see I have kept my word, 
I have returned from India as I went out — a, bachelor. 
I deserve some praise, for I might have made more 
than one capital match." 

"I cannot doubt it, Seymour," she rejoined. "But, 
pardon me — you say bachelor — ought you n^t rather 
to describe yourself as a widower?" 

"A widower!" heexclaimed, staring at her. "What 
mean you, Esther?" 

Mrs. Radcliffe made no reply, but looked down and 
played with her eye-glass. 

The colonel rose from his seat and approached 
her. 

"There is only one person on earth whom I would 
have married, and she jilted me," .he said, eamestly. 



I 76 HILARV ST. IVES. 

"There you wrong her," replied the ladj. "She 
did not jilt you, Seymour, and you know it. She was 
forced to give you up. Pray do not recal that un- 
happy time." 

"I would not give you an instantes pain if I could 
help it, Esther. Far less do I desire to open long- 
closed wounds. But you appear to have got a notion 
in your head which it is necessary I should remove." 

"Really, Seymour, I meant nothing. It was pierely 
a foolish fancy of my own. Forgive me for making 
the Observation. I see it has disturbed you." 

"From any other lips than yours the remark would 
have been perfectly indifferent to me, and j should 
have laughed at it. But I cannot allow you to labour 
under the slightest misapprehension. ' Some mischief- 
maker must have hinted this to you. By-the-by," he 
added, in a careless tone, and as if changing the sub- 
ject, "you have got a very superior sort of person as 
housekeeper." 

"He suspects Sutton, I perceive," thought Mrs. 
Radcliffe. "I am not surprised you should be Struck 
with her. Most people are so. Mrs. Sutton has lived 
with me nineteen years — ever since May was born, in 
fact — and is inval nable to me." 

"Who is she?" asked the colonel. "She looks 
like a lady." 

"I know little of her previous history, except that 
she was married very young to a worthless man, who 
deserted her, but fortunately died. I have not ques- 
tioned her much about her husband, as you may sup- 



HILARY ST, IVES, 177 

pose, for the subject is extremely painfiil to her. Ap-« 
parently, she has no ties, for I never hear her speak 
of her relatiöns. She has devoted herseif exclusively 
to me, and I have the grestest confidence in her." 

"I am sure your confidence is not misplaced« You 
aie most fortunate in possessing such a treasure/' 

"She is a treasure, and I should be sorry to lose 
her. She might marry very well, if she chose. Mr. 
Malham, the surgeon — a most respectable man, and 
very well to do — has spoken to me about her, but she 
won't listen to him for a moment. She has had too 
bitter an experience of wedded life to run a second 
risk." 

"The housekeeper is mistress here, that I can see," 
thought. the colonel. "I am glad on your account, 
though sorry for poor Malham, that Mrs. Sutton has so 
decided," he added, aloud. "What a charming boudoir 
you have got! An Indian life would suit you, Esther. 
You would be idolised at Calcutta or Bombay. Why 
not go back with me when I return — and I haven't 
got long leave? — taking Mr. Radcliffe and May with 
you, of course." 

"How can you make such an absurd proposition?" 
she exclaimed. But she did not seem dlspleased, and 
added, with a half sigh, "I do think my delicate 
health might be improved by a few years spent in a 
cllmate like that of India." 

'''Not a doubt of it. Apropos of India, I see you 
have got my old Bengal tiger here. The magnificent 
brate who once owned that skin might have made a 

Hilary St. Ivts» /. 12 



178 HILART ST. IVBS. 

meal of me. My first shot only wounded him. He 
sprang upon my elephant, who had enough to do to 
bear his weight, kiUed my mahout, and in another in- 
stant would have reached my howdah, if I had not 
despatched him by a ball through the brain. I never 
shall forget the ferodous aspect of the beast as I fired. 
It Was an awful moment." 

"I have your letter describing the terrific encounter, 
Seymour. In fact, I have all your letters." 

The colönel did not seem much gratified by the 
information/ But he made no remark. 

"I keep them in that casket," pursued the lady. 
"Look round. Do you notice anything over the 
chimney-piece? Any souvenir öf former days?*' 

"Ah! the miniäture I gave you. That was-taken 
in my beaux jours. I had not a scarred cheek and a 
grey moustache then/^ 

"The scar improves you, Seymour, and so does 
the grey moustache.'^ 

He then feil into raptures with the other miniäture, 
and was still admiring it when the door opened, and 
Mr. Radcliflfe came in. 

"Sorry to interrupt your t^te-ä-t6te," he remarked, 
In an apologetic tone. "But you will excuse me I am 
sure, my love." 

"We have no more secrets to discuss," replied the 
lady. 

"In that case I need not hesitate. Mr. St. Ives is 
.vithoUt," he added, with a significant glance at his 
.wife, "Have I your petncdsaioti lo bring him in." 



HILARY ST. IVES. «79 

Charmed by the idea of witnessing the meeting, 
Mrs. Radcliffe graciously assented. 

"Come in!" cried Mr. Radclifie. 

Thereupon Hilary entered the boüdoir, foUowed by 
Mt. Thorntön, who was obliged to hold a handkerchief 
,to bis mouth to stifle bis merriment. 

Mr. Radcliflfe went through bis part very welli tbough 
fae bad to cbeck ä streng tendency to laugbter. 

"Allow me, colonel, to present to yoü our young 
artist, Mr. Hilary St. Ives," he said, leading tbe young 
man forward. 

Colonel Delacombe moved politely towards bim, 
but snddenly stopped and stared at Hilaxy, who looked 
quite as mucb astonisbed as bimself. 

Tbus brougbt face to face, tbe resemblance be- 
tween tbem was seen to be very striking, allowing of 
course, for diiference of age. Even tbeir beight cor- 
responded as nearly as might be, tbough tbe colonel 
was a trifle the taller of the two. Naturally, the ad- 
vantajg^es of youth were on Hilary's side, and the palm 
of good looks must have been assigned to bim, but he 
wanted the refinement of manner aiid proud military 
tiearlng that lent so much distinction to the bronzed 
and scarred soldier. 

Half-suppressed. laugbter reached the colonel's ears, 
wariiing bim that he was the object of a practical 
joke. He glanced at Mt. Radcliffe, as much as to say, 
"I no\sr und^stand why the young fellow was brougbt 
here." He tben addre^sed Hilary. 

12* 



l80 HILART ST, IVES, 

*'Glad to know you, Mr. St. Ives. Your features 
appear familiär to me.'' 

"I shotild think they must be," muttered Mr. Thom- 
ton; "uncommonly familiär." 

*'I was about to make the same remark, colonel/' 
Said Hilary. "If it were not presumption on my part, 
I would venture to observe " 

"That you have discovered a likeness," supplied 
Mr. Radcliffe, laughing. "So have we all." 

"Never saw such a likeness in all my bom days!'- 
exclaimed Mr. Thornton, indulging in a roar. "Ex- 
cuse me, colonel — ^I can't help it — ha! ha!" 

"I won't aflfect to misunderstand what you mean,'^ 
Said the colonel, joining in the laugh. "You pay me 
a much greater compliment than you do Mr. St. Ives." 

"I should be proud to be thought like you, colonel," 
Said Hilary. 

"Then make yourself easy on that score, young 
man," remarked Mr. Thornton. 

Mrs. Radcliflfe, who had looked on through her 
eye-glass, much amused by the scene, added her testi- 
mony to that of her father. 

"We have provided you with a son, colonel," said 
Mr. Thornton, in a loud whisper. 

"A son!" exclaimed the other. "My good sir, I 
wish I had such a son as Mr. St. Ives. But you know 
very well I have never married." 

While making the assertion, he cast a glance at 
Mrs. Radcliffe, and saw that sYve ^^s «rosliiv^. 



HILARY ST. IVES4 t8l 

"Excuse me, colonel," said Hilary. "May I ven- 
ture to ask if you chance to know Mr. Courtenay of 
Exeter? — or have had any correspondence with him?" 

"Courtenay! I know lots of Courtenays. Major 
Courtenay, of the 2nd Foot, is my bosom friend; and 
Captain Chichester Courtenay, of the 2 ist, is another 
great friend. But they are both in India — one at 
Bombay, the other at Madras. I have no acquaintance 
with Mr. Courtenay of Exeter, nor have I ever cor- 
responded with him. Does your friend belong to the 
Devon family?" 

Hilary shook his head, abashed. 

Before any ftirther questions could be put, an inter- 
ruption was offered by May, who came to inform her 
mother that Lady Richborough and Sir Charles had 
just arrived. 

"Indeed!" exclaimed Mrs. Radcliffe. "I didn't 
expect them so soon. Well, go at once with your 
papa to receive them. I will come down as soon as I 
can. You will like Sir Charles," she added to Colonel 
Delacombe. 

"I'm sure of it, he rejoined. "IVe heard of him. 
He was in the — th Lancers." 

"I will say nothing about his sister, Lady Rich- 
borough, except that you are certain to fall in love 
with her. Go down and see her. Mr. Radcliffe will 
introduce you." 

"Yes, come along," cried that gentleman. "You'll 
find her ladyship a most charming person." 



l82 HILARY ST. IV£S. 

'^I must heg to be introduced at the same time/' 
Said Mr. Thornton, following them. 

Thus Mrs. Radcliffe was left alone with Hilary* 
What passed between them will be learnt anon. 



END OF THE FIRST BOOK. 



BOOK II. 



MYRTILLA. 



4 



I. 

A Lecture from Grandpapa. 

Not every woman who can move about gracefully 
in a riding-habit. Lady Richborough understood the 
art to perfection, and never looked better, or seemed 
more at ease than when attired en Amazone. The cos- 
tume was exactly adapted to her incomparable figure. 
And how becoming was the hat surmounting the chig- 
non in which her rieh black tresses were braided. 

While pacing to and fro on the lawn, chatting 
merrily with Oswald, with the skirts of her habit under 
her arm, and a little whip in her band, her charming 
ladyship contrived to indulge her companion with a 
glimpse of a foot worthy of Cinderella, clad in the 
daintiest boot imaginable. 

Sir Charles Ilminster was likewise upon the lawn, 
sauntering about by himself. He had by no means 
the confident air of a hopeful suitor. On the contrziry, 
he looked thoughtftil, and cast many an anxious glance 
towards the house, and when at last the object of his 
affections came forth, a tremor passed through his 
frame. 

The joyous shout raised by Lady Richborough on 
sight of May, was blithely responded to by the fair 
young damsel. In another moment they had met, and 
embraced. The meeting was witnessed by CoVoxv^ 



l86 HILARY ST. IVES, 

Delacombe and Mr. Thomton, who had lingered be- 
hind on the terrace, and very much delighted they 
both were with the spectacle. 

"Deuced fine woman, Lady Richborough!" ex- 
claimed the öolonel. "Never saw a finer figure in my 
life." 

"Magnificent!" cried the old gentleman. 

Mr. Radcliffe followed his daught^ as quickly a^ 
he could, and cordially greeted Sir Charles. But it 
did not fare so well with the baronet, as it had done 
with his sister. When he advanced to pay his devoirs 
to May, he was coldly received — so much so as to at- 
tract the attention of the spectators on the terrace. 
Not being in the secret, the colonel attached little im- 
portance to the circumstance, but Mr. Thornton was 
greatly put out by it. 

"Zounds!" he mentally ejaculated. "I suspect the 
little hussy means to refuse him. Mustn't be. Height 
of folly to throw away such a chance." 

He then proposed to the colonel that they should 
join the party on the lawn, and proceeding thither^ 
they were presented in due form to Lady Richborough 
and Sir Charles. Her ladyship's charms lost nothing 
by nearer inspection — rather gained. If the colonel 
was charmed with her, she was not less Struck by his 
distinguished appearance and manner. But she had 
too much tact to neglect Mr. Thornton, and quite cap- 
tivated the old gentleman by the civil things she $aid 
to him. How could he resist such honeyed words 
from Ups so rosy? , 



X 



HILARY ST. IVES. 1 8 ? 

Colonel Delacombe got on very weO with Sir 
Charles. Habitually, as we have remarked, the baronet 
was reserved and haughty, but he was prepossessed by 
the colonel's manner, which was unquestionably fascw 
nating, and, besides, he khew all abont him. So they 
were speedily on very friendly terms. Sir Charles had 
many friends in India, with most of whom Colonel 
Delacombe was acquainted, and could give hlm tidings 
of them. So well pleased was the baronet with bis 
new acqtiaintance, that before they had been long to« 
gether, he told him he should be delighted to see him 
at Botgrove. 

Overhearing the invitation, Lady Richborougfa 
wannly seconded it 

"I am sore yon will be pleased with the old place/' 
she Said, with a lock that was quite irresistible. 

Th^ colonel feit sure he should, and added that 
the invitation was a great deal too tempting to be 
refbsed. 

Meantime, Mr. Thomton, who was resolved to have 
a Word with his grand-daughter before any mischief 
was done, beckoned to her to follow him, and led her 
away from the Company. 

As soon as they were out of earshot, the old gen- 
tleman began without preamble. 

*'Yoür papa has intimated to me Üiat you mean to 
refiise Sir Charles Uminster. Now, my dear child, I 
teil you plainly you must do nothing of the sort. There 
cannot be two opinions as to the eligibility of Sir 
Charles. He is quite as good a match as you can 



l88 HXLARY ST. IVES. 

ever expect to make. Your union with him will place 
you in an excellent social -position, and will be satis- 
factory to us all, while it must be conducive to your 
own happiness. 

"Don't intemipt me, I beg. I Won't listen to any 
observations. I know the silly arguments you are 
about to employ. *You can't make up your mind' — 
fyou don't care for him,' and so forth. Stuff and 
nonsense! You cannot fail to like Sir Charles; and as 
to making up your mind, since you are incapable of 
deciding for yourself, we must decide för you." 

"But I have decided, dear grandpapa — quite de- 
cided." 

"Not in the right way. You have decided to 
refuse Sir Charles. I won't allow you to commit such 
foUy." 

"Really, grandpapa, you are very unreasonable. I 
have no desire to marry just at present." 

"Humph! I know better. Every girl of nineteen 
wishes to be married, whatever she may a.ver to the 
contrary. But even if you do desire to remain Single 
a little longer, it is your bounden duty to accede to 
the wishes of your family. Nothing, I repeat, can be 
more satisfactory to us than the proposed alliance; and 
I, for one, shall be wofully disappointed if it does not 
take place. Your papa and mamma have not spolcen 
to you as strongly as they ought to have done. They 
have not put the matter in the right light. They are 
too indulgent by half, and I have told them so. You 
ßppear to entertain most erroneous notions in regard 



HItARY ST. IVES. iS^ 

to matrimonial arrangements. A girl has no voice in 
them — or ought to have none. She must take the man 
chosen for her, whether she likes him or not. Do you 
mark that?" 

"If you did not speak so seriously, grandpapa, I 
shottld think you were jesting." 
I **Parents expect implicit obedience to their will," 

I pursued the old gentleman. "A girl's inclinations are 
* rarely, if ever, consulted. Still more rarely is there 
any Opposition on her part, because she knows that 
the best has been done for her. All important mar- 

rriages are arranged on this plan. Mamma settles them. 
^ They may be styled *Marriages of convenience.* What 
? of that? They are far better than foolish love-matches 
[ that always end unhappily. Now, my dear child, I 
^ trust it won't be necessary for me to say more to 
I ensure obedience to my injunctions. Put aside all 
I nonsensical feeling, and accept Sir Charles." 
j "An)^hing in reason to please you, dear grand- 

I papa," she rejoined. "But not this." 
^ "You must — you shall accept him!" he cried, ex- 

i* asperated by her refusal. 
I The old gentleman had grown so terribly red in 

Ithe face, that May feared he would have a fit of apo- 
plexy, and it was a great relief to her when Lady 
Richborough and Oswald were seen approaching. 
Delighted to escape from a further lecture, she 
hastened to meet her ladyship. 
"^1 "The gentlemen are gone to look at the plants in 
the greenhouses/' öbserved Lady RichboTongYi. "^xs^. 



jlQO HILARY ST. IVES. 

I decliped to accomp^y. them, fbr I want to have a 
Jittle talk with you, May. How excessively hot it is!" 

'^Suppo^e we sit down for a few minutes in the 
summer-house?" said May. "You will fiüd it cool 
there." 

*'A delightful Suggestion. You will know where 
to find US if we are wanted," she remarked, with an 
arcb look at Oswald. 

"Mind what I have said to you, May," cried Mr. 
Thornton, as the two ladies tripped off. 

"What has grandpapa been saying to you, my 
}ove?" inquired her ladyship. 

"Giving me a lecture," replied the othen "He 
is a very positive old gentleman, and likes his own 
way." 

"But very fond of you, Vm sure, so you ought to 
iet him have it," observed Lady Richborough, who 
suspected the truth. 

"Harkee, Oswald," cried Mr. Thornton to his 
grandson; "I have a question to ask you, and I «xpect 
a straightforward answer. Have you proposed to your 
fair Cousin?" 

Oswald stammered out something, but could not 
deny the soft impeachment. 

"And been rejected, eh?" 

Impossible to ofifer a contradiction. 

. "I thought as much. Your poor mother persuaded 
herseif that the affair was in excellent train, ^d would 
be settled as soon as I made my appearance, but she 
seems to have been out in her calculations, er you 



L^ 



HILARY St. IVES. IQ! 

have misled her. Never mind, my boy, riever mind. 
You must look elsewhere for a wife. And you needn't 
look far," he observed, with a knowiiig wink — "not 
farther than Boxgrove." 

"No Chance there, sir," replied Oswald. "Lady 
Richboröugh is a monstrous fine woman, but above 
my mark." 

"Pohl poh! you don't know whether yoti've a 
Chance or not tili you try. Wete I in your place I 
wouldn't hesitate." 

**But th^e's a difficulty to get over, sir, of which 
you may not be aware. Her ladyship forfeits her 
jpinture if she marries again." ^ 

" S'death ! that is awkward — confoundedly awkward. 
I promised your mother I would do something hand- 
some for you on your marriage , and so I will. But 
her highflying ladyship couldn't live on a paltry pittance 
of a thousand a year." 

"I fear not, sir. Therefore I must give up all idea 
of such a match. Besides, to confess the truth, I can't 
get May out of my head." 

"Think no more about her, I teil you. We have 
other designs for May. A little flirtation with her lady- 
ship — if it comes to nothing — will eure you of your 
fooHsh passion. By-the-by, you haven't told me why 
May refused you. I thought she liked you, and so 
did your mother. Has she ahy other attachment?" 

"None that Fm aware of, sir. I'was fool enough 
to believe she liked me, She seems to have a sort of 
fancy for that young artist who has got itito tYie\iöV3&«&, 



194 HILAKir ST. IVES. 



II. 

In the Summer-house. 

"Well, my love/' cried Lady Richborough, laying 
dpwn her whip, and taking off her hat, as they entered 
the summer-house, "I haVe a great deal to say to you, 
but I scarcely know where to begin. However, I must 
dash into the thick of it, or I shall never get on. Of 
course you have seen Sir Charles's letter, but I can 
assure you it gives a very inadequate idea of the dear 
boy's feelings , for he is desperately smitten. I confess 
I don't approve of such a formal mode of proceeding. 
An offer comes best from a man's own lips, for then 
it Springs straight from the heart, and there can be no 
mistake about it — but Charlie would have his own way. 
Ah ! if I were tö repeat all the rapturous things he has 
uttered about you, I should tire your patience as much 
as he has tired mine. Your name has been coupled 
with every endearing epithet in the language. Sixty 
times in the hour is it pronounced — that is, once in 
every minute." 

"You are laughing at me," observed May. 

"No such thing. I am trying to give you an idea 
of the dear boy's condition. I have known many a 
man who has been suffering from heart complaint, but 
I never knew a worse case than Charlie's. You must 



HILARY ST. IVES. I95 

take pity on him, or you will be answerable for the 
fatal consequences certain to ensue." 

"I should be sony to be the cause of Sir Charles 's ~ 
death/' replied May, smiling. "But I have no appre- 
hension of any such result" 

"Neither have I," rejoined her ladyship, "Because 
I feel sure you will compassionate him. Come, now 
we are alone, confess that you do love him — a yery 
little bit. I see you do — though you won't answer. 
The dear boy deserves your love, for though he is my 
brother, I will say that a better fellow does not exist. 
If he has a fault I have never been able to discover 
it. He is the most refined, sensitive creature pos- 
sible. A woman must be an angel to come up to his 
ideal.'' 

"But I am not an angel, dear Lady Richborough," 
observed May, laughing. 

"You are in Charlie's eyes," rejoined her lady- 
ship. "But call me Myrtilla — ^just as I call you May 
— for I now regard you as a sister. I must take some 
credit to myself for making the dear boy sensible of 
your merits. A hundred to one if he would have ob- 
served you, if I had not pointed you out, and given 
him my opinion about you. But on the very first in- 
terview those bright eyes did their business. Are you 
not vain of your conquest? You ought to be." 

"Dearest Lady Richborough " 

"Myrtilla, my love, if you please." 
. "Well, dearest Myrtilla, I cannot allovj yo\x Vo ^o 

13»* 



igÖ HILARY ST. IVES, 

on in this strain. I need not say how much flattered 
I feel by Sir Charles's offer, but " 

"You don't mean to say you have the slightest 
idea of refusing him?" cried her ladyship, in astonish- 
ment. "Impossible! I have a better idea of your judg- 
ment." 

'^I really cannot make up my mind/' said May, 
blushing and greatly embarrassed. 

"Oh! if you're only undecided I don't care," cried 
Lady Richborough, laughing. "I really didn't expect 
to be called upon to plead the dear boy's suit, because 
I thought the advantages of the offer would be ob- 
vious." 

"I have the highest opinion of Sir Charles in 
every respect," said May. "But I cannot give him my 
heart." 

"Have you given it to any one eise?" demanded 
her ladyship. 

"No," replied May, firmly. 

"Then you may safely accept him. Love will come 

hereafter." 

"But would it be fair to Sir Charles to act thus?" 
Lady Richborough was rather puzzled by the ques- 

tion, but she answered promptly, 

"Yes, I do not think any man has a right to ex- 
pect more. Sir Charles's character must command 
your respect — his devotion cannot fail to win your love. 
I counsel you to accept him." 

At this critical junctuie, a.iid as if he had been 



HTLARY ST. IVES. igj 

expressly summoned, Sir Charles himself stood before 
them. 

SmiKng at her brother, Lady Richborough imme- 
diately arbse, took up her hat and whip, and prepared 
to depart. 

"Do not leave me, Myrtilla, I entreat," whispered 
May. 

"Nay, my love, you must listen to the dear boy. 
A Word from you will make him supremely happy. 
All's right," she whispered to Sir Charles, as she passed 
out. "Go in and win!" 



igS HILARY ST. IVES. 



III. 

Mrs. RadclifTe gives Hilary Advice. 

Now to return to the boudoir. 

After begging Hilary to be seated, Mrs. Radcliffe 
observed, 

"I think I can guess what is passing in your breast, 
Mr. St. Ives. You fancy you have discovered some 
Solution to the mystery of your birth. I should be 
sorry to excite hopes that may never be realised — at 
the same time I cannot altogether discourage you. I 
will frankly own that the interest I feit in you at first 
was caused by the remarkable likeness you bear to 
Colonel Delacombe. There is a miniature of the 
colonel — taken when young. It might pass for your 
Portrait." 

"Astonishing!" exciaimed Hilary, gazing at the 
miniature. "I am fairly bewildered." 

**I am a good deal perplexed myself," pursued 
Mrs. Radcliffe; **but one thing seems tolerably clear. 
Although the colonel feigned surprise on seeing you 
just now, I am pretty certain he knew you were here. 
I will teil you why I think so. This morning, I under- 
stand, you have received five hundred pounds from an 
unknown friend?" 

"Very true." 

'^ You have also received a ehest containing a large 



HILARY ST. IVES, I99 

supply of wearing apparel and other things. Who 
coiüd have sent the money and the ehest?" 

^^No one but Colonel Delacombel " exclaimed Hilary, 
eagerly. 

"The colonel has only just retnmed from India," 
Said Mrs. Radcliffe. "His first inqniries have evidently 
been about you. Having ascertained that you are here 
— thongh how he obtained the information I cannot 
explain — bis immediate Impulse wets to send you as- 
sistance. His next was to run down and see you, 
which he persuaded himself he could do with safety. 
But the likeness between you — of which I suppose he 
was Ignorant — has betrayed him." 

**You have divined it all," cried Hilary. 

Mrs. Radcliffe smiled at this tribute to her per- 
spicacity. 

**0{ course he pretends that his visit is paid to me, 
but I know better," she said. "I am not to be duped 
by such a shallow artifice. He has come to seej^ou, 
and satisfy himself, by personal inspection, what you 
are like. That is his object, I am convinced." 

"I am lost in wonder at your penetration, madam," 
exclaimed Hilary. ''Nothing seems to have escaped 
you." 

^^Another point of the last importance has yet to 
be mentioned," pursued Mrs. Radcliffe. "The arms 
engraved upon the signet-ring which you wear are the 
colonel's." 

"Great heavens! is it possible? I have always been 
told that this ring was my father's?" 



J 200 HILARY ST. IVES. 

Mrs. Radcliffe smiled and nodded her head. 

"I must beg you to entrust that ring to me for a 
time, for reasons which I will presently explain. It 
will be perfectly safe with me, I can assure you." 

He gave it to her at once, and she locked it up in 
a drawer of the table. 

"I do not wish the colonel to see it at present," 
she Said; ''and he could not fail to do so, if you 
continue to wear it. And now I must give you a few 
hints as to the course I think you ought to pursue. 
We will suppose our notions to be correct. Clearly, 
the iirst thing you have to do is to ingratiate yourself 
with the colonel. To succeed in this object will require 
care on your part. Do not seem too curious. Do not 
annoy him with any more questions. Evidently, as I 
have explained, he came here to reconnoitre. Let him 
take his own time, and proceed in his own way. Do 
not presume in the slightest degree on the discovery 
which you believe you have made. Do not allude to 
the likeness that seems to proclaim your parentage. 
By proper management, you may perhaps in the end 
induce him to acknowledge you. But this desirable 
consummation can only be brought about by prudence 
and caution. Like every one eise, the colonel has his 
peculiarities, and in order to win his favour they must 
be studied." 

''I hope to make him proud to acknowledge me, 
cried Hilary. 

"Precisely what I would have you do, and I there- 
fore urge you not to pTedp\ta.te matters." 



tf 



HILARY ST. IVES. 20l 

"I See the policy of the course you suggest, madam," 
said Hilary, with a look of inexpressible gratitude, 
**and will strive to follow it most carefully." 

**I will give you all the aid I can," said Mrs. Rad- 
cliffe. "And now another word of caution. You will 
be surprised when I counsel you not to take Mrs. Sutton 
into your confidence. She is the best creature living, 
and I have every faith in her. But from some cause 
or other — ^I know not what — she has conceived a strong 
dislike to Colonel Delacombe, and may thwart your 
plans." 

**I will not neglect your counsel, madam," said the 
young man. "But I could have trusted Mrs. Sutton 
with my life." 

"Do not trust her now." 

After a little pause she said: 

"That you may fully comprehend the almost 
matemal interest I take in you, I must let you into a 
secret. Seymour Delacombe — I mean the colonel, of 
course — was my first love. I was engaged to him; but 
the engagement was broken oflf, and I was martied to 
Mr. Radcliflfe. Now you will understand what Strange 
emotions were roused in my breast when I beheld one 
who so strongly resembled Seymour. Yes," she con- 
tinued, carried away by exdtement, and almost heedless 
what she said, "I thought what might have been, had 
fate permitted, and for the moment looked upon you 
as a son!" _ 

Hilary started to his feet, doubting whether he had 
heard aright. 



202 HILARY ST. IVES. 

But another person — the very last who ought to 
have done so — heard the words. This was the lady's 
husband, who chanced to enter the boudoir at the 
moment. 

However, we hasten to say that he attached very 
little importance at the time to the expressions, though 
he afterwards recalled them. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 203 



IV. 

The Scheine Frastrated. 

Seeing he was in the way, and a good deal con- 
fused, Hilary prepared to quit the room. Just as he 
was going out, Mrs. Radcliffe told him she would come 
down stairs presently, and introduce him to Sir Charles 
and his sister. 

"My dear," said Mr. Radcliflfe, as soon as they 
were alone, "you have promised more than you are 
likely to perfonn.'* 

"Why so?" she inquired. 

"I do not think it would be agreeable to Colonel 
Delacombe that this young man should be introduced 
to our friends. In fact, as things have turned out, it 
is rather unlucky that he happens to be here at this 
jnnctare; and I think the best plan wiU be to get rid 
of him — civilly, of course — as soon as we can." 

"The thing is impossible, my dear," said his wife; 
"I have asked him to stay." 

"Yes, but we must make some excuse. I see no 
hann in the young fellow — none whatever — and am 
quite willing that he should remain — indeed, I am 
sony to send him away — but to teil you the truth, 
your fether objects very strongly to him." 

Mr. Radcliffe thought this argument would be un- 
answerable, but he was mistaken. 



204 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"Neither to please the colonel, nor to please papa, 
nor to please you, sir, can I aDow Mr. St. Ives to go," 
Said the lady, decidedly. 

"I wish you could induce him to keep his own 
room then," groaned Mr. RadcKflfe. "At any rate, let 
me beg of you not to introduce him to Lady Rich- 
borough and Sir Charles, or you will place me in a 
very awkward position." 

**I cannot see why you should be uneasy," remarked 
the lady. "Mr. St. Ives is very gentlemanlike, and our 
friends will understand that he is an artist." 

"But he will make the colonel look ridiculous, my 
dear. Can you understand that?" 

"No, I confess I don't see it," said the lady. 

Very opportunely the colonel and Mr. Thomton 
here entered the boudoir. 

Thus strongly reinforced, Mr. RadclifFe ventured to 
renew the attack. 

**IVe been telling my wife, colonel, that you ob- 
ject to this young spark — ^this Hilary St. Ives," he said. 

"I refuse to believe so unless I Jiave it from your 
own lips, colonel," observed the lady, with one of 
her Wandest smiles. "You have seen nothing of 
him." 

"I have seen quite enough," rejoined the colonel. 

"I have no personal objection to the young fellow, and 

I regret to eject him from such comfortable quarters, 

but upon my soull I think the joke has been carried 

far enough. I cau't stand more of it." 



HILARY ST. IVES, 20$ 

"No joke is intended, my dear colonel. Surely, 
you don't suppose so?" 

"Everybody eise will think so, if I don't," he re- 
joined. 

"I object to the fellow on other grounds," inter- 
posed Mr. Thornton. "A conceited puppy — and if I 
didn't fear offending the colonel I should say he 
presumes upon his likeness to him." 

"How extremely silly you are, papa. The colonel 
will laugh at you." 

"My dear lady," said the colonel, "I should not 
care about the matter if it were confined to your own 
circle — ^you are welcome to laugh at me as much as 
you please. But I cannot be made lidiculous in the 
eyes of Lady Richborough and Sir Charles." 

"Didn't I say so, my dear?" cried Mr. Radcliffe. 

"What would you have me do?" said the lady, 
with an imploring look at tjie colonel, which she 
thought would move him. "I have asked Mr. St. Ives 
to stay. I did not think his presence would be dis- 
agreeable to you." 

"But it is disagreeable to him," cried Mr. Thom-^ 
ton — "infemally disagreeable. It is disagreeable also 
to me." 

Mr. Radcliflfe did not venture to make a remark. 

"It comes to this, my dear Mrs. Radcliffe," said 
the colonel, "that either he or I must go. Make your 
choice." 

"Nay, then, I cannot hesitate," said the lady; 
"though I yield very much against my inclination." 



^o6 HILARY ST. IVES, 

**ril go and give the young fellow his congö," 
cried Mr. Thornton, chuckling at the notion. 

"Spare his feelings, I entreat, papa," said Mrs. 
Radcliflfe. 

"Oh yes, TU spare him." 

"I must See him before he leaves — teil him so." 

"Of course, he'll come to bid you good-by." 

The old gentleman winked at Mr. Radcliffe, and 
they left the room together. 

"I think you will be sorry for compelling me to 
take this step, Seymour," observed the lady, in a tone 
of reproach, as soon as they were alone. "Have you 
no interest in this young man?" 

"Interest! — none," he replied. 

She shook her head sceptically. 

"You cannot deceive me. You have defeated a 
scheme which I had devised for his benefit." 

"It is not too late to repair the eiror," said the 
colonel. "If you have any motive for detaining him 
I will take my departure." 

"My motive was to serve you, Seymour," said the 
lady. 

"Serve me! I really cannot understand all these 
innuendoes." 

Mrs. Radcliffe was about to reply, when the door 
opened, and Hilary entered the boudoir. His looks 
showed that he was greatly hurt and offended. 

"After what passed between us a short time ago, 
madam," he said, "and the interest you professed to 
take in me, I did not expect to be thus summarily dis- 



HILARY ST, IVES. 207 

missed. It is to you, sir, I presume that I owe my 
dismissal?" he ad(led to the colonel. 

"You are welcome to entertain any opinion you 
please, sir," rejoined the other, haughtily. 

"For Heaven's sake, Seymour," cried the lady, 
"do not treat him thus/' 

Hilaiy, who was evidently struggling with violently 
repressed emotion, said, in a hoarse voice, to Mrs. 
RadclifFe, 

"May I speak to him?" 

"No, no," she repKed; "not now." 

"I am de trop here, I perceive," said the colonel, 
"I have the honour to wish you good day, Mr. St. 
Ives." 

"A moment, sir!" cried the young man, trying to 
detain him. 

But the colonel repulsed him with a haughty gesture, 
and went out. 

Hilary's enfeebled State did not enable him to bear 
up longer. He sank on the sofa, and Mrs. Radcliffe, 
alarmed by his looks, rang the bell. 

As the colonel issued-forth into the passage he 
found Mrs. Sutton. She had evidently heard what had 
just passed in the boudoir. Seizing his arm, and fixing 
a threatening look upon him, she said, 

"I told you you ought not have come here. You 
have broken ihe compact, and are interfering with me. 
If this young man is driven away, look to yourself." 

"I have made no compact with you, woman. Do 



2o8 HILARY ST. IVES. 

as you please/' rejoined the colonel. And disengaging 
himself from her, strode on. 

Just then the bell sounded, and Mrs. Sutton entered 
the boudoir. 

On seeing Hilary's condition, she cast an angry 
and reproachful look at her mistress, that seemed to 
imply, "This is your work." 

"I could not help it," cried Mrs. Radcliffe. "Don't 
upbraid me — ^but assist him." 

Fortunately, there were plenty of restoratives at 
band, and some of these being applied by the house- 
keeper, the young man soon regained bis conscious- 
ness. 

But he looked ghastly pale, and was still very 
feeble. He made an efFort to rise, but feil back again. 

"I cannot teil what has come over me," he mur- 
mured, trying to force a smile. 

"The agitation you have just undergone has been 
too much for you," said Mrsl Radcliflfe. "You must 
not think of leaving to-day. What say you, Sutton?" 
she added, appealing to her. 

"You are the best judge," replied the housekeeper, 
coldly. "In my opinion he is not in a fit State to 
move. He ought not to have left his room at all to- 
day. Had he remained quiet this would not have 
happened. Worse may ensue. If he leaves the house, 
I will not answer for his life." 

"He shall not go," said Mrs. Radcliffe, alarmed. 

"Pray do not give yourself any further concem 
about me," said Hilary. "There is no real danger, I 



HILARY st. IVES. 20^ 

am sure. This faintness will soon pass. I cannot 
remain here longer." 

"Not if I command you?" rejoined Mrs. RadclifFe. 
"Have I not just said that I feel towards you as a 
mother?" she added, in a low, tender tone. "Stay 
for my sake. Mrs. Sutton cannot feel for you as I do> 
but she will take every care of you." 

"/cannot feel forhim!" exclaimed the housekeeper, 
with a burst of uncontrollable rage. "Oh, this is too 
much ! " 

"Forgiveme, Sutton," said Mrs. Radcliffe, frightened. 
"You have done all that could be done for him — far 
more than I could have done. But — you understand." 

"Yes, yes, I understand," rejoined the housekeeper. 

•*Are you able to move now, do you think?" she 
added to the young man, who arose with her as- 
sistance. 

"Oh yes, my strength is returning." 

"Ah! that is well," cried Mrs. Radcliffe. "Take 
him to his own room at once, Sutton. I will come to 
see you presently," she added, in her sweetest voice, 
to Hilary. "But keep quiet, I beg of you, and on no 
account leave your own room." 

The young man promised compliance, and, with a 
look that bespoke profound gratitude mingled with al- 
most filial aifection, quitted the boudoir, supported by 
the housekeeper. 

Mrs. Radcliffe stood at the door, and watched them 
as they moved slowly along the passage. 

Hilary St. Jves, J. H 



^10 HILARY ST. IVBS. 

Just as they were about to enter a Chamber on the 
left, Hilary perceived her, and smiled gratefuHy. 

"He shall not leave, if I can prevent it," thought 
Mrs. Radcliflfe, as she retumed to the boudoir. "But 
I really must not neglect our guests," she added, ad- 
justing her toilette, preparatory to going down-stairs. 



.HILAI^Y ST. rVES. ^11 



V. 

Contrary to Expectation, Sir Charles is accepted. 

SooN after leaving the summer-house, Lady Rich- 
borough encountered Oswald, who was Coming in that 
direction. He told her he was looking for her lady- 
ship and May. 

"Turn back with me, Mr. Woodcot," she rejoined 
with an arch look. "May is in the summer-house with 
Sir Charles." 

"With Sir Charles!" echoed Oswald. 

"Yes, and I don't think they would care for your 
Company. You must make up your mind to lose your 
fair cousin. Sir Charles is resolved to carry her off." 

"Ah! this is the plan they have had in view," 
thought Oswald. "No wonder I have been sent to the 
r^ght-about." 

"You can*t suppose I am so blind as not to have 
perceived that you are desperately enamoured of your 
fair cousin," pursued her ladyship, "and I wouldn't 
have allowed Sir Charles to interfere, if I hadn't found 
out that May doesn't requite your passion," 

"Much obliged for your kind intentions in my be- 
half," rejoined Oswald. "Luckily, they are quite un- 
necessary, since your ladyship has already made me 
perfectly indifferent to any rivalry on the part of Sir 
Charles." 

14* 



212 HILARY ST. IVES, 

"Ah! indeed — you surprise me. I am very happy 
to learn that. The object has been achieved quite 
unconsciously, I assure you." 

"Not quite unconsciously, I should think," ven- 
tured Oswald. 

"I should like to know how I have done it?" she 
remarked. 

"The explanation is easy enough, and yet I have 
scarcely the courage to make it. When I feil in love 
with May, I had not seen your ladyship." 

"Very prettily turned, upon my word, Mr. Wood- 
cot," Said her ladyship. "I am inmiensely flattered 
by being preferred to your charming cousin, but I 
cannot compliment you on your taste." 

"It seems to me that I have given the best proof 
possible of taste," rejoined Oswald, "though I may 
be fairly taxed with inconstancy." 

"Good again. You improve, Mr. Woodcot." 

"I am glad to hear your ladyship say so," rejoined 
Oswald, rather more diffidently. "I am afraid I shall 
sink in your esteem if I venture to describe the efFect 
produced upon me by your charms." 

Her ladyship did not seem at all displeased. She 
had flirted a good deal with Oswald on the previous 
day, when he had luncheoned at Boxgrove. 

"Let US hear the State of the case," she observed, 
laughing. "Are you very hard hit?" 

"Very hard," teplied Oswald. 

"What are your Symptoms?" she inquired, with an 
arch look. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 21 3 

"Violent palpitations oftheheart — troubied dreams 
— total loss of appetite — disordered brain — -suicidal 
tendency." 

"A very bad case indeed," she rejoined. "Shall I 
prescribe for you?" 

**It rests with your ladyship to save my life," he 
cried, with an impassioned look. "I am entirely in 
your hands." 

"Promise to attend to the prescription, or I cannot 
give it," she said. 

Promise given. 

"Drink an extra bottle of bordeaux to-day in 
honour of your fair cousin. To-morrow run up to 
town for a week, and before you come back ypu will 
have forgotten all about me. Your eure will then be 
complete." 

While rattling on in this way, her ladyship had 
kept a watchful eye upon the summer-house. She now 
perceived the pair come forth, and, laughing heartily 
ßi Oswald's consternation, flew to meet them. 

She augured well from her brother's looks. 

"It's all right — I see it is!" she cried, seizing both 
May 's hands. "Make me happy by saying you have 
put the dear boy out of his misery." 

"I don't know what I have said," replied May, 
who looked pale and confused. 

"Not at all surprising, my love. Girls never do 
know what they say on these occasions. They leave 
men to put their own construction on their words. 
How do you Interpret -her an^wer, Charlie?" 



/ 



214 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"Most favourably,'* he replied. "I have reason to 
believe I am accepted." 

"Reason to believe, dear boy! That's not enough. 
You must be certain." 

"I have asked for a few hours' consideration/* ob- 
served May. 

"But I hope Charlie has not been foolish enough 
to grant the request. Why keep the dear boy in 
suspense? I would not allow a moment's delay. ~It 
should be now or never with me. Let me give this 
little band to Charlie, and conclude the matter." 

May tried to withdraw her band, but she could not 
prevent Sir Charles from pressing it to bis lips. 

Before a word of protest could be uttered, Lady 
Richborough told May, in an undertone, that she could 
not now retract, and such was her ladyship's ascen- 
dancy over the young damsel that she feit unable to 
remonstrate. 

"All is now satisfactorily concluded," cried her 
ladyship, greatly elated by her successful management. 
"I ofFer you both my heartfelt congratulations — you, 
my dear Charlie — and you, sweet sister that-is-to-be. 
May you both be as happy as I would have you!" 

Just then the gong sounded for luncheon. 

They were preparing to obey the summons, when 
Oswald, who had witnessed the scene at a distance — 
with what feelings we shall not attempt to describe — 
advanced towards them. 

Lady Richborough begged him to go before them, 
and announce to Mr. atvd "Mlis. "^dcMe that an en- 



HILARY ST, IVES* 21$ 

gagement had just been concluded betweeij^May and 
Sir Charles. 

"I am sure you will be delighted to be the bearer 
of the joyful intelligence," said her ladyship. 

Oswald winced, but could not refuse, and, with a 
sore heart, departed on his mission. 

The others followed more slowly to the house. 



2l6 HILARY ST. IVES, 



VI. 
Hilary leaves Hazlemere. 

Imagine papa's and mamma's amazement — imagine 
grandpapa's delight — when Oswald informed them that 
May had accepted Sir Charles. 

"Many a girl, I know, has accepted the man she 
meant to refuse," observed papa; "but I didn't think 
May was one of that sort." 

"Nor I/' rejoined mamma, who had just come 
down-stairs, and was greeted by the intelligence. "I 
can't understand it." 

"But I can/' cried grandpapa, chuckling and rub- 
bing his hands gleefully. "It's all my doing. IVe 
brought her to her senses." 

"Begging your pardon, sir," remarked Oswald, "I 
should say, if May has been Influenced by anybody, it 
U by Lady Richborough." 

"Nothing of the sort," rejoined the old gentleman, 
sharply. "It's my doing, I teil you." 

The foregoing discourse took place in the hall, 
where the party were assembled preparatory to going 
into the dining-room to luncheon. In another minute 
the newly-engaged couple came in, accompanied by 
Lady Richborough, who seemed in tip-top spirits. A 
scene of congratulations enswed, yrhich will be readily 



HILARY ST. IVES. 217 

conceived. While affectionatelj^ embracing his grand- 
daughter, the old gentleman whispered in her ear, 

"You are a dear good girl, May, and won't regret 
following grandpapa's advice." 

She made no reply. Indeed, she was almost over- 
come, and her great desire was to be alone. Rejoiced 
SS he was at the resolution she had taken, her father 
looked at her anxionsly, and noticed — not without mis-. 
giving — that she was exceedingly pale. She did not 
go in to luncheon with the others, but excusing herseif 
to Lady Richborough, hurried to her own room, and 
throwing herseif into a chair, gave vent to her emo- 
tion in a flood of tears. 

When she looked up, she perceived the house- 
keeper Standing before her. 

"Oh, SuttonI" she exclaimed, "I have been very 
foolish — I have accepted him." 

"I guessed as much," said the housekeeper, coldly. 
"Well, I congratulate you." 

"Pity me, rather." 

"Pity you!" cried the housekeeper, contemptuously. 
"No, I can't do that. Having taken the step, you 
must abide by it. I believe you have chosen well. 
You know my opinion of Sir Charles. Why are you 
not with them at luncheon?" 

"I could not stand it. I am going down presently. 
Where is Mr. St. Ives? I did not see him in the hall 
when I came in. I was glad he was not there." 

Mrs. Sutton looked at her searchingly, as she re- 
plied, 



% 






£|8 HILARY ST. lYES. 

''I do not think you will see him again. He has 
been enjoined to leave the house immediately." 

''Enjoined to leave!" exclaimed May, indignantly. 
By whom?" 

By your grandpapa, but I believe at the instance 
of Colonel Delacombe. I am very sorry for it. But 
it cannot be helped." 

"It must be prevented," cried May. "I will speak 
to grandpapa. He will not disoblige me so mnch. 
What does mamma say? Sorely she will never allow 
Mr. St. Ives to be sent away thus!" 

"What can she say, when every one is against her 
— even your papa? However, there is no use in dis- 
cussing the matter. Mr. St. Ives is much hurt at the 
treatment he has experienced, and would not remain, 
even if requested. Unfortunately, he is scarcely in a 
fit State to move, for he has had a relapse, brought on 
by this exdtement." 

"Don't let him go, Sutton." 

"I cannot prevent him, dear." 

"I wish I could talk to him, but that would not be 
proper." 

"I will teil him what you say," rejoined the house- 
keeper. "If it produces no other effect, it will con- 
Kole him." 

And she departed on the errand. 

Shortly afterwards, May left her room with the In- 
tention of joining the party at luncheon. 

In the passage, near the landing, she found Hilary 
and Mrs. Sutton. Evidently they were waiting for her 



HELARV ST. IVES. 21 q 

Coming forth. The young man moved forward feebly 
to meet her» 

''I am come to bid you farewell, Miss RadclÜfe/' 
he Said. ''You have heard why I am leaving thus 
suddenly. I shall carry away with me a grateful re- 
collection of your kindness." 

"I have been nrging him to delay his departure, 
bat without effect," observed Mrs. Sutton. 

"To remain longer would be impossible, aller what 
has occorred/' obs^ired Hilary, in a tone that showed 
his resolution was taken. 

**Farewell, then, since it must be so/' rejoined 
May. "It will delight me to hear of your success." 

'*I shall strive to obtain distinction," he returned, 
"though I have not the indtement that I had to work. 
I have just heard that you are to be united to Sir 
Charles Ilminster. May I be allowed to wish you all 
possible happiness!" 

Thanking him by a look, May again bade him 
adieu, and went down-stairs, 

With a deep sigh that seemed to proceed from the 
inmost recesses of his breast, Hilary retumed to his 
room. 

Mrs« Sutton did not go with him, her presence 
being required below. 

Hilary thought his heart would burst. All the hopes 
in which he had so foolishly indulged were crushed. 
The future was a blank. Worst of all, he was stung 
well-high to madness by a «ense of wrong and in- 
justice. 




220 HILARY ST. IVES. 

From this State he was roused by the entrance of 
Boston, who brought him some Sandwiches and wine 
on a tray, which he placed on a little table beside 
him. 

"Sorry to find youVe had another attack, sir," ob- 
served the valet, in a commiserating tone. "A glass 
of Sherry, I'm sure, will do you good. Allow me to 
pour one out for you. WeVe just been drinking cur 
young lady*s good health in the servants' hall, and 
coupling with it the name of the honoured gentleman 
with whom she is to be united. Ah! sir, Sir Charles 
is a fortunate man, and could not have made a better 
choice." 

"I trust she will be happy with him," said Hilary, 
raising the glass to his lips. 

"Little doubt of it," cried Boston. "She'U have 
everything she can desire — a splendid mansion and a 
wealthy spouse. Boxgrove is the finest place in this 
part of Surrey. YouVe not seen Sir Charles, I think? 
— a noble-looking gentleman. And as to the love he 
bears our young lady, his groom, Kennedy, who has 
been dining with us in the servants' hall, told Annette 
that he's awful spoony. We shall all be sorry to lose 
Miss May — for she's the life and soul of the house — 
but we couldn*t wish her a better home, or a better 
husband than she's sure to get." 

Hilary assented in a scarcely audible voice. 

"Everybody seems delighted with the engagement, 
except Mr. Oswald, and he looks rather down in the 
mouth — but that's not to be wondered at. I never saw 






HILARY ST. rVES. 221 

master in greatpr glee than he was at luncheon, and as 
to Mr. Thornton, he's almost beside hisself. They're 
all going over to Boxgrove this aftemoon, as Sir 
Charles wishes to show the place to Colone! Dela- 
combe and the old gentleman. Pity you're not able to 
join the party, sir." 

Hilary made no reply, and the valet, noticing his 
increased paleness, kindly urged him to take another 
glass of Sherry, and try to eat a mouthful — but the 
young man declined. 

"Is Mrs. RadcliiFe going to Boxgrove?" he in« 
quired. 

"Yes, sir; and her ladyship has asked Mrs. Sutton 
to accompany my mistress; so she's going too. The 
carriage is ordered immediately. That reminds me 
that I may be wanted. Can I do anything more for 
you, sir?" 

** Nothing whatever," replied Hilary. 

And the valet departed. 

Shortly afterwards, Mrs. RadcliiFe and the house- 
keeper entered the room — both arrayed for the drive. 
Mrs. Radcliffe was got up with great taste, and looked 
extremely well. 

"I want to have some conversation with you," she 
Said to the young man; "but I haven't tirae for it now. 
We're all going to Boxgrove, and shan't be back be- 
fore seven o'clock in time for dinner. You'U have all 
the house to yourself, so ramble about it as you please, 
and do what you like. I can't stay a minute longer. 
Au revoir!" 



22Z mUiKY ST. rVES« 

Mrs. Sutton lingered for a moment, and said» in a 
low voice^ ''I am obliged to go with her. Do ixothing 
tili my rpturn." 

She then foUowed her mistress out of the room. 

All this occurred so quickly, that Hilaiy had not 
had time to speak, but feeling that some explanation 
of hi3 intentions was due to Mrs. Radcliffe, he arose 
as quickly as he could, and went out into the passage. 
Too late. They were gone. 

Merry voices mingled with laughter, resounding 
from the great staircase and from the entrance-hall, 
told him that the party were just starting on the ex- 
pedition, and though he feh the sight would give him 
pain, he could not resist the Impulse that prompted 
him to proceed to a window which he knew commanded 
the principal entrance of the house. 

A well-appointed landau, to which a pair of splen- 
did bays were hamessed, was drawn up at the door. 
This carriage was destined for the elderly parties — 
though Mrs. Radcliffe would not have liked to be in- 
cluded in that list — ^and, as soon as they were seated, 
it yfBS driven off. 

/ The saddle-horses were then brought round, and 
trie first to mount were Lady Richborough and May. 
^hough dazzled by her ladyship's beauty, Hilary was 
far more attracted by May, whose slight symmetrical 
figure was seen to great advantage in a riding-dress. 
If not so bold a rider as her ladyship, May sat her 
steed with equal grace, and looked more feminine — a 
special charm in Hilary's eyes. Sir Charles was now 



/ 
/ 



|m4AR.Y ST- IVBS. 223 

privileged to assist her to mount, and having perfonned 
this enviable office, he sprang into hi$ saddle, and they 
rode OJÖF together. What would poor Hilary have given 
to be by her side. He watched them as they proceeded 
slowly towards the lodge-gates. It was an aggravation 
of his misery to perceive that May's lovely coüntehance 
had lost all trace of sadness. She smiled complacently 
upon Sir Charles,. whose prond features wore an ahnost 
exulting expression. 

Never, indeed, had the haughty baronet been hap- 
pier than at that moment. The prize was won, When 
he had feared it would elude his grasp. 

They were foUowed at a discreet distance by Lady 
Richborough, escorted by Colonel Delacombe and Osr 
wald. The colonel was provided with the best hack in 
Mr. Radcliffe's Stahles — a thoroughbred chesnut. Not 
knowing his rider, the horse began to show off. But 
better horseman than Colonel Delacombe never existed, 
and the skill with which he managed the fiery animal 
filled Hilary with admiration. Even Lady Richborough 
was Struck by the colonel's horsemanship, and com* 
piimented him upon it. He smiled. Praise from her 
ladyship was praise indeed. From that moment she 
resolved upon his conquest, and set about the task in 
eamest. Oswald was not badly mounted, and looked 
well enoughy but she did not bestow a thought upon 
him. 

Hilary watched them, and listened to their laughter, 
tili they had disappeared, and the sound of their voices 
could be heard no more. 



224 HILARY ST- IVES. 

With a sad heart he then retumed to his Chamber, 
and surrendered himself once more to bitter reflections. 

He had taken leave of May for ever. She would 
soon be the bride of another. He must think of her 
no more. This was the sharpest pang. 

Next in point of intensity was the anguish caused 
by Colonel Delacombe's treatment of him. Here, how- 
ever, pride and Indignation came to his rjelief, and 
allayed his mental torture. 

The necessity for action aroused him, Writing 
materials were upon the table, and taking a sheet or 
two of paper he commenced a lengthened letter, the 
composition of which occupied him more than an hour, 
for he paused frequently while engaged in the task. 

He did not dcire to read over what he had written, 
but folding up the sheets, both of which he had filled, 
he placed within them the bank-notes he had received 
that morning, and securing the letter and inclosure in 
an envelope, addressed it to Mrs. Radcliflfe. 

Next unlocking the ehest of clothes, which had 
been placed in a corner of the room, and taking from 
it a knapsack, sent him in lieu of the one of which he 
had been plundered, he packed up within it a cotiple 
of Shirts, and a few other necessary articles. These 
and a round feit hat were all he took. His preparations 
being completed, he left the room, taking the letter 
with him. 

On the landing of the staircase he encomitered 
Annette, to whom he confided the letter, requesting 
her to lay it on the table in her mistress's boudoir. 



HILARY ST. IVES. ^25' 

Annette looked very much surprised, and noticing 
the knapsack, ventured to inquire if he was about to 
take his departure. 

Hilary replied in the affirmative, and putting a 
small gratuity into her hand, bade her good-bye, and 
descended the staircase. No one was in the haJl at 
the time, and he left the house without attracting further 
Observation. 

Astonished at his abrupt departure, Annette did 
his bidding, and took the letter to the boudoir, twist- 
ing it about as she went, and wondering what it con- 
tained. 



miary St. Ives. I. IS 



a26 HILARY ST. IVES. 



VII. 
Boxgrove. 

Ths landau was slowly ascending the lofty and 
well-wooded hill on the summit of which Stands the 
ancient mansion of the Ilminsters, when May and Sir 
Charles entered the park. 

It was not May's first visit to Boxgrove. She had 
often been there before. But somehow the place looked 
difFerent now — brighter and more cheerful. While 
cantering over the smooth turf, with Sir Charles by her 
side, gazing at her with admiration, she thought she 
had never discerned half the beauties of the park before. 
Perhaps the brilliant sunshine, flooding the groves and 
glittering on the vanes, gables, and bay-windows of the 
stately old pile, heightened the attraction of the pros- 
pect. A fine day will do wonders. But was there 
not something at work within her gentle breast? Was 
she not slightly elated by the idea that this proud 
domain might soon be hers? Certainly, as her eye 
ranged over the lovely scene, the thought crossed her, 
and quickened her pulse. 

Boxgrove Park boasts timber of great age and great 

variety, wide-spread beeches, Druid oaks with huge 

gnarled trunks, Spanish chesnuts, and walnuts. No 

such walnuts to be found elsewhere. Besides these, 

there are hollies in abutidaiiee ^xvd of great size, spien- 



HILARY ST. IVES, ^2? 

did ilexes, groves of box that clothe the steepest parts 
of the hill, sombre avenues fonned by black and matted 
yew-trees, while rows of tall straight pines edge the 
paths that lead through the tangled tbickets. Here the 
red sqilirrel may be seen , here .the harsh jay may be 
heardy and many another bird besides. In short, Box- 
grove Park is very beautiful, and very picturesqiie, and 
so May thought it. 

But what chiefly delighted her was a large herd of 
deer couched beneath the trees about a hundred yards 
from the spot where she had halted for a moment to 
gaze aronnd. Alarmed by the notice taken of them, 
the gracefui animals quickly arose, and trooped off to 
an adjacent covert. May watched their movements 
with the greatest interest, and loudly expressed her ad* 
miration. 

"Oh, the lovely creatures!" she exclaimed, "how 
well they harmonise with the scene! No park can be 
complete without deer." 

"That is quite my opinion," observed Sir Charles. 
"They are generaily to be seen from the house, and 
form a very pretty picture. I hope you will take them 
under your especial Charge." 

May thanked him with a smile. 

"By-and-by they will know me," she said, "and 
I shall not frighten them when stopping to look at 
them." 

Nothing could have delighted Sir Charles more than 
this simpfe Observation. 

• 15* 



22$ HILARY ST. tVES. 

"I know you sketch/' he said. "You will find 
plenty of exercise for your pencil here." 

"Yes," she rejoined, "I havealready noted one or 
two charming little bits that will exactly suit me. I 
could spend hours among those trees." 

"I hope you will," he said; "and I hope I shall be 
near you." 

"That will never do. I must be alone, or I shaU 
not be able to sketch. I am an enthusiastic admirer 
of old trees. Yonder aged oak is perfection. What a 
grand looking treel" 

"You have picked out the best tree in the park," 
said Sir Charles. "That oak is called *The King of 
the Forest,' and is older by some centuries than the 
oldest tree near it. There are some magnificent beech- 
trees on the north side of the hill behind the hoose 
that deserve your attention." 

"I know them well," she rejoined. "They are 
perfect beauties; such broad branches, and such clean 
silvery stems. I have sketched one or two of those 
beech-trees. Before long, I dare say I shall have made 
acquaintance with every tree in the park." 

"Every tree in the park is yours from this moment," 
he cried. 

"A princely gift!" she exclaimed. "But though I 
dote upon trees, I cannot accept it." 

"Why not?" he demanded. "All I have is yours. 
Having given you my heart, the rest goes with it." 

Sir Charles looked so like a preux Chevalier while 
making this gallant speech that May thought him süperb. 



HILARY ST. IVES* 22Q 

Homage like this is rarely paid now-a-days, and for 
the best of reasons — the girl of the period would laugh 
at it. With her the days of chivalry are for ever past. 
She does not understand the sentiment of devotion. 
Sentiment of any kind she derides. She neither desires 
to insplre a great passion, nor is capable of inspiring 
it. We have utterly failed in our portraiture of May, 
if she seems to bear any resemblance to a girl of this 
class. HithertOy as we have shown, she cared very 
little for Sir Charles. She accepted him without know- 
ing exactly why she did so — ^partly because she had 
been told most emphatically that her union with him 
would be agreeable to her. family — but chiefly because 
she yielded to the influenae exercised over her by Lady 
Richborough. Blame her not too severely, fair censor. 
Very likely you would have acted in the same way, if 
subjected to a sinular ordeal. The really surprising 
thing is, that she did not fall in love with Sir Charles 
from the first. But there is no accounting for tastes* 
After accepting him, she repented — but it was then 
too late. During the ride to Boxgrove he made wonder- 
ful progress in her regard. She listened to what he 
Said with pleasure — with something more than pleasure. 
Love was fluttering around her with his golden wings, 
though she could not distinguish him. At the critical 
moment he let fly the dart. Touched by Sir Charles's 
devotion, she now feit for the first time that she could 
love him. The thoughts passing in her breast could 
be read in her looks, and Sir Charles was not mistaken 
in them. 



23Ö HILARY ST. IVES. 

They were both roused from the delicious reverie, 
into which they had fallen, by light langhter, and look- 
ing round, beheld Lady Richborough approaching with 
her attendant cavaliers. 

For the first time Sir Charles wished his sister away. 
In his present mood her high spirits were too much 
for him. As soon, therefore, as ehe and her companions 
came up, he said he should ride on to receive Mrs. 
Radcliffe, and with a look that conveyed a world of 
passionate regard to May, put spursto his steed and 
galloped off towards the house. As he plunged into 
a grove of trees that lay between him and the mansion, 
May thought he looked like a paladin of old. 

Reared about the middle of the sixteenth Century 
by Sir Alberic Ilminster, Boxgrove was a magnificent 
mansion, partially castellated, with large transom Win- 
dows filled with stained glass, and possessing many 
noble rooms, which were fortunately allowed to remain 
in their pristine State. 

No material change had been made in the mansion 
since its erection, and even the old furniture, chairs, 
beds, antique mirrors, and hangings were carefully 
preserved, so that it was not merely a capital specimen 
of Tudor architecture, but gave an accurate idea of the 
internal decorations of a large hpuse of the period. 

The mansion was approaghed from the back 
through a turreted and embattied gateway, and over 
the entrance was a great stone shield, sculptured with 
the arms of the family. These were repeated on the 
garden gates, on the sundial, on the posts of the great 



HILARY ST. IVES. 23 1 

staircase, on the huge chimney-piece of the hall, and 
WCTe, furthermore, emblazoned on several of the Windows. 

The hall to which we have just adverted, and 
which was entirely undefaced by modern alteration, 
with its gallery for minstrels, its long massive oak table, 
its great fireplace and andirons, recalled the days of 
baronial hospitality, which Sir Alberic and many of 
his successors had practised. In the hall was a full- 
length Portrait of the doughty old knight, in rüfF, 
doublet, and hose, with his favourite black hound by 
his side, and a certain resemblance might be traced in 
his proud features to those of his descendant. 

The drawing-room was splendid, the ceiling being 
covered with a profusion of plaister Ornaments, the 
wainscoting richly carved, and the chimney-piece 
ornamented with pillars and terms, and decorated with 
the arms of Elizabeth. 

The dining-room had also a süperb chimney-piece 
and richly-carved .wainscot. 

At the head of the staircase was a grand gallery, 
upwards of a hundred feet in length, fiUed with family 
portraits. Hence a passage led to the State bed- 
chambers , one of which had been occupied by Queen 
Elizabeth, and another by James the First, and in both 
were preserved the antique beds in which those sover- 
eigns had reposed. 

The beds were orily used on State occasions, and 
their once rieh hangings looked dim and faded, while*" 
the rooms themselves, hung with arras from the iooms 
of Flanders, had a ghostly air. 



<232 HILARY ST. IVES. 

All the bed-chambers, as we have intimated, 
retained their original furniture. Whether any of them 
were haunted we decline to State at present, but we 
must own that everybody who visited the royal apart- 
ments declared they must be haunted, and expressed 
a decided disinclination to sleep in them. 

There was also a communication from the gallery, 
by means of a short staircase, to a private chapel, 
which was as large as many a country church. 

The mansion looked towards the south, and the 
fa^ade, with its splendid bay Windows and richly 
sculptured portal, was most imposing. A broad ter- 
race, with a stone balustrade, looked down upon the 
lovely slopes and glades of the park, and commanded 
the finest and most extensive prospect imaginable over 
a lovely district. Some magnificent cedars of Lebanon 
adorned the lawn. 

In the large, old-fashioned gardens, quincunxes, 
clipped trees, and alleys were to be found; but many 
modern improvements had been here judiciously in- 
troduced. 

Not only was Boxgrove a very fine old place, but 
it was extremely well kept, and this could not have 
been accomplished without the large establishment that 
Sir Charles Ilminster maintained. 

Sir Charles had already dismounted, and stationed 
himself at the foot of the broad flight of Steps leading 
to the entranCe, when the carriage entered the court. 

A bell rung at the gateway brought forth a host of 



HILAR.Y ST. IVES. ;233 

servants, chief among whom was the pompous old 
butler, Mr. Dancer, who, having served in. the honse 
before Sir Charles was born, considered himself the 
most important person in the establishment, being 
firmly persuaded that nothing could go on properly 
without him. Intelligence of the great event of the 
day^ which was likely to produce such an important 
change in the domestic arrangements of the house, had 
already reached Boxgrove, being brought by Kennedy, 
the groom, who had been sent on by his master, and 
the news, though not whoUy unexpected, caused an 
immense Sensation in the household. Some were 
pleased, but the majority, we regret to say, were dis- 
satisfied. Among the latter were the great Mr. Dancer, 
and Mrs. Trapp, the housekeeper, neither of whom 
were at all desirous of submitting to the dictation of a 
young mistress. Mrs. Trapp, who shared with the 
butler the rule of the house, did not at all approve of 
the choice that Sir Charles had made. Against the 
young lady's personal attractions she had nothing to 
say — Miss RadclifFe was pretty, no doubt — but her 
beauty was insipid, and she could not for a moment 
be compared with Lady Richborough. There was a 
fascinating woman — if you please. As to her family, 
the less said about them the better. She beüeved that 
Miss Radcliffe had a grandfather, who built Hazlemere, 
but she never supposed that the proud Sir Charles 
Ilminster, who might have wedded an earl's sister, 
would stoop to the daughter of a city merchant. Pity 
old Sir Umfraville and her lamented ladyship were laid 



^34 HILARY Sf. IVES, 

in the familj vault. They would never have allowed 
the match. 

. Mr. Dancer attempted to console her by observing 
that it would certainly have been far better for Sir [ 
Charles — ^more for his own happiness, and the happiness 
of all connected with him — if he would have remained ; 
a bachelor; but as he had allowed himself to be in- 
veigled by an artful miss-in-her-teens, such an inex^ 
perienced girl might be more easily managed than a 
woman of twenty-five. He had always understood that 
Mrs. Sutton ruled suprenie at Hazlemere, and never 
brooked the slightest interference on Miss Radcliffe's 
part. He recommended Mrs. Trapp to follow the ex- 
ample set her, which she faithfully promised to do. 

Their coUoquy was intemipted by the loud ringing 
of the bell at the gate, announcing the arrival, and 
summoning Mr. Dancer and a host of powdered 
lacqueys to the door. 

Chasing away all signs of vexation from her comely 
face, Mrs. Trapp prepared to welcome her future 
mistress with a smile of delight. 

Mrs. RadclifFe and the others had just been ushered 
into the hall, when May and those with her rode into 
the coutt. Again Sir Charles was in attendance on the 
perron, and assisting his intended bride to alight^ led 
her into the house. No one would have supposed, 
from the profound respect paid her by the butler, by 
Mr. Spriggs, the valet, and the obsequious lacqueys, 
and the delight manifested by Mrs. Trapp, who had 
already made her appearance in the hall, and was 



HILARY ST. IVES. 235 

conversing with Mrs. Radcliffe — no one, we say, could 
for an instant have imagined that the slightest objection 
had been raised to Sir Charles's choice. Bows and 
smiles greeted May on all sides, and certainly her 
charming looks and extreme amiability of manner were 
calculated to disarm hostility. She addressed Mrs. 
Trapp most aflfably, and that domineering dame began 
to think that she should not object to a young mistress 
after all. While this was going on, Colonel Delacombe 
and Mr. Thornton, being strangers to the place, were 
shown round the ancient hall by Lady Richborough, 
who pöinted out certain suits of armour, swords, and 
bucklers, with histories attached to them, and called 
their attention to the portrait of Sir Alberic. Little 
time was allowed for this examination. Sir Charles led 
the ladies into the dining-room, where a cold coUation 
was set out, and the rest of the Company followed. 
The coUation was superfluous, since everybody — except 
May — had already partaken of luncheon; but a glass 
of wine was deemed indispensable to the occasion, and 
Clicquot and Chäteau Yquem were handed round by 
Mr. Dancer and the footmen. Looks füll of kindly 
meaning, and words of kindly Import were directed 
towards May by grandpapa — and not by him alone — 
as the wine was drunk. Mrs. Sutton was present at 
the time — very much to the colonel's annoyance, for 
he feit that her eyes were constantly upon him, and 
her ears open to everything he said. He owed this 
infliction to Lady Richborough, who, wishing to show 
Mrs. Sutton especial attention, insisted upon her re* 



i 



^^6 HILARY ST. IVES, 

maiaing with the Company. After a second glass of 
Champagne had been quaifed, the survey of the house 
began. 

Mrs. RadclifFe was scarcely equal to the fatiguing 
task imposed upon her, but she would not be left out, 
and leaning on Mrs. Sutton's arm, went with the party. 
Climbing the grand old staircase was indeed a toil, but 
on reaching the gallery, she sat down, and examined 
the portraits with her eye-glass. Mr. Radcliffe, who 
was Standing beside her, could not help remarking in 
an undertone whj^t a fine thing it was to be connected 
with such an ancient and important family as was here 
represented. The Company were dispersed about the 
gallery. Sir Charles and his intended had sepaiated 
thejnselves from the rest, and seemed wrapped up in 
each other's society. All seemed going on as smoothly 
and satisfactorily as those interested in the match could 
desire, and papa and grandpapa were enchanted. Un- 
.fortunately, Mrs. RadcliiFe's delight was marred by a 
circumstance which we must proceed to explain. The 
inconstant colonel was flirting dreadfiilly with Lady 
Richborough. No mistake about it. There they were 
seated together on a velvet-covered bench at the further 
end of the gallery — not looking at the portraits, but 
looking at each other, and talking in a very animated 
manner. If the colonel was making love, it was clear 
that he met with pienty of encouragement. 

"Upon my word," observed Mr. Radcliffe, greatly 
amused by what was going on, "I shouldn't be sur- 
prised if W0 have ß,nother marriage in the family." 



HILARY ST. IVES. ^37 

Mrs. RadclifFe had no business to be jealous — but 
jealous she was— -and not being able to contain her- 
seif, her angry remarks made her husband laugh very 
heartily. 

"I should have thought, my dear, you would be 
pleased that the colonel and her ladyship should make 
a match of it," he said. 

"I am disgusted with the flirtation," rejoined his 
wife. "Do go and put a stop to it." 

" Certainly not, my dear," he replied, moving away 
to examine the pictures. 

Another person . was likewise jealous — furiously 
jealous. The day was unpropitious to Oswald. Dur- 
ing the ride to Boxgrove, her ladyship had been en- 
tirely engrossed by the colonel, who, sooth to say! 
seemed enthralled by her fascinations, and had scarcely 
condescended to notice him. Arrived at the house, 
she seemed quite unconscious of his presence. 

"Decidedly, the colonel has cut you out," re- 
marked Mr. Thornton to his grandson, with affected 
sympathy. 

"Oh! I don't care," cried Oswald. "She is a 
heartless coquette. She flirted quite as much with me 
yesterday. To-morrow, it will be the turn of some- 
body eise," 

"Sorry for you, notwithstanding," said the old 
gentleman, with a grave countenance, though he was 
chuckling internally. 

Never for an instant was Mrs. Sutton's gaze re* 
moved from the couple whose undisguised flirtation 



233 HILARY ST. IVBS. 

caused such heartburning and jealousy. She watched 
their looks» and, though at a distance, seemed to 
divine what passed between them. 

Oh! how she hated the fascinating Myrtilla^ and if 
a look would have stricken her dead, she would have 
so destroyed her. It rejoiced her, however, to feel 
that Mrs. RadclifFe sufFered equally; and the few re- 
marks she made were calculated to inflame her mis- 
tress's jealousy. She knew how to plant the stmg 
where it would be feit most keenly. 

When at length the colonel and the syren who had 
chamied him arose, and marching towards Mrs. Rad- 
clifFe, inquired "how she liked the pictures?" she had 
become so agitated that she could scarcely make an 
intelligible reply. But the colonel did not notice her 
reproachful look, neither did he appear to trouble him- 
self about Mrs. Sutton. 

Very little attention, we are sorry to say, was paid 
to the portraits, and the celebrated beauties, proud 
cavaliers, and gallant gentlemen, ranged along the 
walls, had never been so shamefully neglected before. 
The living beauties were the sole objects of attraction 
— with two, at least, of the party. Sir Charles had 
eyes only for May — and the infatuated colonel thought 
Lady Richborough far more charming than Barbara 
Lady Ilminster, who bloomed in the days of George L, 
or than the rather d6collet^ dame who had been ad- 
mired by James 11. when Duke of York, though both 
were accounted the loveliest women of their time. 

Taking Oswald's arm, Mr. Thornton desired him 



HILARY ST. IVES. 239 

to point out the best portraits. But the wretched young 
man proved a veiy indifferent cicerone. He was always 
either glancing towards May and Sir Charles, or trying 
to catch some of the colonel's gallant observations to 
her ladyship. Generally speaking, much to their credit, 
the üminsters had chosen fair women as their consorts. 
But there was one notable exception — a great heiress, 
but not a great beauty. And this lady, the bewildered 
Oswald informed bis grandfather, was the gern of the 
collection. The old gentleman thought he was joking 
— but Oswald persisted, tili he found out bis mistake, 
It was a relief to the poor fellow when a move was 
made to the royal bed-chambers, for he then managed 
to escape from the thraldom in which he had been 
kept by the old gentleman, but he vainly tried to get 
a Word from Lady Richborough. A visit to the private 
chapel completed the survey of this part of the mansion, 
and the party went down stairs. 

They then proceeded to the billiard-room, and her 
ladyship taking down a cue, challenged the colonel, 
telling him, with a laugh, that she feit sure she could 
beat him. Of course, the challenge was accepted — 
and, of course, her ladyship was triumphant — for 
though a magnificent player, the colonel did not mean 
to win. Some betting took place during the game, 
and Oswald, who backed her ladyship, won a couple 
of sovereigns from bis grand-dad. 

The colonel had hoped that he should now be 
freed from the jealous surveillance to which he had 
been exposed. Vain expectation. Mrs. Radcüffe sat 



240 HILARY ST. IVES, 

down to watch the game, and, dissembling her rage, 
extoUed Lady Richborough's play to the skies, de- 
claring she had never seen anything like it. Mrs. But- 
ton remained with her mistress, and her cold grey eyes 
constantly, fixed upon the colonel rather disturbed his 
equanimity. However, he did not desist from paying 
court to her ladyship. 

Meantime, Sir Charles and his intended had dis- 
appeared. They were in the garden, and remained 
there so long that Mrs. RadclifFe began to think they 
were lost, and sent her husband in search of them. 
He found them slowly returning from a sequestered 
walk, looking very like a pair of lovers. 

Sir Charles was asking a question which he j||ad 
already asked several times. 

"Can you be happy here, dearest May?" 

"For the twentieth time, yes," she replied; — "p«*- 
fectly happy." 

Certainly, if vast domains, a magnificent mansion, 
hosts of servants , and all the accessories of a princely 
establishment can confer happiness, it might be found 
at Boxgrove. 

But with all its splendour, and all its attractions, 
May could not have been happy had she not loved 
Sir Charles. Now nothing dimmed the brightness of 
the prospect. 

Did no thought of Hilary intrude itself? If it did, 
she banished it on the instant. Why think of him? 
She had been interesled m \am — laothing more. A 



HILARY ST. IVES. 2^i 

momentaiy dream. He must be forgotten. Union 
with him was out of the question. 

Sir Charles feit he should be the happiest of men 
possessed of one so bright and pure — so utterly un- 
tainted by the world — ^as the fair nymph he had chosen. 
He loved her passionately — with a love that a proud 
and loyal heart like his alone can feel — and he vowed 
to devote his life to her. 

Not liking to part with his visitors, Sir Charles 
proposed that they should stay dinner. Mrs. RadclifFe 
objected, declaring she could not venture to remain 
out so late. Besides, dinner had been ordered at 
home. Why not go back with them, and dine at 
Hazlemere? 

^Agreed to at once. Provided he was not separated 
from the object of his idolatry, Sir Charles did not 
care what arrangement was made. But he could not 
give up the supreme delight of riding back with May. 
Accordingly, evening dresses for himself and his sister 
were ordered to be sent on in the brougham, under 
the care of Mr. Spriggs. Pleading fatigue, Mrs. Rad- 
clifFe begged that her carriage might come round in an 
hour, and directions were given to that effect. 

Colonel Delacombe must see the stables — the 
hunters were worth seeing, as he would find. So, Sir 
Charles being too much occupied to go with him, her 
ladyship volunteered to show them to him herseif, and 
Mr. Thomton played the part of propriety and went 
with them. 

Luckily, they were free from Mrs. Radcliflfe, who 

Htlary St. Ives. I. l6 



^2 HILARY ST. IVKS. 

would as soon have entered a dungeon as a stable« 
However, in this instance she need not have been so 
mighty particular, for the Stahles of Boxgrove, which 
were personally superintended hy Lady Richhorough, 
were admirahly kept — cleaner, her ladyship declared, 
than any drawing-room. A pair of bull-terriers belong- 
ing to Thorpe, the coachman, came out to greet her, 
and attended her during the inspection« She did the 
honours of the stable, if we may so speak, with in- 
imitable grace; begged the gentlemen to do as they 
pleased in regard to a cigar. She didn't object to one. 
Sir Charles always smoked when he went over the 
Stahles with her. So they gladly availed themselves of 
the permission. 

Attended by a couple of active young grooms,>Vilo 
obeyed her slightest gesture, she then led them from 
stall to stall. How well the horses knew her. What 
whinnying, what rattling of halters at the sound of her 
voice. A pretty sight to see her Standing beside a 
favourite courser patting his satin coat, and proclaiming 
bis merits. Pleasant to listen to her, while she dilated 
with flashing eyes upon the Performances of the noble 
animal, who seemed to comprehend what she said, and 
testüied his satisfaction as she told of his wondrous 
feats. 

Sir Charles had a first-rate stud — not an indifferent 
horse in the collection. The colonel was in raptures, 
and would have been well content to remain for some 
time longer in the Stahles, especially in such delightful 
Society. 



inLARY ST. IVES. 243 

But before the examination could be completed, 
they were summoned away. The landau had gone 
round, and the horses were being saddled. Go they 
must. Mrs. Radcliffe could not be kept waiting. In- 
deed, her ladyship feit she had neglected her shock- 
ingly. 

That Mrs. Radcliffe was impatient to be off was 
manifest. Already she was in the carriage with Mrs. 
Sutton by her side, and her husband opposite her. 
The old gentleman's seat was the only one vacant. 
Into it h« got as quickly as he could, for he discerned 
a frown on his daughter's brow. Lady Richborough 
was profuse in her apologies, but Mrs. Radcliffe smiled 
blandly and begged her not to say a word about it. 
l^pras very proper the colonel should see the stal^s, 
and she herseif had been greatly amused by looking 
about the rooms ; in fact, she had spent a most delight- 
ful day. She waved her band to Sir Charles and May, 
who were standing on the Steps, and the carriage 
drove off. 

Scarcely had it passed through the great gate-way 
thän the horses were brought round. Lady Richborough, 
though she wanted no assistance, allowed the colonel 
to assist her to the saddle. Kissing the silver handle 
of her whip to May, and glancing archly at her brother, 
she then rode off, escorted as before by the colonel and 
Oswald. Our young friend, who it must be owned, had 
been infamously treated, was now in the sulks, and as 
soon as they gained the park he dropped behind under 
pretence of lighting a cigar, and then, without making 

i6* 



244 HELARY ST. IVES. 

an efFort to overtake them, dashed ofF in a different 
direction. Poor fellow! we are concerned to say that 
his absence was not regretted. 

"How very obliging of that dear Oswald to relieve 
US of his Company," observed the colonel, laughing. 

"I fear I must have slightly hurt his feelings," said 
her ladyship, displaying her pearls. 

"Never mind! he won't break his heart — though 
mine would be broken if I were so treated." 

"I very much doubt if you have a heart to break," 
cried her ladyship. "AUons! I will take you back 
through a different part of the park. We will go 
through the woods." 

"Through the woods — charming! " cried the cold^ßt 

Thpir course led them through some of the most 
secluded portions of the park, and after passing through 
the walnut and chesnut groves, previously mentioned, 
they were involved in a thicket which covered the lower 
part of the hill. The road, edged on either side by 
tall pines, was so narrow that they were obKged to 
proceed singly. However, this did not prevent the 
colonel, who brought up the rear, from addressing 
many a gallant speech to his fair companion. These 
could not have been very disagreeable to her, for ever 
and anon she turned a smiling face towards him, and 
at such moments looked irresistibly charming. 

They were still in the midst of the thicket, when a 

tall youiig man was seen ascending the narrow road 

clothed in a grey Tweed sm\., ^xvdba.ving a knapsack 



mLARV ST. IVES. 245 

at his back. He seemed to require the aid of the stout ' 
stick which he grasped. 

On seeing her ladyship he halted for a moment, 
and then came on. Owing to the interposition of the 
foremost horse, he could not distinguish the colonel, 
neither did the colonel perceive him. Her ladyship, 
however, shook her whip at her companion to check 
the rapturous speech he had just commenced, and he 
took the hint without exactly knowing why silence was 
enjoined. 

As Lady Richborough drew riear, the young'man 
stepped out of the road to allow her passage. Leaning 
against a lofty pine for support, he raised his feit hat 

Malute her, revealing pallid but singularly handsome 
Lires, that startled her as she gazed on them. 

In an instant she recovered from her surprise, and 
courteously returning the salutation, passed on. Look- 
ing back, she perceived, from the colonel's manner, 
that the stranger was not unknown to him. What sur- 
prised her still more was, that the coloneFs countenance 
had assumed a very stern expression. He was evidently 
put out by the unexpected rencounter. 

Reining in her steed, she said, 

"You appear to know that young man, colonel. 
May I ask who he is?" 

"I know very little about him," he replied, care- 
lessly. "I met him this morning at Hazlemere. An 
artist, I believe, by name Hilary St. Ives." 

"That Hilary St. Ives?" cried her ladyship. "Novf^ 



246 HILARY ST. I'CTBß. 

indeed, I am surprised. Do call him back. I should 
like so much to speak to him." 

"Your ladyship must excuse me if I decline to obey 
yoiir bebest/' rejoined the colohel. "I can have nothing 
to do with that young fellow." 

"Oh, indeed!" exclaimed her ladyship. 

She saw something was wrong. But the coloneFs 
manner did not encourage her to ask any further 
questions, and thoügh still füll of curiosity, she de- 
sisted. 

But how came Hilary in Boxgrove Park? Above 
all, how came he in that secluded road, known to 
few, and frequented by none save inmates of the 
mansion? 

The thought perplexed her strangely. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 24/ 



VIII. 

Hilary's Letter. 

A DiSAGREEABLE surprise, as we are aware, awaited 
Mrs. RadclifFe on her return to Hazlemere. 

As she entered her boudoir, she learnt from Annette, 
who was in attendance, that Hilary had taken his de- 
parture. 

"The young gentleman left quite sudden, mem, 
about an hour and a half after you had started for 
Boxgrove, without mentionihg his intention to any one 
— 'dUcept me. He went away on foot, with a knapsack 
on his back." 

"But surely he left some message for me?" 

"Only this letter, mem, which he desired me to 
lay on your table. No doubt it will give you all per- 
ticklers." 

Mrs. RadclifFe looked at the letter, but, much to 
Annette's disappointment, did not open it, deferring 
its perusal tili she should be quite alone. 

"I haven't time to read it now," she said. "I 
mnst dress for dinner at once. Lady Richborough 
will require your Services presently. Her ladyship dines 
here to-day, and will dress on her arrival." 

"Yes, mem, I knows. Mr. Spriggs have brought 
her la'yship's evening dress in the broom, and I've put 
it out all ready for her in Miss May 's dressing-roo\3CL, 



l^S HELARY ST. IVES. 

A sweet pretty dress it is, mem, as ever I see, and l'm 
sure her la'yship will look charming in it, as she do ip 
everything she wears." 

Annette was not all prepared for the pique exhibited 
by her mistress at this Observation. She followed her 
into the dressing-room, which communicated by a side- 
door with the boudoir. The dressing-room was very 
tastefully fitted up, with a large cheval glass hung with 
muslin, and a toilette-table covered with old lace, on 
which reposed numberless flacons of perfumes, boxes 
of pearl-powder and iris-powder, and pots of fard. 

"Look out my prettiest dress, Annette," said Mrs. 
Radcliffe, seating herseif in a chaise longue. "I must 
not be entirely eclipsed by her ladyship." 

"No fear of that, mem," replied Annette, eager to 
repair the error she had committed. "I always says, 
and Mrs. Sutton will bear me out, that for grace and 
style — let alone good looks — no one can come up to 
our own dear lady." 

"You are a silly creature, Annette, and I ought 
not to listen to such ridiculous flattery," said Mrs. 
Radcliffe, smiling. "My day is gone by." 

"Oh no, mem, I can't allow that. Any one would 
take you for Miss May's eider sister." 

"Bah! Choose the dress that you think will become 
me most. I really'want to look well to-night." 

"Then wear your white satin robe with the yellow 
satin panier, mem. You will put a complete distinguisher 
on her la'yship's pink dress." 

Precisely what Mrs. Radcliffe desired. So the dress 



HILARY ST. IVES. 249 

recommended was adopted, and very charming her 
mistress looked in it, Annette declared. 

Her task ended, Annette was departing, when Mrs. 
RadclifFe stopped her to inquire whether Mr. St. Ives 
had given any directions respecting his ehest. 

"No, mem, he said nothing about it, and I didn't 
think to ask him; but after he was gone I went to his 
room, and the first thing I see was the ehest. The 
key was in it, so I thought there eould be no härm in 
taking a peep at its eontents. It was nearly füll of 
linen and elothes — fine Shirts as ever you see, mem, 
and spick-and-span new eoats and waisteoats. I don't 
know what eise there might be, for I had seen quite 
enough, and loeking up the ehest I put the key in 
my pocket, intending to give it to Mrs. Sutton on her 
return." 

"Quite right. But don't give it her just now. She 
is busy about dinner, and this unexpeeted oeeurrenee 
will put her out very mueh — as it does me." 

"Begging your pardon, mem, Mrs. Sutton must 
have heard of the young gentleman's sudden depar- 
ture from Mr. LufF. All the servants have been talking 
about it." 

"Well, go and see after her ladyship. She must 
have arrived by this time. Make her look as charming 
as you can." 

"You have nothing to fear from her, mem, I ean 
assure you," rejoined Annette, as she quitted the 
room. 

Mrs. RadclifFe then passed into the boudoir. 



250 HILARY ST. IV£S. 

After a moment's hesitation, she opened Hilary's 
letter. The bank-notes dropped out upon the table 
and alarmed her, and her agitation increased as she 
read as foUows: 

"Madam, — You desired me to await your retum, 
but I cannot do so, for reasons which I shall proceed 
to State. 

"I hope I shall not pain you by what I have to 
say. I would not wound the feelings of one to whom 
I owe so much, and for whom I feel such strong 
afifection. But I must speak plainly, lest my conduct 
should be misunderstood. 

"The mystery of my birth is no longer a mystery. 
Brought hither by fate, when procfeeding in a diflferent 
direction in quest of Information, I have unexpectedly 
learnt the secret. But the knowledge thus strangely 
acquired has been dearly purchased. My true position 
has been revealed to me. I now know why I am dis- 
owned, and why I can never be acknowledged. 

"Judging by my own emotions, I can guess what 
yours must have been, when carried away by exdtement, 
you allowed the secret, which you have so long and so 
carefully kept, to escape your lips. The avowal, I 
know, was made uaconsciously, and peihaps would 
have been recalled, had recal been possible. Would it 
had never been made! 

"What extravagances I might have conunitted in 
the delirium of the moment, but for the Interruption 
caused by your husband*s*entrance, I cannot teil. No 



HILARY ST. IVES, 251 

wonder I was scarcely master of myself, when I obtained 
the certitade that the mother whom I supposed to be 
dead was living and Standing before me. 

"But when my transports subsided, reflection con- 
vinced me that I had better have remained in ignorance 
of the secret. 

"The discovery could profit me nothing. The 
necessity for concealment was strong as ever — strenger 
perhaps. No disclosure of my parentage could possibly 
be made without damage to the honour and happiness 
of others. I must remain what I am. On no con- 
sideration would I bring disgrace upon you, or upon 
those with whom you are connected. 

"Were I to stay here longer I should not only 
offend your husband, for whom I entertain great respect, 
and from whom I have experienced great kindness, 
but I might also uninteiitionally imperil you. Prudence» 
therefore, enjoins my immediate departure. Another 
interview with you might shake the good resolutions I 
have formed. 

"Some things connected with my history still per- 
plex me, and these you might have explained. But I 
shall institute no further inquiries. I have leamt enough 
— too much, alas! 

"You may desire to know what I propose to do. 
I shall strive to achieve an independence.» I have 
marked out a career for myself which I shall steadily 
and unflinchingly pursue. Relying for success entirely 
upon my own energies, I can accept no further aid, 
even from those who may deem it a duty to aid me. 



2$2 HILARY ST. IVES. 

^'Acting lipon this resolve, I must respectfully 
decline Colonel Delacombe's late presents in money 
and clothing, and heg to retum them to him, through 
you. Though poor enough, Heaven knows! I do not 
require the large sum he has thought proper to send 
me — nor any portion of it. My own band will main- 
tain me. 

"One thing more. As I shall never bear bis arms, 
even with a bend sinister, bis signet-ring will be useless 
to me. Pray restore it to bim. I do not now need 
tbe evidence it affords of my birth. 

"In acting tbus, do not suppose I am influenced 
by pride, or galled by the sense of injustice. I have 
no right to be proud; and if I have suffered wrong I 
can endure it without a murmur. I am actuated by 
feelings which, if I could explain them, would, I am 
sure, command your respect. 

**To say that I can ever become reconciled to my 
enforced position would be idle and untrue. But I 
must learn to submit. 

"Henceforth, I stand alone. 

"Farewell, madam! Think of me sometimes, I 
pray you. I shall always think of you — always with 
affection. We may never meet again — better we should 
not — but rest assured whatever betide, you will never 
have reason to blush for bim who is, unfortunately, 
compelled to subscribe himself, 

"HiLARY St. Ives." 

The perusal of this letter roused extraordinary 



HILARY ST. IVES* 253 

emotions in Mrs. Radcli£fe's breast, and she was still 
ander their dominion when Mrs. Sutton entered the 
boudoir. The housekeeper^s haggard looks alanned 
her mistress. 

"Don't agitate me, Sutton, I beseech you. My 
nerves have been dreadfully shattered by this letter. 
Read it before you say a word." 

The housekeeper sat down, and it was well she did 
so, for she had not read many lines when her strength 
completely failed her. A mist gathered before her 
eyes, but she bnished aside her tears and went on. 
Internal agony was plainly depicted in her counte- 
nance, and excited Mrs. Radcliife's commiseration. But 
the housekeeper resented her sympathy. 

"This is all your fault!'* she cried. "The error 
you have committed may appear trifling, but it is 
fraught with fearful consequences, which cannot be 
repaired. You have led him to believe you are bis 
mother, and he has gone away with that conviction. 
How is he to be disabused? You cannot find him. 
You cannot communicate with him. See what you 
have dpne. By an inconsiderate word you have de- 
prived him of the few friends he possesses, and have 
thrown him upon the world without resources. For 
whatever misfortunes may happen to him you will be 
responsible. He teils you that you have made him 
wretched, and the whole tenor of bis letter proves that 
he is so." 

"Peace, Sutton, peace! I cannot endure this» No 



254 HILARY ST. IVES. 

misfortunes shall happen to him. I can still find 
means of aidii^g him." 

"But he will not accept your assistance.*' 

"He can be aided indirectly. The colonel will de- 
vise some plan for his benefit." 

"The colonel will <^o nothing for him. I am sure 
of it." 

"You are unjust towards the colonel, Sutton. He 
has shown every disposition to help the poor young 



man." 



"How?" demanded the housekeeper, sceptically. 

"Has he not just sent him five hundred pounds 
and an expensive outfit? What further proof do you 
need of the interest he takes in Hilary's welfare?" 

Mrs. Sutton could make no rejoinder. 

"No one could have foreseen the unfortunate tum 
.that things have taken," pursued Mrs. Radclifife. 
"Hilary's pride — though, like all proud people, he 
denies that he has any pride — is a stumbling-^block in 
the way of his advancement. I fear also that he is 
wanting in gratitüde. I observe with pain that he 
does not allude to you in his letter. I trust he has 
written to bid you fareweU, and thank you for your 
great kindness to him." 

"He has not written to me," rejoined the house- 
keeper, with difficulty repressing a pang. 

"He is much to blame for the neglect. But his 
thoughts, no doubt, were occupied with me, whom he 
looks upon as his mother. A stränge mistake, and 
yet not surprising — all things considered." 



HILART ST. IVES. 255 

**It is not surprising at all, after what you have 
to him," cried the housekeeper, sharply. "He is 
*^ Let him take. his own course." 
« * No , I cannot desert him. I must watch over him 
^^j^xuseen, unknown. You shall act for me, Sutton." 
**I can make no promise." 

<< You are hurt by his ingratitude towards you, and 
<ion't wonder at it. But you must make allowances 
or liim- We will talk more on the subject to-morrow. 
IVleaxitime, I must -put these things by." 

«^1 should like to read that letter again. Leave it 
-wilth mei if you are going down-stairs." 

"Excuse me, dear Sutton. I know the letter would 
\>e safe with you. But I cannot trust it out of my 
own custody." 

Aä she spoke, she locked up the letter and the roU 
of bank-notes in a tiroir of the bureau. * 

\ If sbe could have seen the look bestowed upo» "^^ 
\ by the housekeeper while she was thus employed 9 ® 
^ouid not have gone down to dinner with as tt^^ 
composure as she did. 



2^6 HILARY ST. IVES. 



IX. 

A little Music in the Drawing-room , and a little Talk in the Dressing-room. 

No one ^<9Md have suspected from Mrs. Radcliffe's 
looks and manner during dinner that an3rthing was on 
her mind. Greatly disturbed by Hilary's abrupt de- 
parture, her jealousy was again excited by the coloners 
continued attentions to Lady Richborough. Yet her 
countenance had a placid expression, and a smile was 
upon her lips. Despite all Annette^s efforts, she was 
>completely thrown into the shade by her ladyship, who 
looked surprisingly well in an evening dress. White 
as Parian marble, Myrtilla's lovely neck and Shoulders 
might have served as a model for a sculptor, while the 
classical mould of her features would have suggested 
a representation of the goddess of the silver bow. She 
was in high spirits, and though her sweetest smiles 
and most bewitching glances were bestowed upon the 
colonel, she dispensed her fascinations around, and 
did not even neglect poor Oswald. In short, she was 
extremely useful as well as highly omamental, and 
communicated a vast deal of life and spirit to the 
party, which might have flagged without her aid, for 
Sir Charles talked only to May. 

Her ladyship's curiosity having been excited by the 
rencounter in the moming, she brought up the subject 
of Hilary St. Ives. But no one seemed inclined to 






HILARY ST. WES. 05 7 

talk about him. Mr. RadcUfFe could give no explana- - 
tion of his sudden departure; and Mr. Thomton 
shrugged his Shoulders when questioned. He knew 
nothing about the young fellow, and was heartily glad 
he was gone. That was all he had to say. Vary ' * 
Strange. She thought Mrs. RadclifFe could teil her 
something, and resolved to seek an explanation from 
her in private. 

Dinner excellent. The cabinet Johannisberg warmed 
grandpapa's heart, and the '20 port, which appeared 
with the desserty put him into a blissful State. Apropos 
of the dessert! we may be permitted to mention that 
Macdonald's strawbenies were magnificent, and Sir 
Charles told Mrs. Radcliife that he must certainly carry 
away her gardener. 

The health of the queen of the fSte was of course 
drunk in bumpers, and the few words uttered on the 
occasion by grandpapa caused a good deal of laughter, 
and raised some blushes on May's cheek. 

Soon afterwards the ladies retired, and the gentle- 
men quickly followed them — much too quickly for Mr. 
Thornton, who had not half finished his bottle of '20 
port. He hated to be hurried in this way. Why 
should not a man be allowed to enjoy his wine? — V^ 
espedally wine like this. ^ 

"Do teil me something about this mysterious Hilary 
St. Ives?" Said Lady Richborough to Mrs. Radelife, 
as they entered the drawing-room together. 

"He is an' artist, that is all I know about him/' 
was the evasive reply» 



^%. 



258 HDLARY ST. IVES. 

^*But why has he left you so suddenly?" 

** Grandpapa and the colonel objected to him. I 
know no other reason." 

"Oh! the colonel objected to him! — ^that's odd! 
Do you know that I was very much Struck by his like- 
ness to the colonel." 

"Have you seen him, then?" 

**Yes. As the colonel and I were riding back 
through one of the thickets in the paiic, we came upon 
him quite unexpectedly. I had not the slightest idea 
who he was at the moment — but the likeness startled 
me. 

"Strange you should meet him there? What could 
he be doing in the park?" 

"Just what I want to know. Does he intend to 
remain in the neighbourhood?" 

"I should think not. I fancy he is going to town 
to practise his profession." 

"Boxgrove is out of the way, if he was going to 
town. He must have had some motive to take him 
there." 

"I can conceive none, unless he desired to take 
some views of the park. It is certainly stränge he 
^"■^ should be there. If you see him again, or hear any- 
I thing more of him, pray inform me." 

"Aha! she takes an interest in him, I perceive," 
thought her ladyship. "There must be some reason 
for his sudden departure." 

Naturally, she promised compliance, and then 
added quickly, "You will think I am troubling you 



HILARY ST. rVES. 259 

with questions — but teil me! Is Colonel Delacombe a 
widower? You are aware I have seen him for the 
first time to-day, and know very little of him except 
by report as a distinguished officer." 

Guessing the object of the inquiry, Mrs. Radcliife 
could not help smiling. 

"A widower! no!" she rejoined. "Colonel Dela- 
combe has never been married. I can State that posi- 
tively." 

Her ladyship appeared very well satisfied by the 
assmance. 

**What are you talkingabout?" asked May, joining 
Üiem. 

"Before replying, Lady Richborough consulted 
Mrs. Radcliffe by a glance, that seemed to say, "Shall 
I teil her?" and received a look signifying, "Better 
not." 

She therefore answered, "I have been propounding 
a riddle, which mamma finds it difficult to solve. Come 
to the piano. I want to practise a duet with you be- 
fore the gentlemen appear." 

The evening passed off delightfully. Lady Rich- 
borough was so much occupied at the piano, that she 
could not flirt with the colonel, though she held him 
in thrall by her voice, and ever and anon electrified 
him with a glance. Consequently, Mrs. Radcliffe was 
quite easy, and able to enjoy the music. Oswald like- 
wise, who had been unmercifuUy rallied by his grand- 
sire, put on a cheerful air, and accompanied the ladies 
on the cornet-ä-piston. 



I 
26o HILARY ST. IVES. . . 

MyrtiUa in a riding-habit, on horseback, or in the 
Stahle — laughing, jesting, indulging in a little harmless 
slang, and tolerant of a cigar; M3rrtilla in the drawing- 
rooom , in a costume not calculated to conceal her 
splendid neck and Shoulders — dazzling, refined, ac- 
complished — so different was her ladyship under the 
two aspects, that she scarcely resembled the same 
person. 

If the colonel was captivated by the fair equestrian, 
whose predilection for the stable and fondness for its 
occupants in no way displeased him, he was perfectly 
fascinated by the grace and accomplishments of the 
high-bred dame. Conscious that she looked well at 
the piano, Myrtilla enthroned herseif before the in- 
strument during the evening. Gifted with a rieh con- 
tralto voice, she sang the "brindisi'* aliiiost as well as 
Alboni, and completed her Performance by a grand 
fantasia, which she executed with wonderful brilliancy. 

The colonel and Mr. Thornton were transported, 
and expressed their delight with enthusiasm, but Sir 
Charles, who was accustomed to his sister's wondrous 
Performances, very much preferred a simple bailad, 
which was exquisitely sung by May. It held him 
breathless as he listened. 

Delightful as it was, the evening came to an end. 
Before the party separated, arrangements were made 
for next day. Everybody was to dine atBoxgrove, and 
come over early if the day should prove fine— to play 
at croquet, or ramble about the park. 

Mrs. Radcliflfe, as usual, feared it would be too 



L 



HILARY ST. IVES. 201 

much for her, but promised to come, nevertheless. 
What laughing there was in the hall! And how Sir 
Charles envied his sister the kiss she received from 
May as she bade her good night! 

The colonel had a tender word for her ladyship, 
and gently squeezed her band, while leading her to 
the brougham. 

"Well, dear boyl" cried Myrtilla, as they were 
bome swiftly towards Boxgrove, "I can really and truly 
cangratulate you. You will have the sweetest wife in 
England. But what's to become of poor me, when 
you are married?" 

"Why you will live with us, of course/' he re- 
joined. 

"Not at all of course. Perhaps, your wife won't 
like me." 

"Nonsense! you know better." 

Her ladyship appeared abstracted for a moment, 
and then tapping him with her fan, said, "Light a 
dgar. Don't go to sleep." 

"I never was less inclined to sleep," he rejoined. 

"What do you think of Colonel Delacombe?" she 
asked, rather abruptly. 

"What doj^ou think of him, Myrtilla? That's more 
to the purpose," he rejoined, with a laugh. "Are you 
disposed to return with him to India?" 

"I shouldn't altogether dislike it. I suppose he is 
well off. Find out all about him for me, dear boy." 

Sir Charles told her there was no necessity to make 
any inquiries respecting an officer so vf^\l fccva^^x -^w^ 



202 HILARY ST. IVES. 

SO distinguished as Colonel Delacombe. Thereupon, 
he Ughted a manilla, and her ladyship feil into a 
reverie, which lasted tili they reached the house. 

Here we shall leave them, and return to May, who 
had already retired to her dressing-room , and while 
preparing for rest was ruminating upon the events of 
the day, when a gentle tap at the door announced the 
housekeeper. 

"Oh, Sutton, Pm so glad to see you!" cried May. 
"I want to know what has happened to poor Hilary 
St. Ives. Annette teils me he has left a letter for 
mamma. You have seen it, of course?'* 

"Yes, but there are secrets in it, which I am not 
permitted to disclose." 

"Secrets! Dear me, how dreadfuUy mysterious! 
You quite rouse my curiosity. Am I not to know a 
little bit of the letter?" she said, in a coaxing tone. 

"No, I dciren't speak. Besides, you can't take any 
interest in the poor young man now." 

"You are mistaken, Sutton, I take the greatest 
interest in him — in his welfare, I mean. I have been 
thinking of something for him.** 

"Indeed!" 

"Yes. Our portraits — that is, the portraits of Sir 
Charles and myself — are to be placed in the great 
gallery, which you visited this morning, Sutton. I mean 
Hilary to paint them." 

"But will Sir Charles consent?" 

"Sir Charles will do anything I like. He will be 
delighted to encourage genius." 



HILARY ST. 1V£S, 263 

"I fear he will not have an opportunity of doing 
so in Hilary's case. The poor young man is gone. 
He does not desire to be heard of mpre. I suspect he 
means to change his name." 

"Well, I must say it is very stupid of him — very 
annoying — ^just when I had arranged it all so nicely." 

"He conld know nothing of your kind intentions. 
But I don't think he wonld have painted the por- 
traits." 

"Yes, I'm sure he would — if I had asked him/' 
she cried, in a tone of pique. "Tm quite angry with 
him for being so foolish." 

"Do you recoUect our conversation before break- 
fast this moming, dear?'' said Mrs. Sutton, fixing an 
inquiring look upon her. "Are you quite satisfied with 
what you have done since? Don't be afraid of con- 
fiding in me." 

"Yes, dearSutton, my feelings are entirely changed 
since morning. I have discovered that I can love Sir 
Charles — nay, I do love him. All his noble qualities 
have been reveaaled to me, and I am surprised I should 
have been so long blind to them." 

"When did you make the discovery? — at Box- 
grove?" inquired the housekeeper, in an ironical tone. 

"You think me inconstant, I perceive, but I am 
not so. This morning my heart was perfectly dis- 
engaged — and I own I should not have listened to 
Sir Charles except on his sister's persuasion. I now 
know him better than I did. As I first looked into his 
eyes, I read truth and loyalty in them — and «uch 



264 HILARY ST. IVES. 

devotion, Sutton. I am sure he woold laj down bis 
life for me if I required it. He said so." 

"A mere phrase!" cried the housekeeper, with an 
ill-disguised sneer. "All men say so." 

"It was not an idle phrase with him, but of course 
I don't mean to put his devotion to the proof." 

"No, that wouldn't be prudent. You would lose 
Boxgrove." 

**It strikes me, Sutton, that you are not pleased 
that I have accepted Sir Charles." 

"All I desire is your happiness, dear." 

"Then rest easy. I shall be perfectly happy with 
him." 

"At all events, you will be Lady Ilminster — mistress 
of one of the most splendid seats in the county, and 
while elevating yourself, you will have the satisfaction 
of feeling that you have elevated your own family." 

"I don't exactly like what you say, Sutton, nor the 
tone in which you say it. I know that I love Sir 
Charles — not for his title — not for Boxgrove — but for 
himself — though you would imply the contrary — and I 
am sure I shall be happy with him." 

"Well, I hope so. Good night, dear! May your 
slumbers be light and pleasant." 

As she left the room she muttered to herseif, 
"Impossible to shake her! She is as worldly as her 
mother." 

"Something is the matter with Sutton to-night," 

thought May, as she was left alone. "She appears to 

be put out by poor "Hüai^'s departure. Well, I am 



HILARY ST. rVTES. 265 

sorry I cannot help him, but perhaps it is better he is 
gone." 

Shortly afterwards she sought her couch, and 
i sweet dreams springing fnom a pure and gentle heart 
hovered above her pillow. 

Thus ended May's nineteenth birthday. 



266 HILARY ST. IVES. 



X. 

The Colonel's Opinion of the Letter. 

Next morning Mrs. Radcliflfe did not make her 
appearance at breakfast. Nor could this be wondered 
at, after the fatigue she had undergone on the previous 
day. Besides, she had another fatiguing day in pro- 
spect. 

"However, she sent a message by Mrs. Sutton to 
Colonel Delacombe, begging him to come up to her 
boudoir after breakfast, as she wished to have a little 
conversation with him. 

To hear was to obey. Though for many reasons 
the colonel wonld willingly have avoided the proposed 
t^te-ä-^t^te. 

On repairing to the boudoir, he found the lady re- 
clining in her accustomed fauteuil near the fire — for 
there was still a fire, though the day was bright and 
warm — got up for the occasion in an elegant dishabille. 
Languor in her manner, reproach in her looks. 

Saluting him in a faint — very faint — voice, she did 
not attempt to rise — that would have been too great 
an eflfort — or even offer him her hand, though he 
hesitated not to take it. She prayed him to be seated, 
but the colonel preferred Standing with his back to the 
fire, regarding her with what he intended for a strong 
expression of sympathy. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 267 

Neither of them dreamed that the door communi- 
cating with the dressing-room , which was concealed 
by a screen, was left slightly ajar, and that the person 
stationed behind it could hear, and did hear, all that 
passed. 

**I am afraid you rather overdid it yesterday, Esther," 
Said the colonel. "You look sadly jaded." 

**Yes; but I am sufFering from low spirits — not 
fatigne." 

"Low spirits! This is not the time to indulge in 
the vapours when you have made such a capital hit 
with your daughter. You have got everything you 
could desire. Boxgrove is really the finest old place 
I ever saw , and Sir Charles is excessively gentleman- 
like and agreeable." 

"Yes, I don't complain. I am perfectly satisfied 
with May's choice. Apropos of Sir Charles! what do 
you think of his sister?" demanded the lady, fixing 
her eye-glass upon him. 

"Now it's Coming/' he thought. "A very fine wo- 
man. Time was when I should hav^ fallen desperately 
in love with her." 

"Time was^ Seymour!" cried the lady, reproach- 
fully. "Say, rather, time is. It appears to me that 
you are just as impressionable as ever. I was grieved 
to see you make such a ridiculous exhibition of your- 
self yesterday. You fancy her ladyship is Struck. My 
poor, dear, deluded friend, she was only trifling with 
you, as you will find to your cost, if you think at all 
seriously of a heartless coquette, Nvho to\.^ \^VOcv ^n^vj 



268 HILARY ST. IVES. 

man she meets. You saw how she treated Oswald. 
Well, the day before she was flirting violently with 
him, and half turned the poor boy's head. I sup- 
pose you know she loses her jointure if she marries 
again?" 

"A hint to that effect was given me by Mr. Thom- 
ton. But what is her jointure to me? I don't care 
about it." 

"But you care a great deal about the lovely widow 
— that is evident. Nay, no protestations to the con- 
trary. They won*t pass with me. Listen," she ex- 
claimed, altering her manner. " You shall not say that 
I am in the way. I release you from your vow. But 
for your own sake, Seymour, as you value your peace 
and comfort, don't choose Myrtilla. She will drive 
you frantic with jealousy." 

/ The colonel laughed carelessly. 

"A capital joke," he cried. "I rather fancy I can 
take care of myself. He ladyship may use a needle- 
gun, but since I shall keep out of ränge, she won't 
hurt me." 

And he again laughed gaily. 

Mrs. RadclifFe shook her head and sighed: 

"Ah, you men — ^ypu men! base deceivers ever! 
But to change the theme. I have a letter to show 
you." 

"A letter!" he exclaimed, with internal mi^giving. 
"I hate letters. For one that is pleasant we get a 
dozen disagreeable," 



HILARY ST. IVES. 269 

"I am sorry to inflict this upon you, but you must 
See it. It is from Hil^iry St. Ives." 

"From him! ha!" cried the colonel, knitting his 
brows. 

Seating himself, he read the letter deliberately, 
without making a remark, but his looks grew sterner 
as he went on. 

**This would be laughable were it not serious!'* he 
cried, tossing down the letter angrily when he had 
done. **I suppose we must treat it seriously, though 
it scarcely deserves to be so treated. The young fel- 
low seems half crazed. The knock on the pate that 
he got from the gipsies must have confused his in- 
tellects. Several points require explanation." 

'*You can best explain one point, Seymour," re- 
joined Mrs. RadclifFe. "Pardon me if I put a direct 
question to you. The circumstances of the case must 
plead my excuse. You may be perfectly frank with 
me. Have you any reason to believe this young man 
to be your son?" 

"Pardon me, my dear Esther, if I reply by another 
question. Have you any reason to believe yourself to 
be his mother?" 

"For shame, Seymour!" she cried, with affected 
Indignation. "This is too bad." 

"Not a bit worse than the accusation you bring 
against me." 

"Well, I have another interrogation to put. Since 
you deny the parentage, pray, what was your motive 



270 HILARY ST« IVES, 

for sending him the five hundred pounds and the 
outfit?" 

"On my honour, I have sent him neither." 
"But here are the bank notes to confiite you, and 
the clothes-chest is in his room." 

"Another hand has been at work — not mine," he 
rejoined, gravely. "This is a möst vexatious business, 
and you yourself — from the best of motives — have 
contrived to complicate it. With regaird to the money 
which you suppose came from me, I advise you to 
commit it to the keeping of Mrs. Sutton. She may 
find an opportunity of communicating with the young 
man. But do not meddle further in the matter your- 
self. You have already done too much." 

"I will act as you suggest. I don't like the Charge 
of the money. One more question and I have done. 
How came your signet-ring in Hilary's possession?" 

"Now, I confess you puzzle me. I can only an- 
swer that I lost the ring many years ago — before I went 
out to India." 

"Before you knew me, Seymour?" 

"Why that question? Yes. It may have been 
Stolen from me with some such design as has just 
been put in practice. Are you satisfied?" 

"I must be. May I keep the ring?" 

"Certainly. But let me bum that letter. It com- 
promises you most seriously." 

The person outside the door was upon the point 
of rushing into the room to prevent, at all hazards, 



• ' I 



1 

i 



HILARY ST. IVES. 271 

the destruction of the letter, but Mrs. RadclifFe's answer 
checked her. 

"No, I can't allow you to burn it," she cried, 
snatching the letter from him. "No one shall see 
it." 

"This is downright madness/' cried the colonel. 

"Suppose the letter were to fall into your husband's 
hands, what would he think of it?" 

"Such an event will never occur. Mr. Radcliffe 
never opens any of my drawers." 

The colonel did not look half satisfied, but he saw 
it was useless to remonstrate further, for Mrs. Radcliffe 
proceeded to lock up the letter, the bank-notes, and 
the ring. 

"There, they are all safe now!'' she cried. 

'*I hope Mrs. Sutton has not got a key of that 
drawer/' he remarked. 

"No, no. This is the only key I don't trust her 
with." 

"You trust her a great deal too much, Esther. Be 
cautious.'' 

"My dear Seymour, she is fidelity itself, and would 
never betray a secret of mine." 

"Then her looks belie her. I am a physiognomist, 
you know, and I warn you against her. She is trear 
cherous." 

"Treacherous! why, you have jast ädvised me to v 
give her the five hundred pounds." f 



•*■ 



* ■ >f. 



2 72 HILARY ST. IVES. 

''Because I would thather shq had it than yoa. 
Hist!'' he cried, "I thought I heard a noise." 

**As the words were uttered the dressing-room door 
was sofUy closed. 

Just in time, for the colonel looked over the top 
of the screen , but of course made no discovery . 

"Where is Mrs. Sutton?" he asked. 

"I don't know. Possibly in my dressing-room. 
She went there just before you came in. Have you 
anything to say to her?" 

"Merely a word." 

**Just touch the bell then." 

The colonel did as enjoined, and shortly afterwards 
Mrs. Sutton made her appearance. 

The colonel fixed a stern and searching look^uj^on 
her. 

"Your mistress has some money to give.you," he 
Said. "You will know what to do with it.*' 

The housekeeper looked inquiringly at Mrs. Rad- 
clifFe. 

"Yes, the money sent to Hilary. You understand, 
Sutton. The colonel thinks you ought to have charge 
of it." 

"Yes, and the clothes-chest too. Take care 
of that. And see that your mistress is no further 
troubled." 

"Is Colonel Delacombe master here?" said the 
housekeeper to Mrs. Radcliffe. "Am I to take bis Orders 
or yours?" 



HILARY ST. IVES. 273 

** You will be pleased to take mine now/* said the •■ 

Colone], with a look that crushed her, as he quitted the k 

room. 



^iVary S/. /ztes. /. 



\^ 



274 HILARY ST. IVES, 



XI. 

A Sketch taken in Boxgrove Park. 

By the time the colonel got down-stairs he had 
quite recovered his composure, and was able to ofFer 
a very cheerful greeting to Sir Charles, who had ar- 
rived during his absence. This early visit was not in- 
cluded in the arrangements of the day, but was none 
the less agreeable because unexpected. The only thing 
that marred the coloners satisfaction was that her lady- 
ship had been left behind. Far too considerate to 
Interrupt a tete-ä-tete, already commenced by the lovers 
in the drawing-room, he stroUed out into the garden 
to smoke a cigar, and think matters over. 

His meditations were chiefly occupied by Myrtilla, 
of whom, notwithstanding his assertions to Mrs. Rad- 
clifFe, he had become violently enamoured; and though 
he entertained no doubt that her captivating ladyship 
was the coquette she had been represented, he did not 
feel uneasy on that account. Vanity whispered that 
she wouldn't throw him over. She was just the person 
to suit him. Such a wife would give him additional 
6clat. Her unrivalled beauty would create an immense 
Sensation in India. He didn't care how much she was 
admired. Esther declared he would be frlghtfully 
jealous. Bah! He laughed at the idea. His was not 



HILARY ST. IVES. 2 75 

a jealous nature. But hold! he was getting on räther 
too fast. There was a triifling difficulty in the way 
that had to be removed — a difficulty that he could not 
have foreseen a few days ago. The consideration of 
this difficulty, which to any other than the colonel 
would have appeared insurmountable, necessitated a 
second cigar — even a third. Nor when that was con- 
sumed had he arrived at a satisfactory conclusion. 

At last, he resolved to ride over by himself to 
Boxgrove, and have a talk with her ladyship. Having 
communicated his design to Mr. RadclifFe, that gen- 
tleman ordered a horse to be brought round for him 
at once. 

However, we will mount a courser fieeter than any 
in OUT respected friend's stables, and speeding to Box- 
grove, ascertain what the lovely Myrtilla was about. 

It may be asked why she did not accompany her 
brother? To this we must reply that Sir Charles did 
not particularly desire her Company. A real lover, 
when not in the society of the mistress of his heart, 
wishes to be alone. 

Her ladyship rode with him to the lodge-gates, and 
then receiving a hint to the above effect, quitted him, 
and continued to take exercise within the park, riding 
about in difFerent directions for some time. 

Her thoughts', we may be permitted to say, were 
occupied with the colonel, and she was considering 
whether it would be worth while to accept him. 

All at once, she caught sight of a figure among a 
grove of trees which at once fixed her ^.lleTvXiow. 



276 - ^ • HTLARY ST. IVESi 

The person she beheld was seated upon the root 
of a large beech-tree, and was evidently sketching the 
mansion, which could be very well seen from the Posi- 
tion he had selected. 

Entertaining no doubt that the sketcher was Hilary 

KJ\ St. Ives, she detennined to have a word with bim. 

JLuidi Bashfulness, as we are aware, was not her ladyship's 

]^^/ foible. A circuitous route brought her to the back of 

•»»,.'• \ *^^ wood, and she came upon him by surprise. He 

* ' was so much engrossed by bis task that he did not 

' -/\'^^^ notice her approach tili she was close beside him. 

When he perceived her, he arose in some confusion, 

and took off bis hat to salute her. 

"Do not let me interrupt you, I beg," she said, 
with a gracious smile. And wishing to put him com- 
pletely at bis ease, she added, "Mr. Hilary St. Ives, I 
believe." 

Bowing assent, he rejoined, "I am afraid I am an 
intruder; but I was so Struck with this fine old mansion 
yesterday that I could not quit the neighbourhood with- 
out making a sketch of it." 

"Will you allow me to look at the sketch?" 

"With the greatest pleasure. But I fear it won't 
please you. I haven't satisfied myself." 

"I like it very much," she rejoined. "I don't see 
how it could be improved. Many sketches have been 
taken of the old place, but I like none so much as 
this. I think you have chosen the best view of the 
place," 



HILARY ST. lYES. 277 

"Every view öf the mansion is picturesque and 
striking. It would make a dozen capital pictures.*' 

"Can I prevail upon you to execute them? J will 
endeavour to make it worth your while to oblige mß." 

"I should be delighted to do your bidding, and 
without other reward than such commendation as. you 
have bestowed upon this worthless sketch. But I am 
going away immediately/' 

"The delay of a day or two cannot much matter, 
I should think," she remarked, with a captivating smile. 

"Your ladyship may be quite sure that if I had 
not good reason for declining, I would not hesitate to 
obey you." 

"You know me, I perceive." 

"Once seen, your ladyship is not likely to be for- 
gotten. I caught a glimpse of you at Hazlemere yester- 
day, and later on I was fortunate enough to meet you 
in one of the thickets of this park." 

"Yes. Colonel Delacombe told me your name. I 
had heard of you previously." 

She looked at him as she made the Observation, 
and perceived that a shade came over his brow. 

"Do you know the colonel?" she asked. 

"I never saw him before yesterday. I appear to 
have given him some oflfence — certainly most un- 
intentionally on my part. But he seems to have con- 
ceived a stränge antipathy to me, and has caused my 
dismissal from Hazlemere. Till he appeared, I ex- 
perienced nothing but kindness from Mr. RadclifFe and 
every inmate in the house." 



278 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"And you cannot account for his dislike of you?" 

"Perhaps I can — but I cannot. very easily explain 
it. To speak frankly, it is to avoid meeting him again 
that I desire not to remain longer here." 

"Have you practised as an artist in London, Mr. 
St. Ives?" she inquired, after a pause. "Pcrhaps you 
are a Student of the Royal Academy ? " 

"No, I have not that distinction/' he rejoined. "I 
have but lately returned from Paris, where the first 
essays in my profession were made, and it is possible 
I may go back there. If your ladyship cares to know 
my history, you can learn it from Mrs. Radcliflfe." 

"I shall learn very little from her," she rejoined, 
smiling. "To teil you the truth, I have already made 
the attempt." 

"Mrs. Radcliffe acted wisely," he observed, with a 
melancholy smile. "There is nothing to interest you. 
My history will best be told some ten years hence." 

"Ten years hence! that's a long time. We shall 
all be grown old then. You expect to become famous — 
eh?" 

"I aspire to win reputation as a portrait painter." 

"A future Sir Joshua— eh?" 

"I hope some day to have the honour of painting 
your ladyship's portrait. Sir Joshua himself could not 
have desired a better subject." 

"I shall be delighted to give you a sitting," said 
her ladyship, with a well-pleased smile. "But I can't 
wait ten years. I shall have lost my good looks before 
that." 



HILARY ST- IVES. 27Q 

"You shall not wait ten minutes, if you will allow 
me to Sketch you. , I succeeded tolerably well with 
Miss Radcliffe yesterday, and I may be as fortunate 
with your ladyship." 

"So you have taken May! She has never shown 
me your Performance. I should like to have Azo taken 
of all things. Try what you can make of us." 

Hilary immediately opened his portfolio, and pre- 
pared for the task. 

Moving her horse to a little distance, her ladyship 
took up a Position. 

"WiU that do?" she asked. 

The artist nodded approval. 

"Stand still, Azo," she cried, smoothing her 
steed's silken mane with the handle of her whip. "My 
pet is going to have his picture taken." 

And as if he understood what was required of him, 
Azo remained tolerably quiet. 

Hilary, as we know, worked with great rapidity. 
But he had more to do now than on the previous oc- 
casion. However, he got through his task with sur- 
prising expedition, and succeeded in making a most 
spirited sketch. 

Her ladyship was enchanted. Praise to a young 
artist is delicious, but praise from such lips as Myrtilla's 
is indescribably sweet. 

"Landseer could not have done better," she cried, 
enthusiastically. "My pet Azo is drawn to the life. 
I must have this sketch, Mr. St. Ives. Ask anything 
you please for it — anyihingJ^ 



28o HJLVRY ST. IVES. 

"I will only ask you to accept it," he rejoined, 
blushing with pleasure. 

"Nay, I really cannot " 

"Since I must have some reward, give me this 
glove." 

She had dropped it, while examining the sketch. 

"Upon my word, you are a proficient in gallantry 
as well as art," cried her ladyship, smiling. 

**I shall keep it as a Souvenir of Boxgrove/* he 
cried, placing the glove within his breast. 

The refined gallantry of his manner was not lost 
upon her. 

^"Decidedly, he is no common person," she thought. 

With one of her most captivating smiles, she then 
asked him if he would like to see the house, adding, 
that she would have great pleasure in showing it to 
him. 

*'I know how much I shall lose in declining your 
ladyship's tempting offer," he replied. "But I cannot 
run the risk of meeting any of the party from Hazle- 
mere." 

"Don't be alarmed on that account. None of 
them will be here for an hour or two." 

"I am compelled to differ with your ladyship. 
Unless I am greatly mistaken, yonder is Colonel Dela- 
combe," said Hilary, pointing out a cavalier who had 
just entered the park, and was evidently shaping his 
course towards the mansion. 

V 

"You are right. 'Tis he!'' she exclaimed. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 281 

"I have the honour to wish your ladyship good 
day." 

"Why beat a retreat?'* she cried. "Are you afraid 
of him?" 

"Afraid! no!" exclaimed Hilary, proudly. "Colo- 
nel Delacombe has more reason than I have to avoid 
the meetihg." 

"Then stay and face him. Ha! he sees us. He 
is galloping in this direction." 

It was now a point of honour with Hilary to re- 
main. 

Shortly afterwards the colonel came up, his looks 
proclaiming surprise and displeasure at the sight' of 
her ladyship's companion. 

Saluting her with his accustomed grace, he turned 
to Hilary, and said, sharply, 

"You here, sir!" 

MyrtiUa instantly interposed. 

"Visit your displeasure upon me," she said. "I 
am the ofFender. Mr. St. Ives has remained here at 
my request" 

"He should not have come here at all," rejoined 
the colonel. "He would have shown better taste by 
leaving the neighbourhood. I would recommend his 
prompt departure." 

Myrtilla again tried to interpose, but ineffectually. 

Hilary's face flushed deeply. He met the coloneFs 
lock with a glance as stern as his own. '0:'^ ^**; 

"I must ask Colonel Delacombe by what right he 




2o2 HILARY ST. IVES. 

presumes to question my taste, or to give me ad vice?" 
he Said. 

"It must suffice that I have expressed my opinion, 
sir," rejoined the Colonel, haughtily. 

** Pardon me, sir, that will not suffice," rejoined 
Hilary, boldly. "Why are you surprised to find me 
here? Why do you complain of my remaining in the 
neighbourhood? Above all, why do you enjoin my 
departure?" 

*!What have you to say to all this, colonel?" asked 
Myrtilla, who, it must be confessed, rather enjoyed his 
confusion. "If Mr. St. Ives has offended you, I am 
sure he will be ready to apologise." 

"Your ladyship is very good to undertake his de- 
fence, but I bring no charge against him. I simply 
expressed surprise at seeing him here after the manner 
in which he had quitted Hazlemere." 

"What manner?" cried Hilary, indignantly. "I 
left Hazlemere chiefly because I was given to under- 
stand by Mr. RadclifFe and Mr. Thornton that my pre- 
sence — from some cause or other which you can best 
explain — is disagreeable to you. So far I have obeyed 
you. But I refuse to obey your mandate now, unless 
you can show that you have some right to exact 
obedience from me." 

"Have you such right, colonel?" cried Myrtilla, 
laughing. 

"I appeal to Mr. St. Ives's good taste and good 
feeling," said the colonel. "I hope he will see the 
impropriety of remaining in this neighbourhood^ — 



UILARY ST. IVES. 283; 

especially after bis own expressed detennination — and 
I think a little reflection will convince him that I am 
right." 

"You are right, sir,'^ replied Hilary. "I confess 
that I have acted inconsiderately, and inconsistently 
with my own professions. I will go at once." 

And bowing to ber ladyship, who sought by a look 
to restrain bim, he departed. 

"Upon my word, colonel, you have dealt harshly 
with the young man," said her ladyship, in a reproach- 
ful tone. 

"I am compelled to act thus. Don't ask for an 
explanation. I cannot give it." 

"Well, look at this drawing. Pretty — ain't it? 
Own that our young artist must be uncommonly clever 
to make such a sketch as this off-hand. I won't say 
anytbing about myself — though I think I come out 
tolerably well — but my pet Azo is perfection." 

**Azo and bis mistress are both excellently done," 
said the colonel. "The fellow has undoubted talent." 

"I like the sketch so much that I mean to have it 
framed, and hang it up in my boudoir." 

"I was in hopes you were going to give it me. 
Won't you?" 

"No, thank you. If you want a copy, apply to the 
artist. I don't mean to part with it. What do you 
think I gave for it?" 

"Can't say. It would be cheap at a guinea." 

"You shouldn't have it for twenty. The gallant 



284 HELARY ST. IVES, ^ 

young artist would take no other payment than one of 
my gloves." 

"And you gave him your glove?" cried the colonel, 
frowning. 

"Where was the haim? I thought it a romantic 
idea. Come, let us take a canter." 

Away they went together at a swift pace down a 
long, sweeping glade, disturbing the deer, and then 
mpre slowly up the hill-side. By this time the colonel 
had recovered his temper, but he did not press his 
suit with the same ardour as heretofore. For nearly 
an hour they continued riding about the park, admir- 
ing its beauties, and the extensive views it conimanded. 
But they saw nothing more of poor Hilary. 

They then proceeded to the Stahles, where they 
remained until the arrival of the whole party from 
Hazlemere. Much to the coloneFs relief, Mrs. Sutton 
did not accompany her mistress on this occasion. 
Lady Richborough, who was extremely proud of the 
sketch, took care it should be seen by everybody, and, 
of course, it was generally admired. But no one, ex- 
cept Sir Charles, made any inquiries about the artist. 
Gurions to know what had passed between Hilary and 
the colonel, Mrs. Radcliffe questioned her ladyship in 
private, and after hearing the details of the interview, 
she could not help remarking, "I think the colonel 
behaves very badly to the young man." 

"I gave him a hint to that effect," said her lady- 
ship. "Pray what has Mr. St. Ives done to ofFend 
the colonel?'' 



HiLARY ST. nms. 285 

"First, he was unlucky enough to be brought to 
Hazlemere. But that was not the poor fellow's own 
fault. I fear the colonel will never forgive him." 

"But why need he care for the coloners forgive- 
ness? What is the colonel to him; or he to the 
colonel?" 

"Don't ask me to give an opinion on that point." 

"Well, all I can say is, that he would quite cut 
the colonel out in a drawing-room. I am sorry he is 
gone." 

The interval between luncheon and dinner was 
spent in billiards and croquet. In the latter pleasant 
game Sir Charles was an expert, and luckily May was 
equally fond of it, and played equally well, so they 
were capitally matched. 

A croquet party, on a smooth lawn, with a tent 
close at band, and a Üne eld mansion in the back- 
ground, forms a^prdity-picture; and when two such 
channing personages asMay andM3Ttilla figure among 
the players, jthe pictiire is prettier still. Both Sir Charles 
and Oswald were quite Sorry when it was time to dress 
for dinner. Colonel Delacombe had never played at 
croquet before, but he profited by the Instructions given 
him by her ladyship. 

Sir Charles's cook being a cordon bleu the dinner 
was perfect. Mr. Dancer had special Orders about the 
wine, and took particular care of Mr. Radcliffe and 
Mr. Thornton. Old Madeira and a bottle of Marshai 
Soult's Sherry at dinner, with a magnum of Lafiitte 
after, made them both superlatively happy. 



286 



HILARY ST. tVES. 



After a little music, the whole party adjourned to 
the billiard-room to witness a match between Lady 
Richborough and the colonel, in which her ladyship 
came ofF the victor. Apparently, the colonel had quite 
forgotten the annoying incident of the morning, and 
seemed just as much enamoured as before. 

To Sir Charles the day had been one of unin- 
terrupted bliss. 



END OF VOL. I. 




PRINTINÖ OFFICE OF THE PÜBLISHER, 



i 



COLLECTION 

OF 



BRITISH AüTHOßS 



TAÜCHNITZ EDITION. 



VOL. 1059. 
HILAKY ST. IVES BY W. H. AINSWORTH. 

IN TWO V0LUMK8. 
VOL. II. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 



A NOVEL. 



BY 



WILLIAM HARRISON AINSWORTH. 

i 

COPYRIGHT EDITION. 



IN TWO VOLUM ES. 



VOU 11^ ^y^^j^^ 



^r rni 



'0. 






LEIPZIG 
BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ 

1869. 



TAe Right of Translaiion is reserved. 



4 
1 






HILARY ST. IVES. 



A NOVEL. 

BY 

WILLIAM HARRISON AINSWORTH. 

i 

COPYRIGHT EDITION. 
IN TWO VOLUM ES. 



VOL. n.^^, rK^M^i«^! r 



\ 'V 



C>. 



>n Lift^ 



LEIPZIG 
BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ 

1869. 



TJu Right of Translation is reserved. 



CONTENTS 

O F VOLUME II 



BOOK II. 
MYRTILLA. 

(CONTINUED.) 

Page 

XXL The Interview in Trafalgar-square '9 

XIII. May's first Ball in Town 20 

XIV. Ascot 29 

XV. Mrs. Sutton's Interview with Lady Richborough ... 93 

XVI. The Colonel's Explanation 45 

XVII. A Discussion ujwn Balls and what it led to . . . . 5? 

XVIII. At the Crystal Palace 59 

XIX. Lady Richborough receives a Proposal 70 

XX. In which Hilary finds a Father 79 

XXI. Explains the Colonel's Errand ...... 87 

XXII. The Usemadeof the Letter ........ 92 

XXIII. An ill Quarter of an Hour 97 

XXIV. TheWaming 104 

XXV. How the News was broughi to Hazlemere . . 115 

BOOK III. 
THE RIVALS. 

I. The Young Mistress of Boxgrove 121 

n. A Letter froro Lady Richborough , , . . , . 128 



VI 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME H. 



Page 

III. Oswald reappears as a Suitor 135 

IV. A Secret Divulged 145 

V. Mrs. Sutton's Confession 150 

VI. The Marquis of Hartlepool i6i 

VII. An unexpected Airival 166 

VlII. How Hilary found the Person he sought 177 

IX. Mrs. Sutton's History i87 

X. The Portrait 210 

XI. A Vision 220 

XII. Father and Son 225 

XIII. Further Explanations 231 

XIV. The Thunderstorm 238 

XV. A Retrospect 242 

XVI. How Barbara was brought back to Boxgrove .... 247 

XVII. An eventful Evening 252 

XVIII. Sequel to the previous Chapter , . . . . . . 257 

XIX. How the Gipsy's Prophecy was fulfilled 265 

L'Envoy 270 



» «' 



>i 



HILARY ST. IVES. 



BOOK II. 

M YRTI LLA. 

(CONTINUBD.) 









>i" 






) 






S 'i 



(,t. Nr/. - V' >iUv\^.; 

The Interview in Trafalgar-Square. 

All went smoothly with the lovers. The skies 
were bright above them — their path was strewn with 
flowers. Not a quarrel has to be recorded. No unto- 
ward or unlooked-for event marred their happiness. 

Sir Charles's love amounted to idolatry. Never happy, 
except in May's society — he was constantly by her side. 
Whether she was in the charming gardens of Hazlemere 
— at work in the dräwing-room — on horseback in the. 
shady lanes, or on the breezy common — whether she 
paced the stately terrace at Boxgrove — strolled forth 
into the park — or loitered amid the woods to admire 
the deer — Sir Charles was near her. 

Sometimes, Myrtilla was with them — but not always. 
They were so wrapped up in each other, that they had 
not a thought for her. She voted them both intensely 
stupid, and told them so. They only laughed, and 
gave small heed to what she said. 

Ah ! those were halcyon days. If such days would 
last, this earth would indeed be paradise. 

But let US not disturb their happiness by any gloomy 
anticipations of the future. Fortunately for themselves, 
lovers never look beyond the present hour. Love is 
eternal, they believe, and will withstand the rudest. 



lO HILARY ST. IVES. 

shock. Dream on, then, happy pair! We will not 
disturb you, orchase away your visions of delight. 

Nearly a month passed away thus blissfully. Early 
and late, May and her lover were together. Neither 
had a plan with which the other was not connected. 
Each day, in Myrtilla's estimation, they grew more 
stupid than thej had been the day before. She had 
no patience with Charlie, and would no longer listen 
to his rhapsodies. Impossible to live with them, if 
they went on in this manner. However, she consoled 
herseif by thinking that they must soon come to their 
senses, since it was arranged that the marriage should 
take place early in July. 

Sir Charles's engagement was vexatious to her lady- 
ship in one respect. It detained her at Boxgrove longer 
than she liked. Her house in Eaton-place was prepared 
for her. The season had commenced. Lots of parties 
were going on — dinners, balls, fancy balls, musical 
soirdes. Every post brought her cards of invitation, 
and notes from the nicest people imaginable, telling 
her she was sadly missed, and imploring her to come 
up to town without delay. 

These notes drove her wild. She longed to be 
seen in the Park, where a host of admirers were on 
the look-out for her daily. She longed for the box at 
the Opera, with which Sir Charles had herfetofore in- 
dulged her. She longed to see the Derby mn, but 
that she knew to be impossible. However, she made 
up her mind to go to Ascot. She thought Boxgrove 
the dullest place on earth. Never had the gardens and 



HILARY ST. IVES. 1 1 

the park looked more exquisite. But what did she 
care for the gardens and the. park when everybody was 
in town ! She very much preferred Kensington Gardens 
and Hyde Park.. She had promised Charlie to stay, 
and stay she would, if he insisted. But why not let 
her take May to Eaton-place? May had never yet had 
a season in town, and would enjoy a few weeks' gaiety 
immensely. She ought to go out a little before her 
marriage. Improvement was scarcely possible, but a 
month in town would give her the last finish. 

Sir Charles shook his head, and entreated her not 
to mention the subject to May. So far from improving 
her, a month in town would take ofF the freshness 
which was so charming to him, and which, like the 
down on the peach, could never be restored. 

Myrtilla laughed at his objections, and told him he 
was a selfish fellow, and wanted to keep May all to 
himself, but she promised compliance. 

In spite, however, of her brother's interdiction, she 
did propose the plan to May, and held out so many 
inducements that, as she expected, the young girl was 
quite dazzled. On being consulted, Mrs. RadclifFe 
gave her assent, and could see nothing but what was 
delightful in the arrangement. Just the thing for May. 

Unable to oflfer a remonstrance, Sir Charles relüc- 
tantly acquiesced. If he had a presentiment of ill, he 
kept it to himself. 

So it was settled that her ladyship and May were 
to go up to Eaton-place, and arrangements were made 
accordingly. 



12 HILARY ST. IVES. 

Where was Colonel Delacombe all this while? Had 
he been rejected by Myrtilla, or given up all idea of 
her? Neither one nor the other. He was just as much 
enamoured as ever, but had not yet proposed. His 
Visit to Hazlemere did not extend beyond the third 
day, when his attendance being required at the Horse 
Guards, he hastened up to town. He had accepted an 
invitation to Boxgrove, but was obliged to postpone it. 
At least , he pleaded a variety of unavoidable engage- 
ments. Mrs. RadclifFe also was very urgent for his 
return tö Hazlemere. But he made the same excuses 
to her. 

In fact, he was trying, though ineffectually, as it 
turned out, to conquer his passion for the fascinating 
Myrtilla. 

Now that the colonel was gone, her ladyship, by 
way of amusing herseif, would not have been indisposed 
to renew her flirtation with Oswald; but that disconso- 
late young fellow did not give her the opportunity, but 
Started ofF rather suddenly for Bowdon, in Cheshire, 
where, it may be remembered, his mother resided, in 
Order to obtain some solace under his bitter disappoint- 
ment. 

Mr. Thornton, however, was still at Hazlemere, and 
since a younger man was not to be had, her ladyship 
diverted herseif by an occasional flirtation with him. 
The old gentleman was almost beside himself. No 
fool like an old fool. 

Recent events had disturbed the calm tenor of-Mrs. 
RadclifFe's existence, and she could not regain" her 



HILARV ST. IVES. 13 

tranquillity. The colonel had promised to return 
immediately, but, as before mentioned, he did not keep 
his Word. He wrote her a short apologetic note, the 
cold and distant tone of which she did not like at all. 
He was still at the Langham, and seemed well pleased 
with his quarters. Mr. Thornton, at his daughter's re- 
quest, ran up to see him, but did not succeed in bring- 
ing him back. 

Mrs. Sutton, too, was greatly changed. Her de- 
portment was difFerent from what it used to be, and 
at times she scarcely attempted to conceal the aversion 
she entertained for her mistress. Evidently, she could 
not folget the humiliation she had experienced from 
Colonel Delacombe. She could not endure to hear 
his name mentioned, and rudely checked her mistress 
whenever she alluded to him. 

The houskeeper, however, manifested no reluctance 
to talk about Hilary St. Ives. Indeed, she often spoke 
of him, and with a tenderness and afFection that sur- 
prised Mrs. Radcliffe. For reasons that need not be 
explained, she at once took possession of the five 
hundred pounds, and caused the clothes-chest, with all 
its Contents, to be removed to her own Chamber. 

Had Mrs. Radcliffe seen her when she was alone 
that night, or overheard some ejaculations that escaped 
her, she would have been terrified. The expression of 
her countenance showed that she was under the empire 
of the worst passions. 

All her machinations had come to naught. She 
had foolishly persuaded herseif that by her influence 



l6 HILARY ST. IVES. 

with the throng, she reached him. He was planted 
before a noble picture by Maclise, and was studying it 
so intently, that he did not perceive her. She touched 
his arm, and, as he turned, his looks betokened the 
greatest surprise. 

Perhaps he would have avoided her, if he could — 
at least, such was her Impression. But he did not 
refuse to attend her. 

Quitting the picture galleries, they crossed the 
Street and descended to the spacious inclosure of the 
Square, where the fountains are wont to play, and 
where, comparatively speaking, they were alone. 

As they paced to and fro, Mrs. Sutton commenced 
by expressing her great satisfaction at meeting with 
him, admitting that she had been in quest of him, and 
after chiding him for his sudden flight from Hazle- 
mere, told him in the kindest terms she could employ, 
that she was still most anxious to serve him, and 
fondly hoped he would not decline her assistance. 

"Do not think me ungrateful for the kindness you. 
have shown me," he rejoined, "or for the interest you 
still take in me, but " 

"You are too proud to place yourself under an 
Obligation to me. But a time may come when you 
may be less scrupulous. Pray let me know how I can 
communicate with you?" 

He hesitated, but at last said, 

"You must excuse me. I have reasons for with- 
holding my address." 

"You believe that I am acting for others. You 



HILARY ST. IVES. IJ 

are wrong. I am personally interested in you — per- 
sonally, I repeat. Do not disregard my friendship. I 
have the power and the will to serve you. In proof, 
let me teil you that it was I who sent the money and 
the clothes which you supposed came from Colonel 
Delacombe." 

"Then the letter I received was written by you?" 
he cried, in astonishment. 

"It was. I adopted that roundabout course because 
I thought it would be most agreeable to your feelings. 
You will understand my motives better one of these 
days. Have I said enough to remove your scruples? I 
have the money with me, and entreat your acceptance 
of it — as a gift — as a loan." 

"I can only accept it on the condition of your 
giving me a füll explanation of this seeming mystery. 
What am I to you that you take such interest in me? " 

"What are you to me?" she cried, stopping, and 
regarding him with inexpressible tenderness. 

She seemed about to pour forth the secrets of her 
heart, but suddenly checking herseif, she added, "No 
— no— you must not ask me why I act thus. I cannot 
teil you." 

"You have said too much," he exclaimed. "I 
have a right to further explanation." 

But Mrs. Sutton's momentary weakness had passed. 

"Be content with what you have learnt. Will you 
take the money?" 

Hilary shook his head. 

Hilary St. Jves. 11. 2 



l8 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"I know from whom it comes," he rejoined. "You 
are employed by Mrs. Radcliffe. You act your part 
admirably. But you cannot impose upon me." 

This was too much. Mrs. Sutton struggled hard 
with herseif, but could not repress an outburst of 
emotion. 

"You do me a great injustice," she ejaculated, in 
a broken voice. "But I forgive you. Farewell." 

"Stay," he cried, detaining her. "Do not quit 
me in anger." 

"In anger!" she exclaimed. "If you could read 
my heart you would find no anger there — but much 
grief." 

Just then an elderly man descended the broad 
stone Steps leading from the street, and walked slowly 
'towards them. He had been watching them for some 
'*^" minutes from above, without attracting their attention. 
He was high-shouldered, and from his halting galt ap- 
peared to be lame. Though respectably dressed in 
black, he had not altogether the air of a.gentleman. 

"Who is that Coming towards us?'' cried Mrs. 
Sutton. "He seems to know you." 

"Mr. Courtenay, of Exeter," replied Hilary. "He 
was to meet me at the Exhibition. I suppose he has 
Seen me talking with you.'' 

"Is that Mr. Courtenay?" she exclaimed, in alarni. 
"I must begone. For Heaven's sake do not teil him 
who I am, Write to me — write to me, I beseech you, 



HILARY ST. IVES. iQ 

if you have any love for me. Attend to my caution. 
Farewell ! " 

And regardless of the construction that might be 
put upon her conduct, she hurried off to the lower 
part of the Square. 



22 HILARY ST. IVES. 

whelmed by engagements. This might, perhaps, ac- 
count for his inexplicable silence. Mrs. Radcliffe was 
willing to believe so, and quite recovered her spirits. 

Mrs. Sutton was pleased with the arrangement. It 
suited her plans. 

But May was greatly surprised by it. That mamma, 
who had never left home for years, and who had often 
declared that nothing should induce her to leave home 
again, should propose a visit to town, seemed the most 
unlikely thing possible. But unlikely things are just 
the things that always happen, as Myrtilla told her. 
Of course May was delighted. Myrtilla said she was 
delighted. And Sir Charles really was delighted. On 
all accounts, it rejoiced him that the family were going 
up to town. 

May's d6but in fashionable society took place on 
the very night of her arrival in town, at Lady Old- 
castle's ball at Prince*s-gate, and created an extra- 
ordinary Sensation. Everybody admitted that she was 
by far the loveliest girl that the season had as yet pro- 
duced, and it did not seem at all likely that she could 
be eclipsed. Such charming features — such a delicately 
fair complexion — such soft blue eyes — such süperb 
blonde tresses — and such an exquisite figure had never 
been seen hefore. And then she looked so fresh and 
unsophisticated — so füll of natural enjoyment — that 
twenty blas6 young fellows , proof against ordinary at- 
tractions, were smitten at first sight, and driven to 
despair when they learnt she was already engaged. All 
eyes foUowed her as she moved through the rooms, 



HILARY ST. IVES. 2^ 

and though there was some disposition to criticise her 
among mammas and chaperons jealous of their daughters' 
and charges' beauty, no real fault could be found with 
her. The worst that could be said was, that she was 
not quite accustomed to society. However, since no 
rivalry was to be expected from her, envy was silenced, 
and her surpassing loveliness universally admitted. Had 
she been in the market, the judgment pronounced upon 
her would have been very difFerent. Her movements 
in the dance were so graceful that she caused a perfect 
fiireur, and there was a host of aspirants for the honour 
of her band. She liked dancing, and danced a good 
deal — almost every dance, we are afraid to say — and 
had the best partners in the room. 

"You will fatigue yourself to death, my love," ob- 
served Lady Richborough. "You should follow my 
example, and never exceed a couple of valses. Re- 
coUect that you have three balls to-morrow night." 

May was about to follow the advice, but her partner, 
who was no other than Captain de Vesci, Colonel Dela- 
combe's friend, looked so blank and disappointed, that 
she took compassion upon him, and was instantly in- 
volved in the mazy ring. 

"Lucky Sir Charles is not here," remarked her 
ladyship to Colonel Delacombe, who was seated beside 
her on a sofa in one of the smaller rooms. "I wonder 
what he would say to all this?" 

"He would be charmed, of course, to see the ob- 
ject of his choice so much admired." 

"Tm not so siu-e of that," said her ladysbi^, ^tk\- 



24 HILARY ST. IVES. 

ing. "Sir Charles is of a remarkably jealous nature. 
If he could have his own way, I don't think he would 
let May go out at all." 

"You amaze mel" cried the colonel. "I fancied 
he knew your sex better, and had more reliance on 
himself. Why should a woman, who is calculated to 
shine in Society, be excluded from it? The plan never 
answers. I have known several young married people, 
who thought they could live for themselves alone, and 
were foolish enough to try the experiment. What was 
the result? Most of them, if not all, are now separated. 
If you want a woman to run away from you, shut her 
up. That's an infallible maxim. For my part," he 
continued, looking earnestly at her, in order to give 
due force to his words, "nothing would delight me so 
much as to see my wife admired. I should feel myself 
flattered by the compliments paid her." 

"But how can you teil, colonel, since you have 
never been married?" observed her ladyship, archly. 

"I can't speak practically. But I know myself 
sufficiently to be certain as to how I should be aifected 
under such circumstances. Homage to my wife I 
should regard as homage to myself. If her charms 
and accomplishments excited admiration, I should feel 
proud of her, not jealous. Other people may covet 
the treasure I possess, but that would only make me, 
value it the more. If we have a priceless gem , we do 
not hide it, but allow it to be seen, and the admiration 
it excites is in the highest degree gratifying to u§. Such 



HILARY ST. IVES. 25 

would be my conduct towards my wife — if I had one." 
And he again looked at her ladyship expressively. 

"Your notions are strictly orthodox, colonel, and 
meet my entire approval," rejoined her ladyship. **I 
wonder you do not give efFect to them." 

"I have no chance of doing so. I am too fastidioua 
to choose any other than a young and handsome wo- 
man, and such a woman would not be likely to accept 
an old scarred soldier like myself, while plenty of good- 
looking young fellows are to be had. I ought to have 
married long ago, but I have had no time to look 
out for a wife, and in India there is but little choice." 

"I am surprised at that. I should have thought 
just the contrary. But what prevents you from choosing 
now? There are pretty girls in abundance here." 

**A pretty girl would not suit me. I must have 
something brilliant." 

"A jewel such as you described just now?*' 

"Exactly." 

"That is not so easily found. Diamonds are not 
to be met with every day.'' 

"I have been singularly fortunate," said the colonel. 
"I have discovered one of inestimable worth." 

Her ladyship was quite fluttered. She could not 
affect to misunderstand him. 

But before anyttting more could be said by the 
colonel, a very unseasonable interruption was oflfered 
by a handßome, though rather effeminate-looking young 
man, with a pale complexion and light flowiag ^wbiitsx.^^ 



26 HILARY ST. IVES. 

who begged her ladyship, in drawling tones, tö present 
him to Miss RadclifFe. 

"Charming creature!" he cried. *'Should like im- 
mensely to valse with her." 

"No Chance to-night, dear Lord Robert," she re- 
joined. "I know she's engaged four or five deep." 

"Deuced unlucky that! Will your ladyship give 
me a galoppe?" 

"Don't ask me, please. Tm tired. Besides, I want 
to take Miss RadclifFe away if 1 can." 

"What, so early! and before she has fulfilled her 
engagements ! " cried Lord Robert Tadeaster. "I must 
protest against such cruelty. Ah, here she comes!" 

As he spoke May was brought back by Captain de 
Vesci. Lord Robert was presented, but May was un- 
able to dance with him for the reasons assigned by 
Lady Richborough. 

"Have you had enough, my love?" said her lady- 
ship. "Recollect you are on your good behaviour to- 
night. Sir Charles will never forgive me if I allow you 
to remain out late." 

"I am quite ready to go," said May. "But un- 
luckily " 

"Never mind your engagements. They don't 
signify in the least. Lord Robert will give you his 
arm." 

Attended by the colonel, and followed by May and 
the young nobleman, her ladyship then quitted the ball- 
room without taking leave of Lady Oldcastle. 

Lady Richborough's box at the Opera was the 



HILARY ST. IVES. 2"] 

general resort of the golden youth of the day. It was 
füll of them. Driven to the pit or to some other box, 
Sir Charles had the annoyance of witnessing the atten- 
tions paid his fianc^e by a succession of impertinent 
coxcombs. 

How often he wished himself back at Boxgrove! 
and how firmly he resolved that May should never have 
an opera-box. 

But this was the slightest of his grievances. The 
same set of coxcombs who beset Lady Richborough's 
opera-box met her ladyship and May — as if by ap- 
pointment — during their morning ride in Hyde Park, 
and would not be dismissed. They did not care for 
Sir Charles 's black looks. Chief among these pests 
wore Lord Robert Tadeaster and Captain de Vesci. 
Sometimes, Sir Charles was exasperated to such a 
degree by their impertinences that he would have 
afFronted them but for the interference of Colonel De- 
lacombe. 

The colonel, who was now recognised by Sir 
Charles as his sister's suitor, always attended her lady- 
ship during her promenades, and indeed was gener- 
ally with her in the evening as well as during the 
morning. 

Seeing, or fancying they saw, how matters stood, 
people invited him to all the parties to which her 
ladyship was bidden. The colonel, therefore, was in 
immense request, and became extremely and deservedly 
populär. Attentions paid to her ladyship never put 
him out. He resigned his seat by her side without a 



28 HILARY ST. IVES. 

murmur, or feil back if a gay cavalier, whose chat he 
knew would amuse her, wanted to join her in Rotten- 
rowi Thus it will be seen that he acted up to his 
own precepts, and would fain have instilled them into 
Sir Charles. 

"Jealousy is an absurd passion," he said, "and 
always makes the person who yields to it ridiculous. 
Even if I were fool enough to be jealous, I would take 
good care not to let my wife perceive it. A woman 
always despises a jealous husband, and not unfrequently 
ends by giving him real ground for jealousy. Take 
my advice, and do not give yourself the slightest con- 
cern about these imbeciles. May is totally indifferent 
to them. She is amused by their bavardage, no doubt, 
but she rates them at their real worth. Do not make 
them of importance by quarrelling with any of them. 
Treat them as a pack of fools, and laugh at them as 
I do." 

Very sensible advice. But Sir Charles could not 
follow it. He had many a severe trial to undergo, but 
one of the worst was at Ascot. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 29 



XIV. 

Ascot. 

Lady Richborough, as we are aware, had re- 
solved to go to Ascot. Sir Charles objected, but bis 
objections were quickly overruled. The colonel, who 
had become a sort of Mentor to him, counselled him 
to give way with a good grace, and he did so. May 
Said it was so kind of him. She longed, of all things, 
to go to Ascot, of which she had heard so much. 
New dresses were ordered — new bonnets — and all pre- 
parations made. 

Mrs. Radcliffe no sooner heard of the plan than 
she determined to join the party. She had not wit- 
nessed a race for upwards of twenty years. At any 
risk she must go. So she ordered new dresses and 
new bonnets. 

The party was further increased by Oswald and bis 
mother, who had just come to town. Of the latter we 
must say a word. Mrs. Woodcot was not so hand- 
some as her sister, but had very pleasing features, fine 
eyes, a very good figure, and very agreeable manners. 
Very well dressed, too, for a country lady. 

Sir Charles made all necessary arrangements. He 
engaged rooms at the Castle Hotel, Windsor, for the 
whole party, which of course comprised the colonel 
and Mr. Thornton. Open carriages were at their disr 



30 HILARY ST. IVES. 

posal, and in these they drove daily through the park 
to the racecourse. The weather being luckily propi- 
tious, nothing could be more enjoyable. 

At all times the drive through this magnificent 
park is delightful, but in Ascot time it is peculiarly 
exhilarating. Every turn-out looks well. Teams bowl 
along merrily. Postilions appear conscious of their 
own importance. Everybody is well dressed and in 
high spirits. 

Our friends were capitally turned out. Four splen- 
did horses attached to each carriage bore them along 
gallantly. Lady Richborough and May, attended by 
Sir Charles and the colonel, occupied the first carriage. 
Both ladies looked ravishingly beautiful in their charm- 
ing Summer toilettes. May was füll of excitement and 
delight — perfectly enchanted by the novel scene. 

But the comparative quietude of the forest, with 
its long avenues, its grand old trees, and stretching 
glades, was soon exchanged for the crowd, confusion, 
and bewildering noises of the racecourse. What stop- 
pages! what vociferations ! what strange-looking people! 
But what excitement! 

Mrs. Reidcliffe, who came in the second carriage 
with Mrs. Woodcot, was quite terrified, half-screamed 
at every turn, and feit certain she should be upset. 
But both carriages got safely into the place reserved 
for them, which was the best place possible, being 
just opposite the Grand Stand. Then the poor lady 
could now look about her with comfort, and survey 
the surprising sceue. She owned that it far surpassed 



HILARY ST. IVES. 3I 

all her preconceived notions. And if she was as- 
tonished, what wonder that her daughter, to whom 
such a spectacle was an absolute novelty, should be 
greatly excited! 

London had sent forth all its fiower of fashion to 
the course. It had sent forth multitudes of others 
who had no pretension to rank or fashion, but still the 
aristocratic element was clearly perceptible in the 
crowd. 

London had likewise sent forth all its beauty — or 
the best part of it. Hundreds of lovely women were 
to be Seen in the long lines of carriages drawn up 
near the ropes. Hundreds of others, equally lovely, 
could be observed on the lawn and on the seats of the 
Grand Stand, looking in their gay attire, and witTi 
their wonderfully-varied parasols, like a vast parterre 
of flowers. But we unhesitatingly declare, that none 
so lovely could be discerned, either in the Grand 
Stand or elsewhere, as in the carriage containing Lady 
Richborough and May. This was proved by the uni- 
versal admiration they excited. 

To this sort of admiration Sir Charles could not 
object, and he was rather gratified by it — but he was 
very soon put out of humour. 

The same set of coxcombs who had been his baue 
in Rotten-row, at the Opera, and at many an evening 
party, speedily discovered the carriage, and invaded 
it. There they were monopolising May, laughing, jest- 
ing in the most impertinently familiär manner, talking 
about the horses, and offering bets of gloves. 



32 HILARY ST. IVES. 

In Order to get rid of his tormentors, Sir Charles 
proposed that the ladies should go over to the Grand 
Stand, and take possession of their box. Agreed to. 
But the plaguy fellows were not to be shaken off. 
Lord Robert Tadeaster immediately offered his arm to 
May, and De Vesci insisted upon escorting Myrtilla. 

"Confound their impertinence!" cried Sir Charles. 
"I can't stand it any longer." 

"It is a bore," rejoined the colonel. "But pray 
keep quiet." 

We shall pass by what happened in the Grand 
Stand. Sir Charles's temper was certainly not im- 
proved. After the race for the Gold Cup had been 
run, they returned to the carriage for luncheon, and 
the same sort of thing occurred again — a degree worse, 
perhaps. Sir Charles and' the colonel were both ex- 
cluded from the carriage, and their seats occupied by 
the odious De Vesci, and the still more odious Lord 
Robert, who laughed and chatted with the ladies, while 
they quaffed the iced Champagne and helped to de- 
molish the lobster salad and pigeon pie. Sir Charles 
was so disgusted that he went to have luncheon with 
Mrs. Radcliffe, and the colonel went with him. 

They had not been gone many minutes when a 
very tawny, but handsome gipsy made her way to the 
carriage, and fixing her black eyes on May, addressed 
her in the customary formula, 

"Let me teil you your fortune, my pretty young 
lady." 

"Yes, do let hex Idl \l you, Miss Radcliffe," cried 



HILARY ST. IVES. ^^ 

Lord Robert, slipping a sovereign into the gipsy's 
hand. "I long so much to hear it. I wonder whether 
she'U teil it right." ^ 

"My words will come true for sartin," rejoined the 
gipsy, confidently. "But no one but the young lady 
must hear 'em. Let me look at your hand, my pretty 
lady." 

After a moment's inspection of May's white palm, 
she whispered in the young lady's ear, "Look over my 
Shoulder, my dear — look straight afore you." 

May complied, and perceived amidst the crowd, on 
the further side of the ropes, a tall young man, who 
was watching the scene. She could not mistake him. 
It was Hilary St. Ives. 

"That's him as you are to marry," said the gipsy, 
in the same low tone as before. 



ffilary S/. Ives. // 



y 



34 HILARY ST. rVES. 



XV. 

Mrs. Sutton's Interview with Lady Richborough. 

After uttering her stränge prediction, the gipsy 
hurried away, refusing to satisfy Lord Robertos curiosity, 
which was greatly excited by May's blushes and con- 
fusion. The cunning fortune-teller had spoken in so 
low a tone that he could not catch a word she said. 

When May looked up again, Hilary had disappeared, 
and she saw no more of him during the day. 

Though quite as curious as Lord Robert to learn 
what had occurred, Lady Richborough made no remark 
at the time, but when she and May were alone together 
in the evening, she questioned her on the subject, and 
laughed heartily at the explanation. 

"Oh! that is all," she exclaimed. "I fancied the 
gipsy had promised you to Lord Robert, for I saw him 
bribe her, but I suppose she was better paid by Hilary 
St. Ives. So .you are to marry him, eh? I wouldn't 
give much for his chance, notwithstanding the pro- 
phecy. " 

"Nor L But you must own it is a stränge circum- 
stance," observed May. 

"Not so Strange as it appears. The gipsy was in 
league with Hilary, who told her what to say, and 
placed himself where he could be readily descried. I 



HILARY ST. IVES. 35 

am glad you did not mention the matter to Sir Charles. 
It would only have put him out." 

"Poor fellow! I fear he was greatly put out before 
that. Dearest Myrtilla, I cannot persevere in the part 
you have forced me to play, now that I find how much 
it pains him. Do give that tiresome Lord Robert a 
hint, or allow me to do so." 

"Not yet, my love — not yet, or you will defeat my 
plan. Sir Charles must and shall be cured of his 
jealousy." 

"But is this the way to eure him? I constantly ex- 
pect to See him break out into a furious passion." 

"Just what I want," said her ladyship, smiling. 
"Then we will make him heartily ashamed of himself, 
and his eure will be accomplished." 

"But if he is no longer jealous, I shall think he no 
longer loves me." 

"My dear child, it is a mistake to suppose that a 
jealous man is the most devoted. He is simply in- 
tensely selfish and exacting. Sir Charles entertains the 
preposterous notion, of which I intend to disabuse 
him, that he is to have you all to himself. Were he 
allowed his own way, he would exclude you altogether 
from Society, and shut you up at Boxgrove, where 
you would be as dull as if you were immured in a 
convent." 

"It would be no punishment to me to be shut up, 
as you term it, at Boxgrove. Indeed, I should prefer 
it to the rackety life I am now leading. You will laugh 
at me, I know, Myrtilla, but I declare I am not half so 

3* 



36 HILAKY ST. IVES. 

happy as I used to be when rambling daily about the 
park with dear Sir Charles. How things have altered 
since we came to town! When we ride out together in 
Rotten-row, Sir Charles's place is immediately taken 
by some one whom he dislikes. Very often we do not 
exchange more than half a dozen words during a whole 
evening. 1 find it very hard to obey your Instructions. 
Sir Charles, as you know, doesn't dance, and I am 
sure — though he never says so — that he thinks I dance 
a great deal too much. My conduct must appear 
shocking to him, and though you find plenty of ex- 
cuses for me, I can find none for myself." 

"Having put yourself in my hands, you must do as 
you are bidden. By-and-by, when you understand 
things better, you will be grateful for my good advice. 
Mrs. Radcliffe entirely approves of the plan I am pur- 
suing, and is infinitely obliged to me. She sees as 
plainly as I do that Sir Charles's design is to keep you 
in the country. Now I won't have such a charming 
creature buried alive to please him. You are formed 
for Society, and shall not be withdrawn from it with 
my consent. As May RadcUfFe, you are immensely 
admired, but you will be ten times more admired as 
Lady Ihninster. I know from experience the effect that 
a lovely young married woman of a certain rank can 
produce. She carries all before her. Every house 
worth entering is thrown open to her, She is queen 
of every fSte, and a hundred soupirants follow in her 
train." 

"A brilliant pictate" o\iB»^TM^^^^^^smiling, "But 



HILARY ST. IVES. 37 

it does not dazzle me. I must repeat that I am un- 
equal to the part I am playing. I was really mihappy 
this morning when Sir Charles left the carriage, and 
would have recalled him if I could. I thought Lord 
Robert perfectly detestable, and wished him at Jericho, 
or anywhere eise, except Ascot." 

"He has been very useful to us in our little plot," 
observed her ladyship. "You need not give yourself 
the least concern about a butterfly that can be brushed 
ofF at any moment." 

They then separated for the night. May was tired, 
but sleep did not visit her so soon as it used to do, 
when she was better satisfied with herseif. 

Things went on pretty much as they had done for 
another fortnight. Morning fStes, concerts, grand 
dinners, and grander balls succeeded each other with- 
out interruption, and at all these Lady Richborough 
and May assisted. 

Apparently, Sir Charles was more reconciled to his 
Position, and allowed no outward manifestation of an- 
noyance to escape him. In fact, he appeared indiiferent 
— though this was far from being the case. Had he 
become philosophical? Or had he penetrated his sister's 
design? Myrtilla trimnphantly declared that they had 
brought him to his senses; but May's uneasiness in- 
creased, and she began seriously to apprehend that 
she had lost his affections. 

Meantime, the business arrangements connected with 
the approaching nuptials had been going on quietly and 
satisfactorily. Settlements — those dangerous rocks upon 



38 HILARY ST. IVES. 

which so many fair barks bound for the matrimonial 
haven have split — ofFered no ^difficulties in this case. 
All was piain sailing. Sir Charles had announced bis 
Intention of settling five thousand a year upon bis in- 
tended, and bis estates were to be cbarged to tbat 
amount. Not to be bebindhand in liberality, Mr. Rad- 
clifFe agreed to settle anotber five tbousand a year 
upon bis daugbter. Tbese arrangements were entmsted 
to Mr. Tbornton, wbo acted as professional adviser to 
botb parties, and declared be bad never been more 
agreeably employed. 

Wben tbe deeds were completed, and only lacked 
tbe necessary signatures, be told May witb a cbuckle, 
tbat sbe would soon bave ten tbousand a year. "And 
a very nice little income you will find it/' be added. 
"Don't forget tbat you owe it to grandpapa." 

As Colonel Delacombe seemed quite at bome at 
Eaton-place, as be was consulted on all matters by 
Lady Ricbborougb, and occasionally did tbe honours 
for ber, it is not surprising Mrs. RadclifFe sbould con- 
clude tbey were engaged, but sbe could not get eitber 
of tbem to admit tbat tbey were so. Tbe colonel 
always laugbed wben rallied on tbe subject, and de- 
clared sbe did bim too mucb bonour. On one point 
Mrs. Radcliffe was perfectly satisfied. Sbe could not, 
sbe was convinced, bave found a better cbaperon for 
ber daugbter tban Lady Ricbborougb. May's triumpb's 
deligbted ber, and recalled tbe days wben sbe berself 
bad been universally admired. Moreover, sbe entirely 
agreed witb ber ladysbip tbat Sir Cbarles must be 



HILARY ST. IVES. 39 

cured of his absurd jealousy. A diflferent opinion, 
however, prevailed among the rest of the family. Mr. 
Radcliffe and Mr. Thornton thought May's conduct 
very foolish, and were both apprehensive lest Sir Charles 
should break off the match. 

Mrs. Radcliffe, it will be seen, did not enjoy her 
Visit to town. Under the circumstances, it was im- 
possible she could do so. She had calculated upon 
the colonel's attentions, and though provoked by his 
neglect was compelled to dissemble her rage and dis- 
appointment. She was also obliged to put on a mask 
of friendship for Lady Richborough, whom she de- 
tested. 

Of late, as we know, she had ceased to impart her 
griefs to Mrs. Sutton, because she met with little sym- 
pathy from her; but one day, being greatly exasperated, 
she could not help observing to the housekeeper that 
she feit certain the colonel was about to marry Lady 
Richborough. 

"I do not think the marriage will take place," ob- 
served Mrs. Sutton, with a Singular smile. 

"Why not?" demanded Mrs. Radcliffe, curiously. 

"I have my own reasons for thinking so," replied 
the other. 

"Whatever your reasons may be, you are entirely 
wrong, Sutton," said her mistress. "1 can no longer 
delude myself with the notion that Seymour is a model 
of constancy. He is faithless as the rest of his sex. 
He has contrived to captivate Lady Richborough, and 
she has accepted him." 



40 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"Do you only suspect this?" said the house- 
keeper, looking at her inquiringly; "or are you sure?" 

"I have not questioned her ladyship on the sub- 
ject, Sutton, but her manner towards Seymour satisfies 
me of the correctness of my surmise. Perfidious wretch! 
I could kill him." 

"-Fi?« kill him!" exclaimed the housekeeper, scorn- 
fuUy. "You have not the courage to do it." 

"Well, perhaps I have not," observed Mrs. Rad- 
clifFe. "I have not the resolution of a Spanish er 
Italian woman. But I should have no compunction in 
breaking ofF the match if I had the power." 

The housekeeper smiled bitterly, and said, 

"I know a way to prevent it." 

Mrs. Radcliflfe looked at her incredulously. 

"Entreaties are inefFectual with Seymour, I have 
tried them. He is immovable." 

"Wait tili I have had an interview with Lady 
Richborough, and you will then see whether he will 
persist." 

"We must consider before you take this step, 
Sutton," 

"No consideration is required. For Lady Rich- 
borough's sake the step must be taken, and without 
delay." 

Next morning, at a tolerably early hour, Mrs. Sutton 
repaired to Eaton-place, and after a little delay was 
shown into Lady Richborough's dressing-room. Her 
ladyship had just finished her toilette, and professing 



HILARY ST. IVES. 4I 

to be delighted to see the housekeeper, begged her to 
be seated. 

Without allowing Mrs. Sutton to enter upon her 
business, she gave her a very lively description of the 
balls at which she and May had been present on the 
previous nights, and would have gone on much longer 
in the same strain had she not perceived that the 
housekeeper was becoming impatient. She then 
stopped suddenly, and said, 

"I suppose you bring me some message from dear 
Mrs. Radcliffe?" 

"No. I have taken the liberty of waiting upon 
your ladyship at this early hour because I have some- 
thing important — very important to yourself — to com- 
municate." 

"Indeed!" exclaimed Lady Richborough, rather 
alarmed by her mannen 

"I must prepare your ladyship for a disagreeable, 
and perhaps painful piece of intelligence," pursued 
Mrs. Sutton. "The disclosure I am about to make is 
calculated to destroy many agreeable illusions, but it 
cannot be withheld." 

"In Heaven's name, what is it? Don't put me on 
the rack." 

"Before entering into any explanation, I must 
venture to ask your ladyship a question to which I 
trust you will not refuse me a precise answer. Is there 
any truth in the report that you are about to be united 
to Colonel Delacombe?" 

"I now see your errand, Sutton," cried tei U.d^- 



42 HILARY ST. IVES. 

sKip, laughing. "Though you deny it, I am sure you 
have been sent by Mrs. RadclifFe to put that question 
to me." 

"Your ladyship is quite mistaken. No one has 
sent me. No one is aware of my visit. No one will 
hear of it from me. If you will give me an assurance 
that an engagement does not subsist between you and 
Colonel Delacombe nothing more need be said." 

"As I cannot exactly give you such an assurance, 
Sutton, you must assume what you please." 

"Then I am bound to teil your ladyship that if 
such a marriage is contemplated, it can never take 
place.'' 

Myrtilla turned excessively pale , and after a 
moment's silence, said, 

"What do you mean, Sutton? Is there any serious 
impediment? " 

Laying her band upon her ladyship's arm, and 
fixing her eyes füll upon her, the housekeeper Sciid in 
a low voice: 

"An insuperable impediment. He is already 
married." 

Myrtilla uttered an exclamation of surprise and 
anger. Shaking off the housekeeper's grasp, she cried, 
with great indignation, 

"Nonsense, Sutton! I won't believe it. Is it likely 
that Colonel Delacombe — a man of unquestionable 
honour — would, if he were married, pay his addresses 
to a lady, and seek to obtain her band? I can guess 



HILARY ST. IVES, 43 

the author of the calumny. Teil her I disbelieve it 
and despise it." 

"Again I must set your ladyship right," rejoined 
Mrs. Sutton, calmly. "I alone am responsible for the 
Statement, and I affirm its truth." 

Her manner carried conviction with it, and frightened 
Lady Richborough. 

"If necessary, I am prepared to substantiate my 
assertion," continued Mrs. Sutton, after a pause. 
"But Colonel Delacombe will not dare to deny the 
accusation." 

"We shall see,'* cried Lady Richborough. "Oh! 
Sutton, you have made me wretched — most wretched.'* 

"Better your ladyship should suffer now than later 
on, when the error would be irreparable." 

"Yes, if what you say is true, you have indeed 
saved me from a terrible fate. But since you have 
Said so much, you must teil me all. Where is his 
wife? What is she? Why has he separated from 
her?" 

"Your ladyship must not question me further," 

f rejoined the housekeeper, in a troubled tone. "I have 

told you all that is necessary. Thus much I will say. 

It was a most unlucky union, and attended with sad 

consequences." 

"Has he abandoned his wife?" 

"Ask him. Perhaps he may teil you. I cannot. 
It is a very painful history. Nor should any allusion 
have been made to it but for present circumstaiices. 
iVly errand is done. I wish your ladyship good morning." 



44 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"Stay!" cried Myrtilla, detaining her. "A stränge 
suspicion crosses me. Pray satisfy my doubts." 

"I must again refer you to the colonel," rejoined 
Mrs. Sutton, evasively. "I have nothing more to dis- 
close. You are now in possession of his secret, and 
can use it as you please/* 



HILARY ST. IVES. 45 



XVI. 

The Colonel's Explanation. 

Lady Richborough would not see the colonel that 
day. She feigned sudden Indisposition, and kept her 
own room. Her first idea was to consult with Sir 
Charles, and leave him to take such steps as he might 
deem advisable in a matter so delicate, but having still 
some doubts as to the truth of the housekeeper's State- 
ment, she resolved — after long deliberation — to question 
the colonel herseif. 

Of course — in consequence of her ladyship's sup- 
posed illness — all the arrangements for the day had to 
be given up. The troop of young men who expected 
to join the fair equestrians in 'Rotten-row were doomed 
to disappointment. The Opera was a blank, since the 
pleasantest box in the house was empty that night. 
Lady Fitton had to fiU up two places at her dinner, 
and Lady Louisa Legge's ball was deprived of its chief 
attractions. 

Mrs. Radcliffe, who had heard of the housekeeper's 
visit, called in Eaton-place, and hearing that her lady- 
ship was indisposed, expressed great anxiety to see her, 
but was not admitted to her room. 

Quite unaware of the thunder-cloud hanging over 
his head, Colonel Delacombe came as usual, and was 



46 HILARY ST. IVES. 

sorry to hear of her ladyship's illness, but any un- 
easiness he might have feit was dispelled by May, who 
told him that Myrtilla was only suffering from fatigue, 
and would be perfectly restored after a few hours' rest. 
Satisfied with this assurance, he gave himself no further 
concern, but proceeded to his club. 

Next morning, when he again presented himself in 
Eaton-place, he learnt that her ladyship was better, 
and was at once shown to her boudoir. He could not 
perceive any traces of illness in her countenance, but, 
on the contrary, thought her looking remarkably well, 
and told her so. She was writing a letter, and begged 
him to excuse her for a moment while she finished it. 
This gave her time to arrange her ideas. 

When she addressed him, he saw in a moment that 
something was wrong. She did not waste time in any 
preliminary remarks, but said, 

"In consequence of a communication made to me 
yesterday by Mrs. Sutton — the nature of which you 
will easily guess — I had resolved not to see you again, 
but to leave Sir Charles to acquaint you with my de- 
termination, together with my reasons for it, but " 

"I am exceedingly glad you did not do so, 
Myrtilla," he interrupted. "What has Mrs. Sutton told 
you?" 

Myrtilla hesitated, and the colour fled from her 
cheeks. 

"If what she says is true, you have no right to pay 
your addresses to me or to any other lady. She af- 
firms that you are already married. Can you give me 



HILARY ST. IVES. 47 

t 

your Word of honour that there is no tnith whatever in 
her Statement? '* 

"No," he replied in a sombre tone, "I cannot do 
that." 

"Then you admit the Charge?" 

" Certainly not." 

"How am I to reconcile these contradictions?" 

"Listen to me, Myrtilla. The disclosure I am 
about to make has been delayed too long— but on my 
honour I intended to make it. How the secret, which 
I thought confined to my own breast, has come to Mrs. 
Suttoii's knowledge I do not pretend to guess. It is 
certain that she has learnt it, and now uses it for her 
own vindictive purposes. I will be as brief in my nar- 
ration as I can, and I beg you not to interrupt me. 
When I first entered the army, and had little or no 
experience of your sex, I was entrapped into a mar- 
riage with an artful woman. I do not attempt to ex- 
tenuate my conduct. All the reproaches you could 
heap upon me would not equal the reproaches I have 
heaped upon myself. I was mad — that is my sole ex- 
cuse. I soon discovered how completely I had been 
duped. The perfidious wretch, with whom I had un- 
fortunately connected myself, did not love me — did 
not even respect my honour. She had basely deceived 
me. Before I married her, she had a lover — and ere 
long, as I subsequently ascertained, she renewed her 
intimacy with him, if she had ever discontinued it. 
These particulars must shock you, but I cannot with- 
hold them. They are necessary for my justification. 



48 HILARY ST. IVESi 

The woman's temper was frightful. At times she was 
a perfect fiend — a terror to her mother, with whom she 
lived — and I confess that I myself was afraid of her, 
for, in her transports of fury, my life was not safe. 
Upon one occasion, indeed, she snatched up a knife, 
and would have stabbed me if I had not wrested the 
weapon from her. It is scarcely necessary to say that 
the degrading alliance I had formed was kept secret. 
It was not even known to my intimates. However, I 
was not troubled with her long. When I went to 
Ireland with my regiment, I left her with her mother. 
She expressed no desire to accompany me — probably, 
for the reasons I have already given. I had no cor- 
respondence with her, and heard nothing of her for 
months. I then only learnt her fate from a newspaper.'' 

"What was her fate?" demanded Myrtilla, who had 
listened with deep interest to his recital. 

" She was drowned with her paramour while Cross- 
ing the Severn during a gale. The ferry-boat was 
upset, and all on board perished. Justice overtook her. 
She had deserted her mother, whose heart was broken 
by her misconduct, and who died soon afterwards. 
Can you wonder that I should desire to bury such a 
deplorable history in oblivion? Long years have passed 
since the events took place, but the recollection of 
them still gives me great pain." 

"Was it clearly ascertained that the misguided 
woman perished?" 

"Undoubtedly. It was known that she and her 



i 

I 



HILARY ST. IVES. 4Q 

lover embarked in the ferry-boat on that fatal night, 
and not a soul was saved." < 

There was a pause for some moments. At last, 
Myrtilla spoke: 

" Seymour, I fear she still lives — lives to plague you 
in the form of Mrs. Sutton." 

The colonel's brow darkened. 

"I cannot hope to convince you," he rejoined, in 
a sombre tone. "Think what you please. But say no 
more on the subject." 

"Do not be angry with me. Right or wrong, I 
will stand by you, and acting thus together, we shall 
prove more than a match for Mrs. Sutton." 

"She can do me no injury except through you, 
Myrtilla. She is in my power, and if she provokes me 
further she shall feel that she is so.*' 

"Take care you do not place yourself in her power, 
Seymour, or she will show you little pity. Marriage 
between us , under present circumstances , is of course 
out of the question; but I shall continue our friendly 
relations, if only to vex Mrs. Sutton. She shall not 
have the gratification of thinking she has produced a 
rupture." 

"I swear to you, Myrtilla, you are mistaken " 

"Do not forswear yourself, Seymour. You will fail 
to convince me, unless you can prove that the Severn 
häs not parted with its prey, which I think you will 
find rather difficult. But I will not ^^^ the vindictive 
woman a triumph. That is all I can promise you. 
One more question, and I have done. Answer it or 

Hilary St. Ives. II, 4 



50 HILARY ST. iVES. 

not, as you please, but answer tnily. Who is Hilary 
St. Ives?" 

"Who is he?" 

"Was there issue of your ill-starred marriage?" 

The colonel made no reply. 

"If there was, this young man is your son. I have 
thought so all along. Have you ever made any in- 
quiries about him?" 

"No. I take no interest in him. Even if your 
suspicions are correct — and there is nothing to Warrant 
them — I will never acknowledge him. It may seem a 
harsh determination — but having formed it, I shall 
abide by it." 

Just then the door opened, and Mrs. Radcliffe 
came in, accompanied by May. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 5 t 



XVII. 

A Discussion upon Balls and what it led tö. 

No one could have supposed from Mrs. RadclifFe's 
manner that she entertained any secret feeling of dis- 
like to Myrtilla, or was otherwise than pleased at her 
recovery. Yet, if her heart had been searched, it would 
have appeared that she was vexed at seeing her rival 
look so well, and still more provoked to find her on 
as good terms as ever with the colonel. Naturally, she 
had attributed Myrtilla's sudden illness to the efFect of 
Mrs. Sutton's communication. But if a quarrel had been 
caused, a reconciliation must have taken place, and 
eonsequently the mischief was undone. 

Myrtilla discerned what was passing in the other's 
breast, and was malicious enough to heighten her an- 
noyance. 

Shortly afterwards, Sir Charles came in, and ex- 
pressed his satisfaction at finding his sister all right 
again. 

"You were terribly missed yesterday, Myrtilla, I 
can teil you," he said. "Your squires in Rotten-row 
were in despair at your non-appearance with May, and 
there was universal lamentation at the Opera. I did 
not go to Lady Louisa Legge's ball, but I hear it was 
considered a failure owing to your absence.'' 

"Very flattering to us," remarked hex VöA^^V\^$^ 



52 HILARY ST. IVES. 

smiling. "We shall reappear with additional 6clat at 
Mrs. Baldwin Lanyon's rout to-night. I insist upon 
your going with us, Charlie." 

Sir Charles shook his head. 

"No more balls for me," he remarked. "I am 
heartily sick of them. I went to bed early last night, 
and am all the better for it. You don't want rae, May. 
I never dance, and you have no end of partners." 

" Very well, sir, then we must do without you," cried 
Myrtilla. "But you will lose a very charming party. I 
dare say you would very much prefer a quiet evening 
at Boxgrove." 

"Infinitely. I find no pleasure in crowded and 
stifling rooms, and there is nothing in the society one 
meets to compensate for the annoyance one is sure to 
experience." 

"If such is your opinion, Charlie, you are quite out 
of place in a ball-room, and much better in bed," said 
her ladyship. "But to my mind there is nothing so 
delightful as a crowded ball — crowded I mean by nice 
people, such as we are sure to meet to-night at the 
Baldwin Lanyons*. Whatever you may aver to the con- 
traxyy girls are never seen to such advantage as in a 
ball-room, and certainly there is no other kind of 
r6union that they enjoy so much. Isn't it true, May?" 

The young lady appealed to made no reply. Bat 
Mrs. Radcliffe smiled assent. 

"It used to be so in my time," she remarked. 

"At no other sort of party can flirting be carried 
on to such an extent," observed Sir Charles, dryly; 



HILARY ST. IVES. 53 

"and that I fancy is the grand recommendation of 
a ball." 

" We all like to flirt a little at a ball or elsewhere," 
laughed Myrtilla; "and so do you in your quiet way, 
Charlie. Rail as much as you please against balls, 
poung people will always enjoy them." 

"To be sure they will/' said Mrs. Radcliffe. "My 
health will not permit me to go out now; but there was 
a time when I liked nothing so much as a ball." 

"And were as much admired as your daughter, as 
I can bear witness," observed the colonel. "Sir Charles 
must be jesting. I never heard him advance such 
monstrous opinions before." 

"You mistake my meaning," observed Sir Charles. 
"A ball now and then is delightful, but there may be 
too much of a good thing. To go out night after night 
— to meet the same crowds — to dance with the same 
triflers — to listen to the same vapid nonsense. — appears 
to me a sad waste of existence." 

This tirade was received with a loud burst of 
laughter from everybody but May. 

"How we difFer!" cried Myrtilla. "To me a ball 
looks like enchantment. I like the atmosphere and 
excitement, the lights, the music, the crowd, the talk, 
the dancing — everything." 

"Especially the flirting," remarked her brother. 

"Well, what do girls go to a ball for; except to 
flirt, as you call it? Most of them go with the ex- 
pectation of finding husbands, and some of them suc- 
ceed in their design. Necesscirily, if they are pretty. 



54 I^LARY ST. IVES. 

they are admired, and men will flatter them — will talk 
nonsense to them. If they laugh and are amused, you 
call that flirting." 

**But I hold it impossible that a girl of any sense 
can be amused by the frivolities and attentions of the 
saipe empty coxcombs/' cried Sir. Charles. "She may 
tolerate them for an occasion, but night after night to 
Surround herseif with the same set of idiots argues a 
very coquettish disposition." 

**Well, then, I proclaim myself a coquette — a heart- 
less coquette, if you please," cried Myrtilla. **I do like 
admiration — I do like to be surrounded by a throng 
of empty-headed coxcombs, vieing with each other for 
the honour of dancing with me. It diverts me to listen 
to their nonsense, and it enchants me to make them 
jealous of each other. And I will teil you why, Charlie. 
A man never looks so supremely ridiculous as when he 
is jealous." 

"None but a fool can be jealous of a coquette. To 
be jealous of a woman you must love her, and when 
you See her bestow her smiles on every one who comes 
near her, the love you have feit will soon be extin- 
guished." 

"There I difFer with you," said the colonel. "Our 
passions are not so much under our control that we 
can conquer them in a moment. A coquette may vex 
and annqy us, but we cannot cease to love her." 

"Well, we have had a very long discussion upon 
balls," remarked Myrtilla. "But, in spite of all that 



■ 

I 



HILARY ST. IVES. 55 

Sir Charles has said, I shall go to Mrs. Lanyon's rout 
to-night. How say you, May?" 

"You must exciise me," she rejoined. 

"Why, surely you won't let Sir Charles's silly 
opinions influenae you?" 

"I had made up my mind not to go before he 
said a word — but I quite agree with him. I am tired 
of baUs." 

"Are these your real sentiments, May?" cried Sir 
Charles, in surprise. 

"Myrtilla will teil you that it is not the first time I 
have expressed them," she rejoined. 

"Yes, since you are foolish enough to make this 
confession, I must confirm its truth," replied her lady- 
ship. "I make no doubt it will gratify you to learn, 
Charlie, that the silly creature, finding you disliked 
balls, and were anything but gratified — as you ought 
to have been — to see her so much admired, and so 
much sought after, would have withdrawn from society 
altogether, if I would have allowed her. But I would 
not hear of such a thing. I thought — and still think 
— that you are bound to sacrifice your own inclinations 
to her's, and that it is very selfish of you to interfere 
with her enjoyment." 

"But I have not found the enjoyment you led me 
to expect in this perpetual round of gaiety, Myrtilla," 
said May; "while, as you are aware, the attentions paid 
me have been as .anuoying to me as to Sir Charles. 



56 HILARY ST. IVES. 

Forced ta contrast my former happy life with that I 
have been leading of late, I am satisfied that my tastes 
are extremely simple — that the country suits me far 
better than town — and that I am not at all cut out to 
be a fine lady." 

Sir Charles uttered a cry of delight. 

"You are the most charming creature on earth," 
he exclaimed, flying towards her, and taking her band, 
which he pressed to his heart, "and have dispelled 
every doubt I entertained." 

"I know you thought me changed, dear Sir Charles," 
she Said, regarding him afFectionately; "but indeed — 
indeed — I am not so. I have played a foolish part, 
but if you knew how much I have suifered in acting it 
you would forgive me. I am still the same May as 
ever." 

"Don't say any more, I beg of you, my love," cxied 
Myrtilla. "You will totally spoil him. I hope he won't 
be so barbarous as to take you at your word." 

"My desire is to return to Hazlemere immediately, 
if I am not interfering with mamma's plans," said May. 
"I shall ever feel obliged by your kindness to me, Myr- 
tilla, but I have had enough of gaiety." 

"ünder the circumstances, I think you have come 
to a very wise determination, my dear,** remarked Mrs. 
Radcliffe. "You are bound to consult Sir Charles's 
wishes on all points. However, you had better remain 
in town for a few days longer, as your sudden departure 
Boight cause disagieeab\^ coicuxients«" 



HILARY ST. IVES. 57 

"If I remain I shall not go to another ball. People 
may say what they please." 

"Well, I will make the best excuses I can for you," 
remarked Myrtilla. "But I must keep my engagements. 
What am I to say to Lord Robert, and the rest of your 
admirers?" 

**Bid them go hang themselves," cried Sir Charles. 

**They are very likely to do it when they hear of 
May's departure," laughed the colonel. "You will 
have a great deal to answer for, Sir Charles. Society 
will not easily forgive you for depriving it of its chief 
attraction." 

"I am too happy to care what it thinks," cried the 
other, pressing May's hand. 

That very morning May removed from Eaton-place 
to Upper Brook-street. 

Thenceforward, she and Sir Charles were almost 
as much together as they had previously been in the 
country, and she declared with perfect sincerity that 
her last three days in town were the pleasantest she 
had spent there. There was plenty to do, for as the 
wedding-day was not far off, the trousseau had to be 
ordered, and other necessary arrangem^nts made. 
These afforded delightful occupation to Mrs. Radcliffe, 
who liked nothing so much as a consultation with a 
modiste. It may interest our fair readers to leam that 
May received a profusion of handsome presents. Every 
day brought her a beautiful piece of jewellery. A new 
chariot had been ordered, and after she had inspected 
it, it was sent down to Boxgrove. Thither Sir Charles 



58 HILARY ST. IVES, 

prepz^red to foUow, while the others got ready for thei 
return to Hazlemere. 

Their last day in town was devoted to the Crysta 
Palace, where grandpapa gave a capital dinner, as wil 
be learnt in the next chapter. 



HILARY ST. IVES. ^ 5g 



XVIII. 
At the Crystal Palace. 

After all, there is no place near London more 
enjoyable than the Crystal Palace. We cannot for a 
moment compare the gardens and grounds with those 
of the regal palace of Versailles. There is no grandeur 
about the enormous conservatory crowning Sydenham 
Hill, but it has a light and cheerful aspect, which a 
more solid structure in such a Situation, and built with 
a similar object, could not offer. Its terraces, though 
Wide, are not stately — ^but they do very well for a 
promenade. Its lawns, which are its prettiest feature, 
are smooth and well kept, but then you are not allowed 
to walk upon them. It has abundance of shrubberies, 
plantations, flower-beds, and paviüons; it has many 
statues in plaster, which we do not admire, and it 
commands a magnificent and extensive view which 
every one must admire, when it is not obscured by fog; 
but it has no charming parterres like those of Versailles 
— no bosquets — no long shady alleys — no quincunxes 
— no tapis vert — no basin of Latona — no salle de bal — 
and above all, no fountain of Neptune. 

Still, its fountains, though wanting in the rieh 
sculpture of those of Versailles , answer their purpose, 
and when in füll play present a very striking spectacle. 

What with its various attractions, inside and out, 



6o ' HILARY ST. IVES. 

the Crystal Palace constitutes, as we have said, the 
best place of amusement to be found near the metro- 
polis. Naturally, it is the favourite resort of foreigners, 
who find in the beautiful gardens and in the vast bazaar 
connected with them, more to suit their tastes than 
anywhere eise in London. Where are there such fetes 
as those of Sydenham? — where such concerts? — where 
such fireworks? The glories of extinct Vauxhall pale 
before the modern pyrotechnic displays, and their 
wonderful accompaniments. Nothing can be finer than 
the illuminated fountains. 

But it is not our purpose to particularise the 
numerous and varied attractions of the Crystal Palace. 
We are not about to describe its courts and galleries. 
All our readers must be familiär with them. Everybody, 
however, may not know how well you can dine there. 
We do not speak of the general refreshment-rooms , of 
which we know nothing; but we refer to the private 
dining-rooms, where you can get a far better dinner 
and far better wines, than at the renowned Hotel des 
Reservoirs at Versailles — and that is saying a good 
deal. 

Of this fact our worthy friend Mr. Thornton had 
been made aware. The old gentleman had already 
entertained the family party at Richmond and Green- 
wich, and had got a capital dinner at either place, but 
as the Radcliffes' visit to town was drawing to a close, 
he resolved to wind up with a dinner at the Crystal 
Palace, which, if possible, should surpass the others. 
Accordingly he secured a room and held a consulta- 



HILARY ST. IVES. 6l 

tion with the representative of Messrs. Bertram and 
Roberts, who promised to carry out his intentions effi- 
ciently, and to give him a most recherch6 dinner — 
whitebait and fish as good as he had eaten at Greenwich, 
and other delicacies superior to those provided for 
him at Richmond. And we may add that he kept his 
Word. 

There was a floral f^te that day at the Crystal Palace, 
and as the show of roses was expected to be magnifi- 
cent, all the party — with one exception — went early to 
See it. 

The exception was Lady Richborough. She did 
not care for roses, and preferred starting at a later 
hour. The colonel would fain have tarried for her, 
but she declined his attendance, and he went on with 
the others. 

Ever since the explanation, though her ladyship 
continued ostensibly on the same terms with him as 
before, she contrived never to be alone with him. 

As ill luck would have it, at the Victoria Station 
she encountered Sir Charles^s two pests, Lord Robert 
Tadeaster and Captain de Vesci, and though their 
Company was agreeable enough in the train, she con- 
trived to get rid of them on her arrival at the Palace, 
and proceeded alone through the grounds towards the 
central entrance. She had not gone far when a young 
man who was passing raised his hat tp her. It was 
Hilary St. Ives, and she stopped him. 

"1 had determined to speak to you, Mr. St. Ives 



62 HILARY ST. IVES. 

if I should ever meet you," she said. "Will you take 
the trouble to walk a few Steps with me?'* 

Hilary was delighted to obey. 

"Your ladyship does me great honour," he ob- 
served. "I thought you had forgotten all about me." 

"No, I have really something important to say to 
you. But first let me teil you that you have very much 
offended Miss Radcliffe." 

"Indeed! I am very sorry to hear it. In what way 
have I offended her?" 

"By sending the gipsy to her at Ascot. The jest 
may have afforded you amusement, but you ought to 
have considered that Miss Radcliffe was likely to be 
annoyed by it." 

"I am sorry your ladyship should think me capable 
of doing.anything in such excessively bad taste," cried 
Hilary, reddening. "The gipsy was not sent by me, 
neither have I the slightest notion what she said. I 
certainly observed her leaning over the side of the 
carriage, and whispering something in Miss Radcliffe's 
ear, but that is all I know of the matter. I was a 
mere accidental spectator of the scene. Pray teil Miss 
Radcliffe so. I would not for worlds give her an- 
noyance." 

"I will teil her exactly what you say," replied Myr- 
tilla. "She will be glad to receive the assurance. Her 
marriage with my brother, Sir Charles Ilminster, is 
about to take place almost immediately.'^ 

"I wish them all happiness, Sir Charles will have 



i 



HILARY ST. IVES. 63 

a lovely bride. He is singularly fortunate in bis choice. 
Miss Radcliffe is one in a thousand." 

"You speak enthusiastically," rejoined her lady- 
ship, smiling. 

"I utter my real sentiments. Your ladysbip's con- 
descension emboldens me to ask a favour of you. 
Mrs. Radcliffe has expressed some interest in me. 
Will you kindly inform ber that I am about to proceed 
immediately to Paris? I tbink I sball do better tbere 
than in London." 

**I will convey tbe message," sbe rejoined. "But 
I bope I am not to understand from it tbat you bave 
been unsuccessful in your profession as an artist? 
Can I be of any service to you?" sbe continued, witb 
an expression of real interest. "I do not make tbe 
off er ligbtly. Some circumstances connected witb your 
bistory bave recently come to my knowledge, and 
bave sbown me tbat you bave been badly treated. I 
bave it in my power to help you, and I will do so, if 
you cboose to assert your rigbts." 

"Alas! I bave no rights to assert. Your ladysbip 
does not understand my unfortunate position." 

"I understand it better tban you suppose. Your 
Position is not unfortunate, and can be easily re- 
medied." 

**Alasf not so. Tbere is no redress for me. I 
cannot mova*witbout injury to one wbo bas tbe cbief 
Claim upon my affections." 

**Sbe deserves no consideration. Sbe is tbe sole 



64 HILARY ST. IVES. 

obstacle to your recognition. Disregard her alto- 
gether." 

**Not for worlds could I act thus. Reproach shall 
never touch her if I can prevent it. If your ladyship 
has obtained possession of the secret, I implore you 
to guard it strictly. Reflect, I beseech you, on the 
consequences of the slightest imprudence in a case in- 
volving the honour and happiness of so many persons. 
For the sake of those connected with her, I beseech 
your ladyship to spare her, and keep her secret.*' 

"What mean you?" cried Myrtilla, amazed. "Why 
should I spare her? What is she to me? Your ob- 
servations seem to apply rather to Mrs. RadclifFe than 
to Mrs. Sutton." 

Hilary saw the error into which he had been led, 
and endeavoured to rectify it. 

"I am so troubled that I scarcely know what I 
say," he rejoined. "But Mrs. RadclifFe is the last per- 
son to whom my observations could apply." 

"They could not possibly refer to Mrs. Sutton/' 
remarked Myrtilla. 

**They were not intended to refer to her." 

"To whom, then, did you allude?" 

He tried to evade the question, and muttered some- 
thing as her ladyship walked on slowly. 

"You have perplexed me very much, Mr. St. Ives/* 
she observed, after a short pause. "You have started 
a difficulty that I did not at all foresee. I think you 
are wrong, but be this as it may, you need fear no 
indiscretion on my part, I am t not a mischief-maker. 



ItILARY ST. IVE3. 65 

My sole desire is to see you righted, for I think you 
have been very badly used; but if this cannot be ac- 
complished without detriment to others, I shall abandon 
the idea — at all events, for the present. I wish, how- 
ever— if not inconvenient to yourself — that you would 
postpone your departure for Paris for a few days, and 
in the interim call upon me in Eaton-place. I should 
like to talk the matter over with you quietly." 

Hilary promised compliance, and pro fessing him- 
self deeply i'ndebted to her ladyship for the kind in-i^ 
terest she had manifested in him, bowed and took 
leave. 

Had the interview been prolonged, even for a few 
minutes, it would have been disagreeably interrupted, 
for shortly afterwards Mrs. RadclifFe and the rest of 
the party appeared on the terrace, where Lady Rich- 
borough joined them. 

Later on in the day — when an opportunity ofFered 
— she informed Mrs. RadclifFe of her meeting with 
Hilary, and delivered his message to her — carefully 
noting its effect. 

Mrs. Radcliffe appeared much concerned. She had 
lost none of the interest with which the young man 
had originally inspired her. 

"The news afflicts me greatly," she said. "He 
has immense talent as an artist, but merit is not pro- 
perly appreciated. He seems very soon discouraged. 
I dare not say more to Colonel Delacombe about him, 
but a Word from your ladyship would do wonders." 

Hilary St. Ives, II, 5 



fit HILARy ST. IVES. 

"I have oflferfed my Services to thö young man, but 
be declines them." 

"Poor fellow! he allows his pride to stand in his 
way. A thousand pities that he is so impracticable. 
Pray speak to the colonel. He will listen to you, 
though not to me. If the young man is going to 
Paris immediately, no time must be lost. I will ac- 
quaint Sutton with his intended departnre. She feels 
for him like a mother, as I do myself." 

"By-the-by, have you ever found out who is his 
mother?" 

"No. I have no curiosity on the subject. There 
is no doubt she is dead." 

"I am not so sure of that," rejoined Myrtilla, look- 
ing at her. 

"\Vhat reason ha^ your ladyship for thinking other- 
wise?" cried Mrs. Radcliffe, surprised. 

"I will teil you some other time. I cannot enter 
into particulars now." 

**Can she be his mother?" she reflected. 

This was May's first Visit to the Crystal Palace, 
and everything conspired to render it agreeable. Sir 
Charles was with her, and his looks proclaimed his 
happiness. Others of the party were equally delighted 
with the scene, for it had the same charm of novelty 
to Mr. and Mrs. Radcliffe as to their daughter. The 
weather was süperb — bright and breezy. The numerous 
assemblage attracted by the flower-show completely 
filled the interior of the building, which presented a 
mägnificent coup d'oeil. 



:piLARY ST. IVES. 67 

Out of doors the sceae was equally attractive — 
more so, perhaps. As the Company began to stream 
forth and disperse among the grounds^ which were 
then in their füllest beauty, the picture, as viewed from 
the terrace, was really enchanting, and May and Sir 
Charles gazed at it with delight. 

As they were thus . occupied in surveying the 
charming prospect, interchanging their sentiments, and 
ahnest beitraying their innermost emotions by their 
looks, they were watched from a distance by Hilary. 

After taking leave of Lady Richborough, as re- 
lated, the young man did not quit the palace, but 
contrived, though unobserved, to keep her ladyship in 
sight. He beheld her meeting with the party. He 
saw Mrs. Radclifife and Colonel Delacombe — ^with what 
feelings need not be described. Above all, he saw 
May. 

Thongh his sentiments towards the latter were 
changed, he conld not but regard her with the deepest 
interest, and he would have given worlds to exchange 
places with Sir Charles, and hold a brief converse 
with her. 

He had much to say — ^mucfa that never could be 
Said — ^and it was not likely they should ever meet 
again« He B^ght obtain a momentary gUmpse of her 
— ^such afi he now enjoyed — ^but that would be all. 

How lovely she lookedl How tender were the 
glances she beatowed on Sir Charles I — and how pas- 
sionately devot^ to her Sir Charles appeared. They 
were Standing on the terrace, as we have described, 

5* 



68 HILARY ST. IVES* 

too much occupied by the scene before them — too 
much engrossed by each other to remark that they 
were watched. 

Near to them stood Colonel Delacombe, laughing, 
and talking carelessly with Mrs. RadclifFe. Did either 
of them bestow a thought on Mm ? 

He turned from theip to Lady Richborough, wh'b 
was Standing between Mr. Tbornton and Mr. RadclifFe, 
and apparently delighting them both by her lively re- 
marks. Her ladyship was evidently an object of 
general admiration, and Hilary could not help feeling 
flattered by the interest that had been taken in him 
by so charming a personage. 

He still maintained his post of Observation, when 
a ridiculous incident occurred that afforded a good 
deal of amusement to all who witnessed it. 

The Upper fountains had just begun to play, when 
two young men of very fashionable appearance, who 
had caught sight of Lady Richborough, and were 
hastening to join her, incautiously passed too near the 
jets, and were drenched from head to foot by the 
spray, which a sudden gust of wind carried over 
them* 

Most pitiable objects they looked, with their di- 
shevelled whiskers and dripping garments, and they 
hurried off as fast as they could to hide their discom- 
fiture, but did not escape recognition as Lord Robert 
Tadeaster and Captain de Vesci. Mr. RadclifFe and 
Mr. Thornton laughed heartily, and Sir Charles was 



«9 



n 



JilLARY ST. IVES. 69 

not sorry that such an example had been made of 
them, 

An excellent dinner concluded a very agreeable 
day, so far as the majority of the party was concerned. 
Lady Richborough, however, had still something to do. 
She went to two balls that night. 

Next day our friends left town — the Radcliffes and 
old Mr. Thornton for Hazlemere, and Sir Charles 
Ilminster for Boxgrove. 

While bidding adieu to Mrs. Radcliflfe, the colonel 
strongly urged her to get rid of Mrs. Sutton. 

"I do not See how that can be managed^ just at 
präsent," said the lady. 

"She must go — and speedily — or she will make 
more mischief," rejoined the colonel. 

Mrs. Radcliflfe smiled. She thought the house- 
keeper had done all the mischief she could. 

She was very much mistaken. 



70 HILARY ST. IVES. 



XIX. 

Lady Richborough receives a Proposal. 

It will naturally be imagined that Hilary would 
present himself without delay in Eaton-place. Three 
days passed by, however, and he had neither called 
nor sent an excuse. 

Lady Richborough, who had begun to take a strong 
interest in his fortunes, was very much surprised and 
annoyed by his unaccountable neglect. 

On the moming of the fourth day after she had 
met him at the Crystal Palace she was alone in her 
eleg^ntly-furnished drawing-room, wondering whether 
he would call, and prepared to take him to task if he 
did, when a valet entered, and announced — not the 
young gentleman who occupied her thoughts, but— 
Mr. Thornton. 

Though secretly disappointed, she immediately rose 
from the fauteuil on which she was reclining, and wel- 
comed her visitor with every demonstration of delight. 
Her ladyship, we may remark en passant, was attired 
in a robe of toile de Finde, with deep flounces, which 
suited her admirably. 

"Good morning, dear Mr. Thornton," she cried, 
in her blandest accents. "Enchanted to see you. 
Just come up from Hazlemere, I suppose? How did 



l 



HILARY ST. IVES. 7I 

you leave them all? — dear Miss RadclifFe — darling May 
— and dear excellent Mr. RadclifFe?" 

''AU much as usual/' replied the old gentleman« 
"The ladies desired their love to you, of course. Sir 
Charles dined with us yesterday, and we all dine with 
him to-day. Your ladyship will laugh when I teil you 
that May declares she will never come to town again, 
unless Sir Charles particularly desires it, and he in- 
variably answers that she shall do just as she likes. 
Well, I hope it will last; they promise to be the hap- 
piest pair under the sun." 

''YeSy if happiness consists in a quiet, humdrum, 
country life, with no excitement beyond a stroll in the 
garden, a canter in the park, or a visit to the stables, 
they are likely to get on well enough. But that is not 
my notion of happiness, as you are aware, Mr. Thorn- 
ton. I like town life — gaiety, and plenty of it." 

"I think your ladyship is quite right," rejoined the 
old gentleman. "I begin to find the country rather 
dull myself. But of course I must remain at Hazle- 
mere tili the grand business is over. Apropos of the 
wedding, the bridesmaids are chosen, Jessie Brooke, 
the two Miss Milwards, Eva Dale, Gwendoline Clifford, 
Elfrida Butler, Lucy Fleming, and Seiina Hardy, eight 
uncommonly pretty girls. Captain Huntley Blois is to 
be Sir Charles's best man. The marriage , of course, 
will take place at Wootton, and our worthy vicar, the 
Rev. Nisbet Jones, will perform the ceremony." 

"In the day fked, Mr. Thomton? It was not 
when they left town." 



72 ^- HILARY ST. IVES, 

" Yes, I believe it will be the I5th, but your lady- 
ship will receive precise information from May. I un- 
derstand they don't mean to go abroad, or make any 
lengthened tour, but return after a week's absence to 
Boxgrove, and spend the rest of the honeymoon at 
home." 

"Just like Charlie! I wonder May will consent to 
such a stupid arrangement. They ought to go to 
Switzerland, or the Italian lakes. Bellagio, on the 
lake of Como , would be delightful , and take Paris on 
the way back." 

"Delicious!" exclaimed the old gentleman, rap- 
turously. "If I ever take another wedding trip, Fll 
follow your ladyship's advice and go to Como. By* 
the-by, Fve something to say to you." 

"Before you say it, let me ask you whether that 
young artist — you know whom I mean, Hilary St. Ives 
— ^has been lately at Hazlemere?" 

"Odd, you should ask me the question. I believe 
he was there yesterday, but I didn't see him." 

"I suppose Mrs. Radcliffe sent for him?" 

"What for!" exclaimed the old gentleman, staring 
at her. "Why should she send for him?" 

"It occurred to me that she might have done 
so — but never mind. What have you got to say to 
me?" 

"Something that requires your best attention," he 
rejoined. "I must premise that I am tolerably well 
off. Prudeiice aivd ^coxvom^j va. ^"^A^ \\fe — together 



HILARY ST. IVES. ^ , 73 

* 

with some fortunate speculations — have enabled me to 
realise a considerable property." 

Myrtilla smiled. She suspectecl from bis manner 
what was Coming. 

"I have always understood, Mr. Thornton, that you 
are rieh— very rieh," she observed. 

"Not very rieh, but rieh enough to make a good 
settlement, as I am prepared to do, if your lady- 
ship " 

"Really, Mr. Thornton, you take me quite by sur- 
prise," she eried, with difficulty repressing a laugh. 

"I fear I have been too abrupt, but your ladyship 
will exeuse me. Yesterday I learnt, for the first time, 
from my daughter, Mrs. Radeliffe, that all was at an 
end between your ladyship and Colonel Delacombe. 
I presume she was eorreetly informed?" 

"No positive engagement ever subsisted between 
the eolonel and myself, Mr. Thornton, and I may add 
none is likely to oeeur , but we are just as good friends 
as ever." 

"Exactly. I understand. Comes to the same thing. 
Engagement, or no engagement, it's ofF." 

"If you like to have it so — yes. And eertain not 
to be renewed." 

"Delighted to hear it — that is, sorry for my friend 
the colonel, for whom I have the greatest regard, but 
glad on my own aecount. Finding there was an open- 
ing for another suitor, I resolved to be first in the field, 
and here I am " 



74 HILARY ST. IVES. 

**A Word, Mr. Thomton. Pray did you acquaint 
Mrs. RadclifFe with your Intention?" 

"Most certainly, and Radcliffe too. I thought it 
only right and proper to consult them. They both 
highly approved of my design." 

"Indeed! I should scarcely have expected it." 

"They thought the match very desirable, as it 
would connect the families still more closely, and Sir 
Charles was of the same opinion. May was particularly 
well pleased. She thought it would be such a nice 
thing " 

"To have me for a grandmamma!" cried Myrtilla, 
laughing. "Excessively obliged to her." 

"To have you for a grandmamma ! " exclaimed 
Mr. Thornton, aghast. "Who ever dreamed of such 
a thing? You must think me crazy." 

"You told me, only this moment, that you were 
resolved to be first in the field — what does that 
mean?" 

"It means that I have come to make you an oflfer 
of marriage — not from myself — ^I have not the pre- 
sumption — but for my grandson, Oswald Woodcot. 
Having been partly refused on a former occasion, the 
poor fellow has not the courage to present himself 
again, so I have undertaken to plead his cause; and 
perhaps I may be able to use some arguments that 
may have weight, if you will deign to listen to them." 

"I will listen to anything you may say to me, Mr. 
Thornton , but I cannot understand why Oswald should 



j 



^ 



i 



HILARY ST. IVES. ' 75 

require your intervention. I did not think bashfulness 
was bis foible. Rather the reverse " 

"Well, if the truth must be told, he is without — 
anxiously, most anxiously, awaiting your decision. 
ShaU I call him in?" 

"By all means," she replied. "I am concerned 
that he should have been kept there so long." 

Thereupon, the old gentleman opened the door, 
and bis grandson immediately nished in, and, flying 
towards her ladyship, threw himself in a theatrical 
manner at her feet. But she at once ordered him 
to rise. 

"Such absurdity as this is out of date," she cried. 
"Nobody kneels now-a-days — except upon the stage. 
Do you know what you have done, sir? By your ridicu- 
lous mode of proceeding you very nearly made me 
accept Mr. Thornton." 

"My Stars! if I had known that, I would have gone 
in oh my own account," cried the old gentlerban. 
"You see what powers of persuasion I possess, Os- 
wald." 

"It appears to me that you have said one word for 
me and two for yourself, sir," observed bis grandson, 
reproachfully. 

"Don't be angry, my boy. All with be right in 
the end. The mistake will easily be rectified. Take 
him on my recommendation," he said to Myrtilla. 
"I'll ans wer for it, he'll make an excellent hnsband." 

"Have you told her ladyship what you propose to 
do, sir.?'' 



7 6 HILARY ST. IVES. 

**No; but rU teil her now in your presence. What 
I promise I'U perfonn. If your ladyship accepts the 
proposal wbich I have just had the honour to make on 
behalf of my grandson, I undertakc that a jointure 
shall be settled on you corresponding in amount with 
that which you now enjoy, and which you will lose on 
your marriage." 

"Upon my word, you do the thing very hand- 
somely, I must say, Mr. Thornton," she observed, 
smiling. 

"But that's not all," cried Oswald. "My dear old 
grand-dad is the most liberal fellow on earth." 

"So he seems," she assented. 

"I always intended to make Oswald my heir," 
pursued the old gentleman. "But if he marries to 
please me — as he will, if he marries your ladyship — 
he shall have a handsome allowance during my life- 
time." 

"Didn't I say he was a capital fellow?" cried 
Oswald. 

"My desire is to make all pleasant," added the old 
gentleman; "and I hope I shall be able to go back to 
Hazlemere and teil them that the affair is satisfactorily 
settled." 

"Now for the decision," said Oswald. "My happi- 
ness and my fortune rest with your ladyship." 

"I must have time for consideration," she rejoined. 

"I should like to please Mr. Thornton, who has be- 

haved so remarkably well, and to whom I feel per- 

sonally indebted, and 1 \ä\^ ito ^^\kxias. <ib\ection 



HtLARV ST. IVES. 77 

io you, Oswald, but I can*t make up my mind at a 
moment's notice." 

"Then I am neither accepted nor rejected?*' said 
the young man, looking very blank. 

"Can't I prevail on your ladyship to say *Yes*?'' 
insinuated the old gentleman. 

She shook her head, and rejoined, "Neither you 
nor Oswald understand me in the least. You have to 
do with the most fickle creature on earth. Were I to 
give you a promise now, ten to one I should break it, 
and then you would upbraid me with falsehood, incon- 
stancy, and all that sort of thing. Don't press me 
fiuther. I repeat, I can't make up my mind." 

"Well, I still hope your ladyship may spend a 
month at the lovely lake of Como, and that I may 
have the pleasure of meeting you at Paris when you 
return." 

"Not this autumn, I think, Mr. Thornton," she 
rejoined. 

"We shall see — we shall see." 

Just then, the valet entered, and approaching Myr- 
tilla, said: 

"Mr. Hilary St. Ives is here. Will your ladyship 
see him?" 

She coloured slightly, as she answered in the af- 
firmative. 

"What the deuce is he doing here?" cried Mr. 
Thornton. 

"Come to take her ladyship's portrait, of course," 
remarked Oswald. 



78 HILARY ST. IVESr 

"He has called by my express invitation/* observed 
Lady Richborough. "Pray don't run away on bis 
account. Luncbeon^ will be ready directly. Do me 
the favour to Step down to the dining-room; 1*11 join 
you as soon as my Conference with Mr. St. Ives is 
ended." 

The proposition was too agreeable to be declined. 
As the two gentlemen were quitting the room, Hilary 
was ushered in, and they met near the door. Mr. 
Thornton bowed very st^ffly, but Oswald gave the you^g 
artist a good-natured nod of recognition. 

"I don't know how it is/' remarked Oswald to his 
grandsire, as they went down-stairs; "but that con- 
founded fellow seems always to cross my path." 



HILARY ST. IVES. 79 



XX. 

In which Hilary finds a Father. 

" You have made very little haste to call upon me, 
Mr. St. Ives," öbserved Lady Richborough, motidning 
him to take a seat. "However, I do not require any 
apologies. I have just learnt from Mr. Thornton that 
you have been at Hazlemere." 

**I was summoned there," he replied. "On the 
morning after I was fortunate enough to meet your 
ladyship at the Crystal Palace, I received a letter from 
Mrs. Radcliffe enjoining me to come down to her 
without delay, and could not refuse compliance, though 
I had resolved never to go to Hazlemere again. In 
obedience to the Instructions given me, I went down 
by a particular train. Mrs. Sutton met me at the 
Station and conducted me to the house. I had a]> 
interview with Mrs. Radcliffe, whfch I need not detail, 
exc^t to say that I consented to act according to her 
directions." 

**You did well," öbserved Myrtilla. "I am c^tain 
she would advise you for the best." 

"I feit so," he replied; "and though stung by a 
sense of injustice which prompted a very different 
course, I yielded to her entreaties, and agreed not to 
depart for Pjuis without seeing Colonel Delacombe. 
Mrs. Radcliffe assured me — as I cannot doubt — that 



So HILARY ST. IVES. 

no one has so much influence with the colonel as your 
ladyship — ^and she assured me also tbat you are willing 
to exert it in my behalf." 

"My influence with Colonel Delacombe is not so 
great as Mrs. Radcliffe imagines/' replied Myrtilla; 
''but I should like to hear something more about Mrs. 
Sutton. Had you no conversation with her? Had she 
no ^ggestions to ofFer?" 

"Mrs. Sutton's manner towards me is incomprehen- 
sible," he rejoined. "Nothing could exceed the delight 
that she exhibited when she met me at the Station. If 
I had been really her son, «he could not have greeted 
me with more affection. But before we reached the 
house her manner had totally changed. Perhaps I did 
not please her by my observations, for she seemed to 
resent them. I am certain that she dislikes — I might 
almost say hates — Mrs. Radcliffe; and she entertains 
no more kindly feeling towards Colonel Delacombe. 
She gives me the idea of a person in possession of 
an important secret which she uses for her own pur- 
poses." 

"It is a great misfortune that she is installed at 
Hazlemere, and I fear Mrs. Radcliffe will have reason 
to regret the trust she places in her. If Mrs, Sütton 
were not in the way» I should have no difficulty with 
Colonel Delacombe. Do not ask me for any explana- 
tion. I cannot give it. Was she present during your 
interview with Mrs. Radcliffe?" 

"No; and I was very cautious in what I said to 
her, for, in spite of her professions of regard, her 



HILARY ST. IVES. 8l 

manner inspired me with distrast. I ought to mention 
that Mrs. RadclifFe told me she would write to thö 
colonel, and heg him to confer with yom* ladyship. A 
few days ago I should not have cared to succeed , but 
now I ardently desire to do so." 

"What has produced this sudden change in your 
sentiments?'' she inquired. 

"I am ambitious," he cried. "I have aspirations 
which I ought not to indulge, but which I cannot help 
indulging. At all hazards I must speak the truth. 
Ever since our meeting, your image has haunted me, 
and will not be dismissed.* I am an artist, and you 
will not wonder that beauty, such as yours, should 
produce an extraordinary effect upon me. I tried to 
control the passion inspired by your charms, but it has 
mastered me. Never has my position appeared so in- 
tolezable as now. I would be something better — 
something on which you would not disdain to cast 
your regards. I know you will laugh at my foUy and 
extravagance, but at least you will understand why I 
desire to attain a higher position.'' 

Lady Richborough did not appear oiFended. 

"If I have any rights, as you intimated when we 
last met, I am resolved to assert them," he pursued. 

"The best thing to eure you of your romantic folly 
would be to allow you to remain as you are," she ob- 
served. "But I have promised to aid you, and I will 
be as good as my word. Pray did you make Mrs. 
Radcliffe a confidante of your passion?" 

The young man looked abashed. 

ffHaty St. Ives. IL 6 



82 HILARY ST, IVES, 

"She may have drawn her own conclusions from 
the raptures in which I spoke of your ladyship's 
charms/' he said. 

"I thought as much," she rejoined. "That ac- 
counts for a visit I have just received." 

An interraption here occurred. Colonel Dela- 
combe was ushered in by the valet, who immediately 
retired. 

Hilary at once arose and prepared to depart, but 
Lady Richborough detained,him. 

Then turning to the colonel, who did not manifest 
either surprise or displeasure on seeing the young man, 
she said, 

"I am very glad you have come, colonel. Mr. St. 
Ives has just laid his case before me, and I have un- 
dertaken to become his advocate." 

"He could not have a better ,*' rejoined the other. 
"It may save time, however, if I State at once that 
my mind is made up. This morning I have received 
a long letter from Mrs. Radcliffe. She, too, is a 
zealous advocate in the young man's cause, and pleads 
it warmly and strongly. But her pleading, I confess, 
would have been of no avail but for a wholly unfbre- 
seen drcumstance. Doubts have rested on my mind 
that have warped my judgment and feelings, and con- 
verted what should have been affection into hate. 
These doubts have just been removed. HJow, or by 
whom, I need not now explain, but proofs have been 
afForded me that I was utterly wrong in my suspicions. 
Satisfied of this, I could not for a moment hesitate to 



HILARY ST. IVES, S^ 

repair the injustice I have done. Learning that the 
man was here, I came on instantly. In your lady- 
ship's presence, I acknowledge him as my son." 

Hilary uttered an exclamation of joy, and threw 
himself into his father's outstretched arms. 

"Nobly done, Seymour/' cried Myrtilla. "You 
have not belied my expectations." 

"I cannot suitably express my feelings of gratitude," 
Said Hilary, in accents broken by emotion. "But this 
moment makes amends for all the past." 

**Let the past be forgotten," said the colonel. 
"You will not blame me too severely when you know 
all. I will endeavour to atone for the error I have 
committed." 

"Enough, sir — more than enough," cried his son. 

"I cannot obey the dictates of my heart, which 
prompt me at once to acknowledge you publicly," said 
the colonel. "For some little time longer you must 
be content to remain Hilary St. Ives. But you need 
give yourself no concern in regard to the future. 
Henceforward, your position is completely assiu-ed." 

**I beg to ofFer you my sincere congratulations, 
Mr. St. Ives, for I suppose I must still call you so," 
said Lady Richborough, archly. "You have now ob- 
tained the position you so much desired." 

The colonel detected the glance that passed be- 
tween her ladyship and the young man. 

"His position and his fortune — for he will have 
both,'' he observed, in a significant tone — "will enable 
him to marry well." 

6* 



84 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"You mean to leave him behind, when you return 
to India, colonel?" she inquired. 

"That depends," he replied. "If he should be 
fortunate 6nough to marry, his wife may not object to 
go out with US. I think I have heard your ladyship 
say that you would like to visit the country." 

"Yes, I have said so, but I never meant it seri- 
ously." 

"For my own part I have the greatest desire to 
Visit India," cried Hilary. "It has every sort of at- 
traction for me." 

"You expect great things, I perceive, but I don't 
think you will be disappointed," said the colonel. 
"You will find plenty of employment there for your 
pencil, if you choose to exercise it." J 

"And plenty of charming society, I suppose?" ob- | 
served Hilary. 

"The pleasantest society on earth — especially to 
ladies," rejoined the colonel. "Nowhere, as I have 
often remarked to Lady Richborough, are ladies made 
so much of as in India. A beautiful woman is posi- 
tively adored there, and exercises a sway quite un- 
attainable in England." 

"A tempting description," observed Hilary, glanc- 
ing at her ladyship. 

"Perhaps I may go to India, when I have nothing 
better to do," she remarked, with a smile. "But come 
down to luncheon. It must be ready. Some of our 1 
friends from Hazlemere are here," she added to the ^ 
colonel. 



\ 



HILARY ST. IVES. 85 

Upon this they descended to the dining-room, 
where they found Mr. Thornton and Oswald, both of 
whom were very glad to see the colonel, but amazed 
that Hilary had not departed. An elegant coUation 
was speedily seryed, and a glass of Champagne raised 
Oswald's spirits. He would have feit far happier, how- 
ever, if her ladyship had not paid so much attention 
to Hilary. Neither he nor his grandsire could under- 
stand the remarkable change in Colonel Delacombe's 
deportment towards the young artist. He now treated 
him with so much friendliness that the old gentleman 
whispered to Oswald: 

"Begad! it wouldnH surprise me if he were to ac- 
knowledge him, after all. 

This impression was confirmed by a remark made 
by the colonel to Lady Richborough, seeming to imply 
that Hilary was going with him to his hotel. 

Indeed, there could be no doubt on the point, 
since Mr. Thornton, being curious enough to look out 
of the dining-room window, beheld Hilary jump into 
the brougham, which was drawn up at the door, and 
heard the order given by the colonel to drive to the 
Langham. 

Prior to his departure, the colonel had charged the 
old gentleman with a message to Mrs. RadclifFe to the 
effect that he meant to run down to Hazlemere on the 
foUowing day. But he didn't add — as Mr. Thorn- 
ton half expected — that he meant to bring Hilary with 
him. 



86 HILARY ST. IVES. 

Grandsire and grandson lingered for a few min 
in the vain hope of obtaining some encouragei 
from Lady Richborough. Her ladyship, however, 
not relent. 



^ 



HILARY ST. rVES. 87 



XXL 

Explains the Colonel's Errand. 

Next day, Colonel Delacombe went down to Hazle- 
mere, as appointed. 

"He did not arrive tili the afternoon, and all the 
party, except the lady of the house, had gone over to 
Boxgrove. Immediately on his arrival, he inquired 
for the housekeeper, stating that he had something to 
say to her, and Mr. Luflf conducted him to her room. 

Mrs. Sutton, who was engaged at the time on some 
household matters, received him with all the deference 
consisterit with her Station, so long as the butler was 
present, but as soon as they were alone, her manner 
changed, and with a menacing look she demanded 
what brought him again to Hazlemere. 

"My errand, as I think you might guess, is to see 
you," he replied, seating himself. "A good deal has 
happened lately." 

"Yes, your designs upon Lady Richborough have; 
been fnistrated," she rejoined, with a bitter smile; 
"and if you have any designs here they will likewise 
be fnistrated." 

"Before you make any further observations, which 
only serve to display your malignity, it may be as 
well to inform you that I saw Mr. Courtenay yester- 
day." 



88 HILARY ST. IVES. 

The housekeeper turned very pale. He remarked 
the effect produced upon her. 

**Perhaps you will talk a little more rationally now," 
he Said. 

"I care nothing for Mr. Courtenay," she cried, 
recovering herseif. "He can teil you nothing that you 
did not know before." 

"Pardon me. He gave me some particulars of 
your history with which I was wholly unacquainted. 
Hitherto," he continued, in a stern tone, "I believed 
that your unhappy mother died of a broken heart. I 
now know " 

"It is false/' she interrupted, fiercely. "Mr. Cour- 
tenay is my deadly enemy, and would destroy me if 
he could. You do not believe me capable of such a 
deed as that with which he charges me?" 

"I will not pronounce an opinion," said the colo- 
nel, still more sternly. "I would fain hope you are 
innocent of this foul and unnatural crime; but after 
what I have heard, I can scarcely acquit you." 

"I am innocent," cried the wretched woman. "As 
I hope for mercy hereafter, I am innocent of this 
dreadful offence! Say you believe me, Seymour! — say 
you believe me!" 

"Do not touch me, woman!" he cried, pushing her 
from him, with an expression of loathing. 

"Oh! Heaven support me!" she cried, sinking 
into a chair with a look of agony. 

"Jf I did my duty," \v^ ^^\d^ ?)Ääi: a pause, **I 



HILARY ST. rVES. 89 

lould bring you to justice; but 1 am restrained by 
)nsiderations which you will understand.'* 

" Considerations for yourself," she cried, with a 
ndictive look. "You would not spare me, if your 
yn reputation were not at stake." 

**I spare you for your son's sake as well as my 
ivn," he rejoined. "The stings of an accusing con- 
ience, which you cannot stifle, will be punishment 
lough for you." 

"Do not condemn me unheard," she cried, rousing 
3rself, and speaking with impassioned earnestness. 
You have lent a too ready ear to this charge. It 
Lunot be substantiated. I can show you Mr. Cour- 
nay's motives for making it." 

"I do not desire to hear them," he said. "Your 
vn conduct condemns you; your quarreis with your 
ihappy mother, and her death, under suspicious -cir- 
imstances, seem to fix the crime on you. But 
idences of guilt are afforded by your flight with your 
iramour — by your desertion of your child — by the 
3vice adopted to screen yourself from the conse- 
lences ojf your evil deeds. If innocent, why allow it 

be supposed that you had perished in the Severn? 
liy conceal your existence? Why hide yourself under 
feigned name? If innocent, why are you here — as 
TS, Sutton? Your conduct proclaims your guilt." 

"It may seem to do so — but I was driven to act 
! I did by remorse — not for the crime which you 
ilieve me to have committed, and of which, as Heaven 
lows! I am innocent — but for ottvei oft^ivs;^^. \ 



QO HILARY ST. IVES. 

knew I should be shunned and despised, and wished 
to be forgotten. I found, as I deemed, a secure retreat, 
and remained in it unmolested for years — and might 
have remained in it to the end, if you — to whom I 
owe all my affliction — had not appeared to trouble me. 
I am not so bad as you suppose. I have sinned 
deeply, but have repented. I would willingly — if I 
could — have made some atonement for my errors. I 
might have died in peace — unknown and respected. 
Of all men, I would most have avoided you, Seymour 
Delacombe. But fate has brought you hither to per- 
plex me — to rouse evil passions in my breast, and 
prompt evil actions. I warned you not to come. I 
besought you not to meddle with me. You would 
not heed; and if ill ensues, you will be responsible 
for it.'' 

"It is useless to continue this discussion," observed 
the colonel, entirely unmoved by her defence. "I 
have simply to teil you that you cannot remain longer 
here.'* 

"You teil me so?" she said, in a singular tone, in 
which a latent menace could be detected. "What if 
I refuse to go on your bidding?" 

"You will not refuse, when I teil you that by re- 
maining here you will mar your son's prospects." 

"Do you mean to acknowledge him?" 

"Not tili you are gone." 

A fierce conflict took place in the unhappy woman's 
bosom. Vindictive feelings obtained the mastery. 
Infernal malice blazed in her eyes as she spoke. 



HILARY ST. IVES. Ql 

"My son is nothing to me," she cried. "He is 
devoid of natural feeling. When he was here the other 
day, he drove me mad by his utter insensibility. If he 
loved me, I would make any sacrifice for him. I would 
lay down my life to serve him. But he hates me, and 
thinks only of the detestable woman who has robbed 
me of his aflfections. I will stay to plague Ä^r." 

"Have you no good feeling left?" 

"When my lacerated heart is healed, it will be 
time to talk to me of good feelings," she rejoined. 
"Meanwhile, I stay here. Try to remove me at your 
peril." 

"You shall go, be the consequences what they 
may," cried the colonel. 

And he arose and left the room. 

Ascertaining from Boston that Mrs. Radcliffe was 
in her boudoir, he proceeded thither at once. 

"That infernal woman is capable of anything," he 
thought, as he went up-stairs. 

He was right, and he would have comprehended 
her vindictive purpose, if he had seen her take a letter 
from a private drawer, and heard her mutter, 

"It is well I secured this letter. The time is come 
to use it." 



92 HILARY ST. IVES. 



XXII. 
The Use made of the Letter. 

Armed with this letter, Mrs. Sutton left her room. 
She knew where the colonel was gone, and was about 
to follow him, when she encountered Mr. RadclifFe in 
the hall. He had just returned from Boxgrove, having 
ridden on by himself. Struck by the housekeeper's 
haggard looks, he inquired what was the matter. 

**I have something to say to you, sir — something 
important — in private," she rejoined. 

"Well, come with me to my study. We shan't be 
disturbed there. Colonel Delacombe, I hear, has 
arrived." 

"Yes; he is with Mrs. Radcliffe — in her boudoir," 
she replied, significantly. 

"Nothing Strange in that," observed the worthy 
gentleman. 

The housekeeper accompanied him to his study — 
^a comfortable little room adjoining the library, in 
which he transacted his magisterial business. It was 
furnished with a large writing-table, on which sundry 
law-books were laid, together with files of papers. 
Seating himself near this table, he requested the house- 
ieeper to take a chair beside him. 

By-the-by, Sutton, WNe^o^3L\veax^^3cÄuews?" he 



(( 



HILARY ST. IVES. 93 

remarked. "Colonel Delacombe, I*m told, is about 
to adopt that young artist, who came here — Hilary St. 
Jves. Odd! ain^t it?" 

"It may appear odd to you, sir, but is doesn't sur- 
prise me. Ah! sir, you little know " 

"Little know what?" he cried. "Speak plainly. 
Why do you look at me in that manner?*' 

"Because Fm so sorry for you, sir. My he^ 
bleeds for you. But it must out — it must out." 

"What must out?" he demanded. 

"The dreadful secret," she rejoined. "I can keep 
it no longer. Prepare yourself for a great shock, sir. 
You will need all your firmness." 

Mr. Radcliflfe's looks betokened great trouble, but 
the relentless woman went on. 

"Read that," she said, placing the letter before 
him. "That will teil you all. That will show you 
how you have been deceived." 

Damps gathered upon the poor gentleman's brow, 
and his vision grew dim. 

"I would rather not read it, Sutton," he said, in a 
husky, unnatural voice, pushing the letter from him as 
he spoke. "I don't want to learn anything that will 
give me pain. I would rather rest in ignorance." 

' This did not suit her. 

"You will read the letter, sir," she said, "when I 
teil you that it is from the young man you have just 
mentioned— Hilary St. Ives — to his motherr 



94 HILARY ST. IVES. 

**To his mother, did you say? Why, it is addressed 
to my wife," he cried, snatching up the letter to 
examine it. 

"Your wife is his mother," said Mrs. Sutton, in a 
hollow voice. 

"You lie, woman!" cried Mr. Radcliffe, springing 
up, and striking the table with his clenched hand. 
"You lie! How dare you make such an abominable 
insinuation? Quit my presence instantly! Quit the 
house ! Begone ! " 

"I am ready to go at once," she rejoined, rising. 
"But you will repent the language you have used 
towards me. My feelings would not allow me to con- 
ceal the truth.'' 

"Stay!" he cried. "I am half distracted. You 
must make allowances for me, Sutton." 

"I make every allowance for you, sir. I pity you 
from the bottom of my heart." 

He sat down. His hand shook so much that he 
coüld scarcely hold the letter, but he went on, pausing 
every now and then to wipe the damps from his brow. 

At last the letter dropped upon the table. 

The mischief was done. 

"You have destroyed my peace for ever, Sutton," 
groaned the miserable man, after a pause; "but I 
forgive you. What a cruel deception has been prac- 
tised upon me! How I doted upon her!" 

"Had you no previous suspicions, sir?" 



HILARY ST. IVES. 95 

"Suspicions? — no! I had the most perfect faith in 
her. I believed every word she told me — every word. 
I knew that an engagement had subsisted between her 
and Seymour Delacombe — I knew that she nourished 
a silly, sentimental regard for him— but the idea of 
anything wrong never entered my head. Even now — 
with this frightful evidence before me — I can scarcely 
believe it." 

, "I thought her conduct towards the young man 
might have surprised you, sir." 

"It did surprise me. I disapproved of her absurd 
demonstrations of regard for him, though I took no 
notice of them. But they bear a different construction 
now. What am I to do, Sutton? What am I to do?" 

"Act like a man, sir. Under such circumstances, 
there is but one course to pursue." 

"But I have not the heart to cast her from me, as 
you would seem to suggest. Besides," he cried, with 
a sudden access of tenderness, "she is the mother of 
my child. For May's sake I must endure the wrong 
patiently and in silence." 

"For your own sake you cannot allow things to 
continue as they are. The colonel must not remain 
here." 

"He shall not," cried the deluded man, transported 
with fury. "He is in the boudoir, you say, with my 
wife. I am half inclined to blow out his brains." 

"He richly deserves it, but it will be enough if you 
Order him'out of the house." 



1 

q6 hilary st. ives. 

"I'U go to thetn at once, I will not allow my just 
Indignation to cool," he cried, rushing out of his study, 
and hurrying up-stairs to the boudoir. 

"They will now feel my power," cried Mrs. Sutton, 
t^ith an exulting smile. 



HILARY.ST. IVES. 97 



XXIII, 
An ill Quarter of an Hour. 

Mr. Radcliffe's wild looks and abrupt entrance 
were well calculated to alarm his wife and the colonel, 
who were engaged at the moment in an anxious dis- 
cussion relative to Mrs. Sutton — the colonel urging her 
immediate dismissal, and the lady reluctant to yield 
assent. They guessed what had happened, and pre- 
pared for a storm. 

Without vouchsafing a word, and scarcely appear- 
ing to notice them, the incensed gentleman marched 
straight to the fireplace, and taking down the two 
miniatures, which had been restored to their places, 
smashed them with the poker, and flung the fragments 
into the grate. 

"There!" he roared. "Those accursed objects 
will never more offend my sight." 

He then turned round, and glared at the astonished 
witnesses of his proceeding, who, while his back was 
towards them, had exchanged very expressive glances 
and gestures. 

"Have you taken leave of your' senses, Mr. Rad- 
cliffe?" inquired his wife, eyeing him through her 
glass, and speaking with a calmness that aggravated 
his fury. 

Hilary st /zfes. 11, T 



gS HILÄRY ST. IVES. 

"Perhaps I have," he vociferated, almost foaming 
at the mouth with rage. "I havp enough to make me 
mad. I have long been your dupe, madam, but at 
last my eyes are opened, and I clearly discem the 
Position in which you have placed me by your perfidious 
conduct. I have read the letter of — of — the words 
>^ell-nigh suffocated him, but at last he got them out 
**of your son! Here it is, madam. Look at it! Can 
you deny that this letter is addressed to you?" 

"No, I do not attempt to deny it," she replied, 
calmly. 

"Then you glory in your shame! You unblushingly 
avow that you have deceived me — ha!" 

"When you speak more temperately, Mr. RadclifFe 
— in a manner more befitting our relations towards 
each other — I will answer you; but thus addressed, I 
shall not condescend to do so." 

"You take it with a very high band, madam," he 
sneered; "but it won't answer your purpose. I am 
not to be imposed upon." 

"My good Mr. Radcliffe," said the colonel, "you 
are entirely under a delusion." 

"A delusion!" exclaimed the other, exasperated 
beyond all bounds by the remark. "Do you mean to 
teil me that I am to doubt the evidence of my own 
senses? I have here in this damnatory letter proof 
positive of my unhappy wife's criminality." 

"My criminality, Mr. Radcliffe! I will not allow 
such language to be used to me." 

"You will regtet yoxn n\o\^wc^, sir, when you are 



HILARY ST. IVES. 99 

able to view the matter in its proper light,** observed 
the colonel. "If you will only hear me " 

"Explanations will not avail with me, sir. It will 
be idle, therefore, to attempt them." 

Then with a withering look at his wife, he cried, 
"You forget, madam, that invthis very room, where 
you are now sitting, I beheld your son at your feet. 
I heard you address him with all a mother's tendemess." 

"I believed him to be the colonel's son," she re* 
joined. 

"I don't doubt it," cried her husband, bitterly. 
**You had good reasons for the belief." 

"Mr. Radcliffe," said Colonel Delacombe, sternly, 
"this must proceed no further. You are merely an 
instnmient in the hands of a malignant and vindictive 
woman, who, for purposes of her own — which, if I 
deemed proper, I could easily explain — seeks to injure 
me and destroy your wife's reputation. How came 
that letter, from which you have drawn these erroneous 
conclusions, in Mrs. Sutton's possession?" 

"I never gave it her," said Mrs. RadclifFe. 

"It must have been stolen to serve the infamous 
purpose for which it has been used," said the colonel. 
"Call Mrs. Sutton. I engage to unmask her villany." 

Mrs. Radcliffe was about to ring the bell, but her 
husband authoritatively forbade her. 

"I won't have her called," he said. "I won't have 
a scene made. I am quite satisfied with her conduct. 
She has done her duty to me." 

"She is a perfidious wretch," cried Mrs. RadcM^^ 



>(( 



100 HILARY ST. IVES, 

"Is this her return fbr all the kindness I have shown 
her ! " 

"A more atrocious scheme was never planned," 
Said the colonel. **I will show you the motives of her 
conduct " 

"I am perfectly satisfied with her motives," re- 
joined Mr. Radcliflfe, coldly. 

**But you are labouring under an entire mis- 
apprehension , sir. Again, I request that the woman 
may be summoned." 

"It will answer no purpose," rejoined Mr. Rad- 
cliffe, shaking his head. "Recriminations won't con- 



vince me.'* 



"You are a barbarian," cried his wife — **a perfect 
barbarian ! " 

"You have made me what I am, madam," he re- 
joined. 

"I Protest my innocence, sir! — protest it in the 
strongest terms. Will you believe me now?" 

"Proofs are ageiinst you, madam — incontestable 
proofs." 

"Oh! this is too much,** she cried, sinking back. 
"I shall never survive it." 

"I must ring for assistance, sir," said the colonel. 

"Leave her alone," interposed Mr. Radcliffe. "She 
has a smelling-bottle near ^er, if she wants it." 

Hearing this, his wife sprang up in the ^eatest 
indignation. ^ 

"I have just said ^ou ax^ ^ barbarian, Mr. Rad- 



HILARY ST. IVES. lOl 

cliffe,'* she cried; "and I now say you are a brüte. 
Would you allow me to expire before your eyes?" 

"I am not afraid of your dying. Keep quiet and 
listen to me. This frightful secret has only just been 
revealed to me, and the agitation it has caüsed has 
not allowed me to consider how I shall act. But I 
shall do nothing harshly. Though you have deeply 
wronged me I will not expose you to the contimiely 
of the World. Your worthy father's later years shall 
not be embittered by the knowledge of your guilt. Your 
daughter" — and his voice faltered — "your daughter 
shall never learn it. Not for worlds would I have her 
know it." 

"For mercy's sake, Mr. RadclifFe, do not go on 
thus. I am your faithful, loving wife." 

And she tried to approach him, but he gently re- 
pulsed her. 

"Had I known your true character, Esther, you 
would never have been my wife. For our child's sake 
I will bear with you. But never again will you be to 
me what you have been.** 

She gazed at hinr as if doubting what he said, but 
reading inflexibility in his looks, she uttered an hys- 
terical cry, and would have fallen if he had not 
caught her. 

This was no pretended faintness, and scarcely 
knowing what he was about, Mr. RadclifFe rang the 
bell violently, while the colonel bathed the poor lady's 
temples with eau-de-Cologhe , and^ave her the flacon 
of salts to smell at. 



102 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"Sad workl" he observed to Mr. Radcliflfe; "and 
to think that eill this needless misery has been caused 
by that accursed woman. Ah! here she is," he ex- 
claimed, as the door was opened. "Now for it!" 

But she did not come alone. May was with her, 
and on seeing his daughter, Mr. RadclifFe whispered to 
the colonel: 

"Not a Word before her, sir, I insist." 

The hypocritical housekeeper flew to her mistress, 
and, feigning the greatest concern at her condition, 
quickly relieved Mr. Radcliffe of his bürden, and plac- 
ing the lady in her easy-chair, proceeded to apply 
fresh restoratives. 

May was nojt so much alanned as she would have 
been, had these fainting-fits been of less frequent oc- 
currence. Nevertheless , she held one of her mother's 
hands in her own, and looked on anxiously. 

"What has caused this, papa?'* she asked. 

*y; can scarcely teil," he replied. "Your mamma 
is subject to these attacks, you know." 

Mrs. RadclifFe at this moment began to recover her 
consciousness. On opening her eyes, and perceiving 
Mrs. Sutton near her, she pushed her ofF with signs of 
the greatest aversion. 

But a gesture from Mr. Radcliflfe prevented her 
from giving utterance to her anger. 

"I have only waited for Mrs. RadclifFe's recovery 
to take my leave," said the colonel. "Pray make my 
adieux.'' # 

"You are not goVa^,'^ ^^^ ttis lady, slightly 



HILARY ST. rVES. I03 

raising herseif. "You are not obKged to return to 
town at once." 

**Not exactly obliged, but '* 

"Then, pray, stay." 

** Yes, pray do, colonel," urged May. "Sir Charles 
quite calculates on meeting you at dinner." 
( "Well, I won't disappoint him. I will stay with 
the greatest pleasure." 

"Very glad to hear it/* crled Mr. RadclifFe, with 
affected heartiness. 

Mrs. Sutton could scarcely conceal her mortification 
at this unexpected turn of affairs. 



104 HILAKY ST. IVES, 



XXIV. 
The Waming. 

Things were now in a most unfortunate positioi. 
Without explaining his connection with Mrs. Sutton — 
without detailing his early history, which he could not 
persuade himself to do — Colonel Delacombe was an- 
able to remove the baneful impression produced upon 
Mr. RadclifFe by Hilary's letter. Indeed the poor jen- 
tleman absolutely refused to listen to any further ex- 
planation. The colonel therefore was compelled to 
desist, and allow things to remain as they were for the 
present. 

Luckily there was a numerous dinner-pariy that 
day, and this offered some distraction. Mr. Radcliffe 
had to attend to his guests, and his thoughts were 
forcibly turned into other Channels. As he gazed on 
his beloved child, who was seated next Sk Charles, 
^ and saw how bright and happy she looked^ could he 
bring a shade upon that lovely brow? No, she must 
never learn his griefs. Mrs. RadclifFe pui on a gay 
mask. Angry with her husband — angry with the colonel 
— excessively angry with Mrs. Sutton -^ she feit the 
necessity of keeping up appearances, an<^ tried to lock 
JiveJy and unconcerned. 

The dinner-paity vi^ ^TLC^^toi^l^ pleasant, and 



HILARY ST. IVES. 105 

numbered half a dozen out of the eight charming girls 
chosen to act as bridesmaids at the approaching cere- 
monial. An equal number of young men had been 
invited, so there was plenty of animated conversation, 
and possibly some Kttle flirting. Bridesmaids expect 
to become brides in their turn, and all these were so 
pretty, that it seemed likely their expectations would 
be realised. Our inflammable friend Oswald was strack 
with a sudden admiration of the golden tresses and 
delicately fair complexion of Jessie Brooke, and paid 
her great attention. He was a sad fellow, that Oswald, 
and bis grandsire did not know what to make of him. 
If the colonel was ill at ease as well as bis host, no 
one found it out. He chanced to sit next to the vicar 
of Wootton , who had a very important part to play at 
the ceremony, and delighted the reverend gentleman 
with bis conversation. 

After dinner, there was music and a little carpet- 
dance for the young folks, in which both May and her 
lover took part, for though Sir Charles, as we know, 
disliked balls, he did not object to a quiet quadrille. 
Never had he passed a happier evening, and he told 
May, as he bade her adieu for the night, that he hoped 
they should pass many — many such. Two days only 
intervened between them and the consummation of 
their happiness. On the third day May would become 
Lady Ilminster, and Sir Charles would be blessed — so 
he thought — with the fairest bride in England. All 
looked bright — too bright, perhaps, to last. But they* 
had no misgivings. Possessing everything that can 



I06 HILARY ST, IVES, 

contribute to human felicity, they had every reasonable 
expectation of a long term of urilntemipted bliss. 

They parted overnight, as we have described, Sir 
Charles assuring his intended bride, as he pressed her 
band, that he had never been so happy as on that 
night, and she echoing the sentiment. 

They met next morning, as arranged. The whole 
party had driven over to Boxgrove. Though Sir Charles 
did his best to conceal it, it was evident that he had 
something on his mind, but May forbore to question 
him tili they were alone. She lured him out into the 
park, and as they shaped their course towards a grove 
his gloom increased — so much so that she began to 
feel quite uncomfortable. At last they sat down beneath 
a large oak, whose broad arms completely sheltered 
them from the sun. Then looking earnestly and entreat- 
ingly into his face, she besought him to teil her what 
was the matter. 

"I have a presentiment of misfortune which I cannot 
shake ofF," he replied, with a sad smile. "I have had 
a waming." 

The- tone in which he pronounced the words made 
her blood run cold. 

"A warningl" she echoed. 

"Were you never told that we have a singular 
superstition?" he rejoined. "It is believed that each 
member of our family is wamed of approaching death." 

"You are saying this to frighten me, Charlie/' said 
May, trying to force a smile, but unable to repress a 
shudder. 



HILARY ST, IVES. ' XOJ 

"Indeed I am not," he rejoined. "The waming 
is a matter of faith with all of us. There are too many 
instances on record to allow of any doubt." 

"You never mentioned this to me before, Charlie." 

"I wish I had not mentioned it now, for I have 
banished the roses from your cheeks. However, I must 
teil you all, since I have begmi. My ancestor Sir 
Alberic was accidentally poisoned by his physician, 
and it is supposed that the warning is given by the 
troubled spirit of this man. Be this as it may, it is 
certain that a dark shadowy figure is seen before any 
of OUT family dies at Boxgrove. This I myself can 
attest. On the night before the death of my father, 
Sir Umfraville, I beheld the shadow." 

May uttered an exclamation of mingled astonish- 
ment and horror. 

"He was ill at the time, but not thought to be in 
danger," he continued. "I was proceeding along the 
corridor towards his room, when I saw a dark figure 
pass through the door. But I had no uneasiness, for 
I thought it was one of the servants. When I entered, 
my father was alone, sleeping in his easy-chair, and 
breathing heavily. I aroused him from his troubled 
slumber, and he complained that he had just feit a 
deadly chill strike to his heart, but I did not teil him 
what had caused it. Next night he died." 

May did not dare to ask any further question, but 
after a brief pause he went on: 

"You know how happy I was last night. When I 
sought my couch I was still dwelling upon the events 



I08 HILARY ST. IVES. 

of the day, and soon sank into a peaceful sliunber. 
But my repose was disturbed by a sense of deadly op- 
pression such as I never before experienced. I feit 
chilled to the marrow, and could scarcely breathe. 
Making a convulsive effort to shake off the horrible 
nightmare, I sprang holt upright in bed, and then by 
the dim moonlight that struggled through the window- 
curtains I distinctiy beheld a dark shadow glide through 
the door. The deadly chill was then accounted for. 
I instantly sprang from my couch, but the door was 
shut before I reached it. The next moment, however, 
I was in the corridor. No one was there. All was 
hushed and still as the grave. The moonbeams feil 
upon the portrait of Sir Alberic, which hangs there, as 
you may remember. The old warrior seemed to gaze 
compassionately upon the last of his long line. I have 
had my warning, May." 

"Heaven forbid!" she ejaculated, fervently. 

"Ah! it would be hard indeed to leave you for 
ever, May!" he exclaimed, gazing at her with unutter- 
able tenderness. "Years hence, I hope we shall be 
seated together beneath this tree, and laugh as we 
recal the warning. But if it should be otherwise — if I 
should be suddenly snatched from you by fate — ^think 
of what I now say. My last thought will be of you — 
my last sigh will breathe your name." 

"You will make me perfectly wretched if you talk 
thus," she cried. "Ah! if I were to lose you, I should 
never be happy again." 

"Let US talk of something eise. See! there are 



HILARY ST. IVES. ^ lOQ 

visitors/* he added, pointing out an open carriage, 
fiUed with ladies, which was approaching the mansion. 
"Let US go meet them.'* 

She took his arm, and they proceeded slowly to- 
wards the house. A number of persons were assembled 
in the garden. The carriage they had seen brought 
the two Miss Milwards and Jessie Brooke, and after a 
little lively conversation, a game^ at croquet was ar- 
ranged, in which Oswald and two other ypung men 
took part. 

Leaving May with Colonel Delacombe to watch the 
game, Sir Charles joined Mr. RadclifFe and Mr. Thorn- 
ton, who were sauntering along the lawn, and begged 
them to Step into the house with him for a few minutes, 
and they all three passed through an open French 
Window into the library. 

"I require your professional assistance, Mr. Thorn- 
ton," observed Sir Charles, as they entered the room. 

"Most happy to afFord it you," replied the old 
gentleman. "What do you want me to do?" 

"To make my will," replied the other. 

Both his hearers expressed siurprise, and Mn Thorn- 
ton thought the baronet must be joking. 

"I am perfectly serious," remarked Sir Charles. "I 
want the thing done without delay.'\ 

"I should be the last person to oppose yoiu* deter- 
mination," said Mr. Thomton; "and I will carry your 
intentions into effect, if you desire it, but the disposi- 
tion of a large property like yours ought to be care- 
fuUy considered. I will take down any instructions 



HO HILARY ST. IVES. 

you may give me, Sir Charles," he added, seating 
himself at a table on which writing materials wäre 
placed. 

"Perhaps I had better retire," remarked Mr. Rad- 
cliffe. 

"On no account," said the baronet. "I desire 
your presence, but beg you not to comment upon my 
Instructions. Let the Instrument be as brief as pos- 
sible," he added to Mr. Thornton. "With the excep- 
tion of a legacy of thirty thousand pounds to my sister, 
Lady Richborough, I mean to leave the whole of my 
property, real and personal — Boxgrove, and all my 
other estates, to May." 

"You have requested me not to make a comment, 
Sir Charles," observed Mr. RadclifFe; "but I cannot 
help saying that you are acting far too generously to- 
wards my daughter." 

"Mr. RadclifFe," said Sir Charles, with profound 
emotion, "your daughter is dearer to me than any one 
on earth. Except the sum devoted to my sister, all I 
have shall be hers." 

The tone in which he spoke left no doubt that his 
resolution was taken, and Mr. Thornton forbore to 
make a remark. 

"I am ready to begin, Sir Charles," he said, taking 
up a pen; "but I think you had better delay the matter 
until after your marriage." 

"Not for a single day — not for an hour," he re- 
joined. "No telling what may happen." 

"Very true," observed the old gentleman, "Well, 



HILARY ST. IVES. IIX 

» 

MI make it as sliort as I Ccin. Who are to be the exe- 
cutors?" 

" Yourself and Mr. Radcliffe, if you will undertake 
the Office." 

No objections made. The old gentleman set to 
work, and in a very few minutes drew up the document, 
which, important as it was, did not occupy more than 
half a side of paper. 

"This is sufficiently concise, I think," he re- 
marked. 

And he read what he had written to Sir Charles, 
who signified his perfect approval, adding that he 
wished to execute the instrament forthwith. 

"In that case we must have witnesses," said Mr. 
Thornton. "Lend me your signet-ring, Sir Charles." 

While the old gentleman was placing a seal in black 
wax on the document, Mr. Dancer and two other men- 
servants were summoned, and in their presence the 
will was duly executed by Sir Charles, who requested 
Mr. Thornton to take Charge of the document. 

"Now that the thing is done, Sir Charles," said the 
old gentleman, "I must remark that you have hurried 
yourself very unnecessarily." 

"I wished to get the business oflf my mind," replied 
the other. 

Just then May and Colonel Delacombe appeared at 
the open window. 

**Not^ a Word to her," said the baronet, with a 
gesture of silence. 

She had come to ask him to join the croquet party, 



112 HILARY ST. IVES. 

and he willingly complied. He had now qmte re- 
covered his cheerfulness, and seemed to have forgotten 
the nocturnal incident that had caused him so much 
disquietude. 

By this time several more visitors had arrived, and 
a large and gaily dressed assemblage, in which the 
gentler sex predominated, was collected on the lawD, 
where croquet was being played. After an hour spent 
very agreeably, the gong summoned the Company to 
luncheon, and both Mr. RadclifFe and Mr. Thornton 
remarked that Sir Charles was in higher spirits than 
usual« 

Luncheon over, croquet was resumed, and kept up 
tili six o'clock, when the visitors departed, and cur 
friends returned to Hazlemere to dinner. 

Sir Charles drove May in a mail phaeton which he 
had just launched. There was another dinner party 
that day, graced by all the pretty girls who had dined 
there the day before, together with three or four others, 
and a very lively dinner it was, for the Champagne 
flowed freely. Music and dancing foüowed as before. 
Plans were made for next day — never, alasl to be 
realised. 

When the moment for Separation came the dread 
presentiment which Sir Charles had hitherto repressed 
again forced itself upon him. He could scarcely bid 
her adieu. She, too, feit saddened — and so they parted 
for ever! 

Anxious to hide his emotion, Sir Charles sprang 
into the mail phaeton, that was waiting for him at the 



HILARY ST. IVES. II3 

hall-door. He was quickly followed by Colonel Dela- 
combe, who had agreed to return with him to Box- 
grove. Next moment they dashed off, and kept up 
the pace so well that within a quarter of an hour they 
were in sigiit of the park gates. It was a lovely moon- 
light night, and the colonel enjoyed the drive im- 
mensely. He smoked his cigar quietly, and did not 
trouble himself to talk much, for Sir Charles did not 
seem inclined for conversation. 

All at once, however, he was roused from the 
dreamy reverie into which he had fallen. Something 
Startled the horses — he could not teil what — for neither 
he nor Kennedy, the groom, saw anything, but they 
both heard Sir Charles exclaim: 

**Good God! there it is again!" 

At the same moment the horses set off at a furious 
pace, and soon became unmanageable. Sir Charles, 
though an admirable whip, could not hold them. Per- 
haps he was unnerved by what he had seen. On they 
dashed, tearing the ground with their hoofs, tili they 
reached the lodge-gates, which unluckily had been 
thrown open. 

Accustomed to this entrance, the infuriated animals 
made an attempt to pass through the gates, but their 
blind impetuosity brought the carriage in contact with 
a post and upset the vehicle, throwing out its oc- 
cupants with great violence. 

Colonel Delacombe, though much shaken by the 
fall, soon regained his legs, and so did Kennedy, but 
the ill-fated baronet did not move. Roused by Üv^ 



1 14 HILARY ST. IVES. 

tremendous crash, the lodge-keeper rushed forth, and, 
seizing the horses, prevented further mischief. 

Attention was now turned to Sir Charles, and on 
raising him, it became evident that he had sustained 
frightful injuries about the head. Indeed, the colonel 
feared that the skull was fractured. 

As soon as practicable, the unfortunate man was 
carried into the lodge and laid upon a bed. He 
groaned deeply, but could not speak. The colonel 
tended him like a brother. By his directions, Kennedy 
piounted one of the horses and rode ofF to Wootton 
in quest of Mr. Malham. But before the surgeon ar- 
rived the spirit had fied of as gcdlant a gentleman as 
ever breathed. 



HILARY ST* IVES. 1 1 5 



XXV. 

How the News was brought to Haziemere. 

That night most of the inmates of Haziemere had 
retired to rest füll of pleasant anticipations of the 
morrow, but LufF, the butler, and Boston, who slept at 
the back of tbe house, were roused from their first 
slumbers by Kennedy. 

The affiicting news was cönveyed by the butler to 
his master and Mr. Thornton, and filled them with 
constemation. The two gentlemen soon came down- 
stairs, and were preparing to set out for Boxgrove, 
when they were stopped by the arrival of Mr. Malham-, 
wrho came to inform them that all was over. Both 
were stunned by the dreadful intelligence. 

" Gracious Heaven ! *' exclaimed Mr. Thomton, when 
he regained his speech. "How remarkable that Sir 
Charles should have just made his will. And how 
anxious he was that there should be no delay. He 
tnight have had a presentiment of his approaching 
3nd." 

" What a frightful shock it will be to May! " groaned 
Mr. Radcliffe. "Enough to kill her." 

"I hope Colonel Delacombe is not much hurt?" 
inquired Mr. Thornton of the surgeon. 

**A good deal shaken, but otherwise uninjured," 

8* 



Il6 HILARY ST. IVES. 

replied Mr. Malham. "He wished to accompany me, 
but I prevailed upon him to go up to the hall. It 
will be better for him to be quiet, though he seems 
made of iron." 

Having fulfilled his sad errand, the surgeon left 
them, promising to call again eärly on the morrow. 
But he was not allowed to quit the house without an 
mterview with Mrs. Sutton. Though as little noise as 
possible was made, the housekeeper heard certain 
Sounds that alarmed her, and hastily attiring herseif, 
came down-stairs, just in time to catch him. She soon 
leamt the terrible truth. 

"But Colonel Delacombe was with Sir Charles," 
she cried. "Is he, too, killed?" 

"No. Fortunately, he has escaped almost unhurt." 

"Fate is unjust," she cried. "Sir Charles ought 
to have been the one spared." 

"Verytrue. What a dreadful business! Never knew 
anything so shocking. Poor Sir Charles! killed in the 
prime of life, and just on the eve of marriage with the 
girl he adored. Dreadful!" 

To his horror the door opened and May came in — 
a taper in her hand, and looking excessively pale. As 
it chanced she had not retired to rest, and being alarmed 
by the disturbance in the house, instead of ringing her 
bell had come down to see what had happened. On 
beholding the surgaon» her uneasiness increased. 

"You are surprised to find me here at this time of 
night, Miss Radcliffe," he said* "The fäct is " 

"Do not disguise the truth, Mr. Malham/' she in- 



HILARY ST, IVES. 1 1 7 

temipted. '^Sir Charles has been taken suddenly ill. 
I am snre of it. You have come to teil us so." 

"Perhaps it will be best to prepare her," thought 
the surgeon. "It is Strange you should think this, 
Miss RadclifFe," he observed. "But don't be alarmed, 
my dear jDung lady, don't be alarmed." 

"Is there any danger?" she asked, with forced 
calniness. 

"In illness there is always a certain danger/' he 
answered, evasively. 

"But what is the nature of the attack? Speak 
plainly. It must have been very sudden. He was per- 
fectly well when he went away." 

"Yes, it was very sudden," he replied, glancing at 
the housekeeper. 

The look did not pass unnoticed by May. 

"Luflf and Boston were in the hall as I came down- 
stairs/' she said, "and I heard them talking about an 
accident But they hurried ofF before I could question 
them. Were they speaking of Sir Charles?" 

"Yes, I am sorry to say he has met with an ac- 
cident " 

"Then my fears are reaUsed," she cried, with a look 
of so much anguish that the surgeon regretted his words. 

But he was spared the necessity of further .explana- 
tion by Mr. Radcliife, who, having heard his daughter's 
voice, hastened to her. 

From her looks he thought she had leamt the 
dreadfiil truth. 

"Heaven sustain you under this dire affliction, my 



Il8 HILARY ST. IVES. 

dear child!'' he exclaimed, clasping her to his breast. 
**Malham has told you all." 

"He has told me nothing, papa," she exclaimed. 
"He has tried to keep the fatal truth from me. But I 
divined it." 

"Alas! my dear child, I cannot hide it from you. 
Yon have lost him." 

Crying out, as if a shot had pierced her heart, she 
became insensible in his arms. 

"God forgive me! I fear I have killed her, Mal- 
ham," he cried to the surgeon. 

"No, sir — ^no. The shock could not be otherwise 
than severe. But it \yill pass. We must take her up 
to her room, Mrs. Sutton, and you will remain with 
her during the night. Do not distress yourself, sir. I 
will answer for her recovery." 

The tender father carried her up-stairs himself. At 
the door of her Chamber he consigned her to the 
surgeon and the housekeeper, and paced to and fro in 
the passage tili they came forth. 

Mr. Malham looked much moved, and Mrs. Sutton 
was weeping. 

"Why have you both left her?" cried Mr. Radcliflfe. 

"There is nothing to fear," replied the surgeon. 
"She wishes to be alone — ^to seek for consolation 
where she is sure to find it. Your daughter is an 
angel, sir. Mrs. Sutton will return to her presently. 
Now take my advice, and go to bed. I wiU be with 
you early in the morning." 

END OF THE SECOND BOOK. 



BOOK III. 



THE RIVALS. 



■41 



i 



I. 

The Young Mistress of Boxgrove. 

No event could have caused a more painful Sen- 
sation than the awfully sudden death of Sir Charles 
Ilminster, occurring as it did under circumstances so 
peculiarly distressing. Populär with all classes of society, 
the ill-fated baronet was universally regretted. 

It was thought remarkable that he should have 
endowed his intended bride with the whole of his 
large fortune on the very day on which he accidentally 
met his death; but this proved the depth of his attach- 
ment to her, and added to the general regret that a 
cruel fate would not permit their union — a union which 
no one doubted would have been happy. 

To May herseif the splendid provision made for 
her served only to aggravate her sorrow. She under- 
stood the motives — inexplicable to others — that had 
actuated him in making his will so hastily. She re- 
called every word he had spoken to her, and feit sure 
he had thought of her at the last. 

As her grief, at first overwhelming, began to abate, 
she was able to realise the position in which Sir Charles's 
magnificent bequest had placed her. But the wealth she 
had acquired could not console her, though it might in 
some degree mitigate the sharpness of her affliction. 
She loved Boxgrove because he had loved the \^la.ce^ 



122 HILARY ST. IVES. 

and because its antique Chambers, its galleries, its 
gardens, and its groves recalled bis Image. He was 
laid among bis ancestors in tbe family vault beneath 
tbe chapel attacbed to tbe Hall, and sbe daily visited 
bis tomb. 

Notbing bad been cbanged at Boxgrove since the 
bouse bad come into ber bands. All tbe establish- 
ment was kept up as it bad been in Sir Cbarles's time. 
Sbe confided tbe management of tbe bouse to Mr. 
Tbornton and Mrs. Woodcot, wbo lived witb ber, and 
if visitors came sbe left tbe old gentleman and ber 
aunt to entertain tbem. Sbe refused for tbe present 
to mix witb society, declaring sbe bad lost all taste 
for it. 

But it must not be supposed tbat sbe bad given 
way to gloom, and tbat tbe secluded life sbe now led 
was caused by a morbid feeling of melancboly. Some- 
tbing of ber former cbeerfulness bad retnmed; and 
tbougb sbe bad lost tbe brigbt look tbat once belonged 
to ber, and tbe winning smile tbat constantly played 
about ber lips bad üed, yet tbe serene and pensive ex- 
pression of ber countenance beigbtened its interest. 
Sbe was graver tban before. Sorrow bad chastened 
ber beart, but not altered tbe sweetness of ber dis- 
position. Aunt Woodcot tbougbt ber more cbarming 
tban ever, and we incline to tbink tbat Aunt Woodcot 
was rigbt. Grandpapa, wbose notions of ber bad be- 
come more exalted witb tbe increase of ber wealth, 
boped tbat sbe would eventually take a very bigb place 
in society, but be was content to wait. Tbe young 



\ 



HILARY ST. IVES. 123 

mistress of Boxgrove was now looked upon as the best 
match in the county, and as nobody supposed she had 
vowed eternal fidelity to the memory of poor Sir Charles, 
everybody wondered who would be fortunate enough to 
obtain her band. A great deal of court was paid to 
the Radcliffes as well as to the guardians at Boxgrove, 
and more than one advantageous offer was qnietly de- 
clined, without being submitted to the young lady. 

Mr, Thornton was extremely well satisfied with his 
Position — and no wonder. Virtually master of a large 
mansion and a large establishment, he had nothing to 
do but to study his own comforts, and these he at- 
tended to most sedulously. 

Aunt Woodcot was equally comfortable. To her, 
indeed, Boxgrove was a sort of paradise, and her only 
dread was that she might, one day, be obliged to quit 
it. Consequently, she was by no means anxious that 
her niece should marry — unless she married Oswald, 
of which there seemed little chance. Mrs. Woodcot 
could now vie with Mrs. Radcliffe, had a carriage en- 
tirely at her disposal, and was in fact a person of con- 
siderable importance. 

To Myrtilla, Sir Charles's sudden death had been 
a great shock. She was sincerely attached to her 
brother, but the handsome legacy he had left her, in 
some measure reconciled her to his loss. She rather 
envied May her large acquisitions, but did not complain 
of being ill-treated. "^She came down to see "the young 
widow," as she called her, but was dreadfully bored by 
Aunt Woodcot, and found the old house duller and 



1 24 HILARY ST. IVES. 

more like a convent than ever. Consequently she spent 
most of her time at Hsizlemere. 

Colonel Delacombe had gone abroad and taken 
Hilary with him. They were now at Castellamare, near 
Naples, in the midst of vineyards and orange-groves. 
Having received a great deal of encouragement from 
Lady RJchborough, the young man was foolish enough 
to propose to her, and being rejected, was still more 
foolish to take his rejection to heart. To eure him the 
colonel took him abroad. It must not be imagined for 
a moment that the colonel and Myrtilla had quarrelled. 
They were on as friendly terms as ever, and kept up 
a constant correspondence. 

Knowing they would interest her, Lady Rich- 
borough showed Mrs. Radcliffe several of the colonel's 
letters, in all of which he spoke of Hilary with great 
affection. In the last that had come to hand he told 
her that the young man was perfectly cured of his 
foolish passion. "But I am half afraid," he added, 
"that he has fallen desperately in love with a fascinat- 
ing Neapolitan countess, who is stäying at the same 
hotel with us." 

"Not very flattering to me," remarked Myrtilla, 
"But I am glad to hear it, nevertheless." 

"I fancied you liked him,*' said Mrs. Radcliffe. 

"Not well enough to marry him. I wonder why men 

will propose to me. They ought to know better. I have 

no idea of given up my liberty. Were I in May's 

Position, and mistress of Boxgrove, nothing should in* 

diKe me to marry." 



HILARY ST. IVES. 12-5 

"I don*t think she will," observed Mrs. Radcliüe. 
"She is inconsolable." 

"Inconsolable! I don't believe that. Her fidelity 
will be put to the test pretty severely by-änd-by, you 
may depend upon it. Plenty of suitors will liiake their 
appearance, or I'm very much mistaken, and then we 
shall See what she will do. By-the-by, did she ever 
inform you that she had her fortune told at Ascot?'* 

"She mentioned the circumstance, but did not teil 
me what the gipsy said." 

"It was a Singular prediction. I laughed at it then, 
but I don't know what to think now. It may be ful- 
filled. Who knows? But to return to the colonel. He 
inquires if Mrs. Sutton is still with you, I am glad I 
can teil him she is gone. I won't ask what she did, 
but I know she was dreadfully mischievous." 

"The mischief she has made can never be set right, 
I fear. Mr. RadclifFe has never been like himself since 
she poisoned his mind by her falsehoods. To me she 
behaved infamously. I treated her like a friend, not 
as a servant, and gave her my entire confidence. She 
requited me with the basest ingratitude." 

"Have you never discovered the motives of her 
malice? I know enough of her history to be able to 
enlighten you as to them. You inadvertently com- 
mitted a great error in taking her into the house. I 
am certain she has all along nourished feelings of 
jealous dislike to you. The colonel's appearance roused 
these feelings into activity, and unluckily^ a-a vt ?ä.^\sv%^ 



126 HILARY ST. IVES. 



you have placed yourself sufficiently in her power to ' 
enable her to do you an injury." 

"What has she to do with the colonel?" cried Mrs. 
Radcliflfe, startled. "I thought they were utter strangers 
to each other." 

"Strangers!*' echoed Myrtilla. "He knew her long 
before he knew you." 

"Was she his mistress?" 

"His wife^^ replied Lady Richborough. "AndHilary 
is their son. Now you must understand it all?" 

"I do, I do," cried Mrs. Radcliffe. "I understand 
it too well." 

"You must not do him an injustice. When he 
sought your band, he believed that deatb had freed 
him from the chain which he had so foolishly imposed 
upon himself. It is due to him that you should be 
satisfied on this point." And she proceeded to give 
her the details of the coloneFs unfortunate marriage. 
To these Mrs. Radcliffe listened with the deepest 
interest. 

"Until his return from India he believed the 
wretched woman dead," said Myrtilla, in conclusion; 
"and you may conceive his horror when he found he 
had been deceived by a false report. Not the least 
surprising part of the stränge story is that she should 
be here — with you — and that their son should be 
brought hither likewise. It looks like fatality." 

"Strange, indeed," said Mrs. Radcliflfe. "There 
has always been a certain mystery about Mrs. Button, 



HILARY ST. rVES. 12; 

but if I had known who she was I should haye been 
frightened to death of her." 

"What has become of her?" asked Lady Rich- 
borough. 

**I cannot teil. She left quite suddenly, and con- 
trary to Mr. RadcKife's wishes. It would seem, how- 
ever, that she had made preparations for her depar- 
ture, for her packages were ready, and she left nothing 
behind her. She proceeded to London, as we suppose, 
but she has not been heard of since." 

**I fear you have not seen the last of her," ob- 
served Myrtilla. "What a misfortune to be tied to 
such a wretch! — and I see no chance of the colonePs 
deliverance. Hilary is not aware that she is his mother, 
but he must learn the secret one of these days." 

"Yes, however disagreeable it may be to the colo- 
nel, an explanation must be given," observed Mrs. 
Radcliffe. 

The foregoing conversation will afford some notion 
of the State of things at Hazlemere. Mrs. Sutton was 
indeed gone, and no tidings had been received of her 
since her departure. Her loss was a serious grievance 
to Mrs. Radcliffe, and even the servants regretted her, 
for she had contrived to secure their good will. But 
no one regretted her so much as Mr. Malham. He 
made constant inquiries after her, and vainly tried to 
ascertain her address. 



128 HILARY ST. IVES. 



IL 

A Letter from Lady Richborough. 

Another spring has arrived. May Day is again 
approaching, but no change has yet taken place in the 
mode of life of the young mistress of Boxgrove. Grand- 
papa and Aunt Woodcot still reside with her. Mrs. 
Trapp, poor Sir Charles*s housekeeper, who could not 
brook Mrs. Woodcot's control, has taken Mrs. Sutton's 
place at Hazlemere. This is the only change in the 
establishment. There are rarely any visitors, and con- 
sequently the house is as quiet as quiet can be — rather 
too quiet, indeed, for Mr. Thornton. The Radcliffes 
are almost as much at Boxgrove as Hazlemere. Mr. 
Radcliffe has never been able to reconcile himself to 
the loss of Mrs. Sutton. Neitha* he nor his wife know 
what has become of her, as she has never written to 
them since her departure. Her conduct appears stränge 
and inexplicable to Mr. Radcliffe, but does not surprise 
his wife, who is delighted to be released from the 
thraldom in which she has so long been kept. She is 
sometimes tempted to take Mrs. Trapp into her con- 
fidence, but warned by previous experience, prudently 
abstains. Not even to Mrs. Woodcot has she disclosed 
the secret ofColonelDelacombe's unfortunate marriage, 
but the thought of it often troubles her. She never 
hears from the colonel now. All correspondence be- 



HILARY ST. IVES. I29 

tween them has ceased. But she obtains tidings of 
him from Lady Richborough, and is aware that he is 
still "abroad with his adopted son. She is also aware 
that he has been dangerously ill, having been attacked 
by fever and ague at Rome, but is now convalescent. 

Things were in this State at the two houses, when 
one day a communication was received by Mrs. Rad- 
cliflfe from Lady Richborough, which it will be proper 
to lay before the reader. The letter arrived by the 
early post while Mrs. Radcliffe was at breakfast, but 
she did not read it tili she was alone in her boudoir. 

**You are quite aware, dear Mrs. Radcliffe, that I 
do not approve of the secluded life that our dear May 
is leading, and think she ought to assume the position 
in Society to which the large fortune left her by my 
brother entitles her. A lovely girl, not yet twenty, 
with the most brilliant prospects before her, cannot be 
allowed to bury herseif alive. Poor Sir Charles would 
not have demanded such a sacrifice. She has paid the 
fuU tribute of regret to his memory, and having an 
important part to play in the world, cannot shrink 
from it. Such is my opinion, and such, I feel sure, 
must also be your opinion. 

"I need not remind you of the immense Sensation 
she produced last spring. But for her engagement to 
poor dear Charlie she would have had no end of offers. 
Chief among her conquests was Lord Robert Tadeaster, 
who was desperately smitten. At that time he had 
nothing beyond his title to recommend him. The 

Hilary St Ives. IL 9 



130 HILARY ST. IVES. 

case is very different now, since, as you must be aware, 
by the demise of bis father and eider brother, he has 
become Marquis of Hartlepool. With princely domains 
in Berkshire and Kent, two noble country seats, and 
a splendid house in Arlington-street, the marquis need 
not look far for a bride. The proudest peer in the 
realm would be happy to give him bis daughter. 

"You will guess on whom bis choice has fallen. 
The lovely girl who captivated him last spring still re- 
mains mistress of bis affections, and be has com- 
missioned me to write to you, and make her a formal 
offer of bis band. 

"A proposal from a nobleman of such distinction 
as the Marquis of Hartlepool cannot be otherwise than 
favourably entertained — at least by you and Mr. Rad- 
cliffe. I account it a signal bonour. But in May's 
present frame of mind she may be insensible to the 
importance of the offer, and if left to herseif might 
decline it. It is to prevent the possibility of such a 
mischance that I now write, urging you to leave nothing 
undone to bring about a satisfactory result. 

"I think you will do better without me than with 
me; but if you fancy I can be of the slightest use, let 
me know, and I will run down at once. 

"Grandpapa and Aunt Woodcot must exert their 
influence. Nothing must be neglected. All sorts of 
good wishes to you all. Adieu! 

Your afFectionate, 
^ "Myrtilla. 



HILARY ST. IVES. I3I 

"P. S. I must not omit to teil you that Colone! 
Delacombe is in Paris on bis way back — much better, 
though still suifering from the eflfects of the fever. 
Hilary is with him. Of course I have told bim of Mrs. 
Sutton's departure, and that nothing has been heard of 
her since. I shall write to inform him of May's splendid 
ofFer. Once more, adieu!" 

In an ecstasy of delight, Mrs. RadclifFe rushed 
down-stairs to communicate the joyful intelligence to 
her husband. She found him in the library with Mr. 
Thornton, who had just ridden over from Boxgrove. 

"Oh! I am so glad you are here," she cried to her 
father. "I have such wonderful news for you — and 
for you too, my dear. What do you think? Our 
darling May has had an offer from no less a person 
than the Marquis of Hartlepool." 

"Why, he's her old admirer, Lord Robert Tad- 
caster — only raised to the first rank of the peerage," 
observed Mr. Thornton. "He was deuced lucky in 
getting rid of bis eider brother, the earl." 

"You shall hear what Lady Richborough says about 
him, for it is through her that the oflfer has been 
made," replied Mrs. RadclifFe. 

And taking a seat, she read the letter, which pro- 
duced a great effect upon both her hearers. When 
she had done, the old gentleman manifested bis de- 
light by a chuckling laugh. 

"Well, this surpasses my expectations ," he cried. 
"As her ladyship very properly observes, the proposal 

9* 



132 . HILARY ST. IVES. 

of a nobleman of such distinction as the Marquis of 
Hartlepool is a signal honour." 

Mr. Radcliffe was less excited, and quietly re- 
marked, "I feel as much gratified as you do, Mr. 
Thornton, but " 

"There must be no *buts' in the case," interrupted 
the old gentleman. "May must accept the marquis." 

"Decidedly my opinion," said Mrs. Radcliffe. 
"There can be no hesitation. Where the interests of 
the family are concerned, as they are now, she is 
bound to sacrifice her own feelings. But I do not see 
that she can raise any objection to her noble suitor. 
She rather liked him as Lord Robert Tadeaster." 

"If she did, which I very much doubt," observed 
Mr. Radcliffe, "poor Sir Charles did not share her 
sentiments. I hope she Will view the matter in the 
same light that we do; but I have great misgivings.*' 

"She cannot be allowed to have her own way/' ^. 
cried Mrs. Radcliffe. 

"Certainly not," said Mr. Thomton. "Lady Rieh- 1 
borough urges me to exert my influence over her, and 
I shall not fail to do so. But if you exercise your 
patemal authority, she will not venture to disobey," he 
added to Mr. Radcliffe. 

"I shall simply State my wishes," replied the 
worthy gentleman. "Personally, I feel honoured by / 
the offer. It would be a proud day to me to see my ' 
daughter wedded to the Marquis of Hartlepool, but I / 
will not force her to accept him, As fax as I am 



[ 



HILARY ST. IVES. I33 

concerned, I shall leave the decision entirely to her- 
seif." 

"I really have no patience with you, my dear," ex- 
claimed Mrs. RadclifFe. "May has been allowed to 
indulge her grief a great d6al too long, and it will be 
a reproach to us if we allow her to continue in this 
State of seclusion. I have not as yet interfered with 
her, because, judging by other people, I naturally con- 
cluded that her sorrow would abate, but I see no signs 
of improvement. I should be as weak as the girl her- 
seif if I suffered her to throw away this brilliant chance 
because she is unwilling to cast off her sentimental 
sorrow. I shall point out what she ought to do, and 
insist upon compliance with my injunctions." 

Mr. Thomton signified his approval very empha-» 
tically. 

"You forget, Mr. Radcliife," pursued the lady, 
"that May is not yet twenty. Are you justified in al- 
lowing her to have her own way?" 

"Though under twenty, she is her own mitsress, 
and can act as she pleases," replied Mr. Raddiflfe. 
"If she prefers retirement to splendöur; if, from 
motives which I can appreciate, she declines to marry; 
I shall not attempt to dissuade her from foUowing her 
inclinations ! " 

Mr. Thomton coughed dryly, and winked at^his 
daughter. 

"All very fine," cried Mrs. RadclifFe, with a sneer. 
"But I will do my best to make her Marchioness of 
Hartlepqol." 



134 HTLARY ST. IVES. 

"And so will I," added the old gentleman. 

Mrs. Radcliffe then arose, and intimated her In- 
tention of writing to Lady Richborough to thank her 
for her letter, and teil her how highly honoured they 
all feit by the marquis's proposal, and that no time 
should be lost in laying it before May. 

"After luncheon," she added, "we will drive over 
to Boxgrove, and I will then speak to the dear child, 
and ascertain her sentiments. If I find it ;iecessary, 
I shall use a little gentle — very gentle — persuasion. 
Are you going, papa?" she added to Mr. Thornton, 
who foUowed her to the door. "Won't you stay 
luncheon?" 

"No," he replied. "I want to astonish Mrs. Wood- 
cot with the wonderful news." 

"I'm not sure that she will be pleased," said Mrs. 
Radcliflfe. "But not a word to May tili I arrive." 

"That is quite understood," rejoined the old gen- 
tleman. "Good-bye for the present. We shall meet 
again anon." 

With this he proceeded to the stable, mounted his 
stout cob, and trotted off to Boxgrove, detennined in 
his own mind that his grand-daughter should become 
Marchioness of Hartlepool. 



HILARY ST. IVES. I35 



III. 

Oswald reappears as a Suitor. 

On reaching thq mansion, he found, to his sur- 
prise, that Oswald had just arrived, and he was a good 
deal put out by the circumstance, for he knew that 
Mrs. Woodcot still cherished hopes of securing the 
great prize for her son. 

"What the deuce has brought him here at this 
juncture?" thought the old gentleman. "He will be 
confoundedly in the way. I must try to get rid of 
him." 

Oswald was with his mother in a charming little 
room looking upon the garden, which Mrs. Woodcot 
had appropriated; and to this room Mr. Thornton at 
once repaired. He greeted Oswald with his usual 
cordiality,. but expressed surprise at seeing him. 

"I am here in obedience to a summons which I 
received from my mother, sir/' replied the young man. 

"You have brought a lot of luggage with you, I 
find," cried his grandsire, rather gruffly. "I suppose 
you mean to make a long stay." 

"I shall only stay as long as I can make myself 
agreeable, sir," rejoined Oswald. "My mother will 
explain to you why she sent for me." 

"Yes, I have a little project in view for him, and 
calculate upon your assistance," observed Mrs. Woodcot, 



136 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"Before you say any more," interrupted Mr. Thorn- 
ton, anticipating what was Coming, "let me give you a 
piece of news which I have brought back with me 
from Hazlemere. The Marquis of Hartlepool has made 
May a formal proposal of marriage. The offer has 
been conveyed by Lady Richborough to Mrs. Rad- 
cliflfe. What do you think of that, eh?" 

"What do I think of it?" cried Oswald, in dismay. 
"I think it an infernal nuisance?" 

"Aha!" cried Mr. Thornton. "You have let the 
cat out of the bag. This spoils your little game, eh?" 

"Yes, sir, I rather think it does; and though the 
proposed alliance ma^ be very dazzling, I cannot 
doubt that you will give the preference to your own 
grandson. Surely it will be better to keep this fine 
place in our own family than relinquish it to a noble- 
man in whom you have no interest." 

"Oswald's Claims upon you are superior to those 
of any other," observed Mrs. Woodcot. 

"You seem to forget that he has already been re- 
jected. What likelihood is there that he will be ac- 
cepted now?" 

"Every likelihood, if you will assist me, sir," cried 
the young man. "None if you Support my noble 
rival." 

"You are always sanguine, Oswald," observed his 
grandsire; "but I don't think you have a ghost of a 
Chance; so you may as well retire from a contest in 
which you are certain to be worsted." 



X 



HILARY ST. IVES. I37 

*'Never," cried Oswald. "I am more in love with 
May than ever." 

"With her fortune?" said his grandsire. 

"With herseif. And I shall esteem you a very un- 
natural grandfather if you desert me now." 

"I have given you plenty of proofs of my affec- 
tion/' said the old gentleman. "I make you a toler- 
ably good allowance. I have constituted you my heir, 
and if you can find a wife of whom I approve, money 
shan't stand in the way. But I teil you fairly I can't 
and won't help you now. This is a most important 
alliance, and I shall do my best to promote it. We 
have settled it amongst us, and it is to be." 

"I am very sorry to hear it," observed Mrs. Wood- 
cot. "You have very little consideration for May 's 
happiness. Grand though the alliance may be, Box- 
grove is too high a price to pay for it." 

"I'll hear no more on the subject," said Mr. Thorn- 
ton, in a positive tone. "Take my advice, Oswald. 
Propose to Jessie Brooke. She'll suit both of us." 

"No, sir, I'll forswear marriage altogether." 

"As you please," rejoined his grandsire. "But 
mark me! not a word to May before her mother's 
arrival." 

And he quitted the room. 

"So our scheme's upset," cried Oswald. "The 
old gentleman is dead against us." 

"We are not beaten yet," replied his mother. "In 
spite of his interdiction, I will speak to May." 

On leaving Mrs. Woodcot and her son, Mr. Thorn- 



138 HILARY ST. IVES. 

ton, who did not feel altogether easy, put on his hat, 
and sallied out into the garden. The strong appeal 
made to him had not been without effect, though he 
resisted it, but as he walked along the terrace, ever 
and anon pausing to survey the stately old mansion, 
or allow his gaze to wander over the park, he could 
not help feeling that it would be a pity to allow so 
magnificent a place to go out of the family. Still, he 
held to his determination. 

"No, no," he mentally ejaculated, "I must not 
hesitate. It is painful to me to thwart Oswald — ^vexa- 
tious to give up this place, but I must do it. May 
must be Marchioness of Hartlepool." 

While thus musing, he saw the young lady herseif 
issue from a yew-tree alley at the farther end of the 
garden. She was not alone, and either his eyes de- 
ceived him or the person with her Wcis Mrs. Sutton. 
Greatly surprised, he stood still to examine the latter 
personage more narrowly, and became convinced that 
he was right. For a minute or two neither of them 
noticed him, but when they did so, Mrs. Sutton in- 
stantly disappeared in the alley. The old gentleman's 
curiosity was greatly excited by the incident. 

May now advanced to meet him. Her deep mourn- 
ing set off the exquisite fairness of her complexion, 
and her beauty was not diminished by the shade of 
sadness that sat upon her brow. 

"Good day, dear grandpapa," she said. "I thought 
you were at Hazlemere." 

*'Just come bac\" \v^ x^-^ovcÄ-d. "Your mamma 



HILARY ST. IViES. 13^ 

will be here by-and-by. She has got famous news for 
you — but I mustn't forestali it. Pray who was with 
you just now? Surely it couldn't be Mrs. Sutton, yet 
it looked uncommonly like her." 

"It was Mrs. Sutton," replied May. "But I must 
entreat you not to mention to mamma or any of them 
that you have seen her. I have promised that her 
Visit shall be kept secret." 

"I suppose I mustn't ask what she has come 
about?" 

"Please don't, for I can't teil you." 

"At least, you can teil me why she has never 
written to your mamma since she left Hazlemere." 

"I can answer no questions respecting her," re- 
turned May, mysteriously. 

"Well, I think, if I were you, I wouldn't encourage 
her Visits. If she must come at all, let her come 
openly. In any case, don't let her persuade you to 
engage her as housekeeper. She and your aunt would 
never get on together." 

"Mrs. Sutton has no wish to take the Situation, 
grandpapa, and I should never dream of oflfering it 
to her." 

"Well, come and sit down with me on this bench. 
I want to talk to you. It sometimes occurs to me, my 
dear child," he observed, regarding her earnestly, 
"that you must be tired of the quiet life you are lead- 
ing here." 

"On the contrary, dear grandpapa, I am perfectly 
happy — that is, as happy as I can ever \vo^^\.^Vi^" 



I40 ^ HILARY ST. IVES. 

she remarked, with a sigh. "I grbw fonder of the 
place every day, and never desire to quit it. All those 
I love are with me, or come to see me daily, and I 
care for no other society. I do not find the time pass 
heavily. As you know, I am always employed, and 
though sadness will sometimes steal over me, I never 
give way to gloom. Make yourself easy about me, 
dear grandpapa. I like this tranquil mode of life, 
wtiolly free from excitement, and my only fear is lest 
something should occur to disturb it." 

**A11 very pretty, but you are too young to retire 
from the world, and really must return to it. If you 
were some thirty or forty years older — had entirely lost 
your charms — had incurred many disappointments— I 
would not say a word against the course you are pur- 
suing. But you are in the very spring-time* of life, 
when everything wears its brightest and gayest colours 
— as we may see by glancing at those parterres — and 
when your spirits ought to be at their best. Grief 
does not endure for ever. It is not meant that it 
should do so. Ere long, when the wounds in your 
heart are fully healed, the image which is now con- 
stantly before you will insensibly fade away, and be 
succeeded by another. New objects of interest will 
arise, and if you do not forget the past, you will think 
of it without pain. This is the law of nature, and 
your case can be no exception to the law." 

May sighed, but made no answer, and grandpapa 
went on: 

^'You must coiisvd^x, iwj «Jääx^ that you have 



filLARY ST. IVES. / I4I 

duties to fulfil in connexion with your large property — 
duties that cannot be neglected. You are bound to 
occupy a certain position." 

"But you and papa discharge all these duties for 
me. You know, dear grandpapa, I cannot attend to 
matters of business, and do not even understand them. 
Whatever you deem necessary, I will do. Hitherto 
you have spared me all trouble, and I cannot be Suffi- 
ciently grateful for your kindness." 

"I do not speak of matters of business, my dear^ 
but of the duties incumbent upon your position. You 
cannot consistently avoid taking your proper place in 
Society. Already, I and your aunt have been blamed 
for allowing you to immure yourself so long — you 
know with what justice. I can no longer, therefore, 
forbear to remonstrate. The idea may be repugnant 
to your present feelings, but since with your large for- 
tune you are not likely to remain Single, let me counsel 
you to marry a man of rank — of high rank. You can 
do it. Think over what I have said." 

So saying, he got up and marched oflf at a quick 
pace towards the farther end of the garden. 

May was ruminating over his words, and wonder- 
ing whether they had any special significance, when 
she was joined by her aunt, who came out to teil her 
that Oswald had unexpectedly arrived. 

"But you look unusually sad, my love," said Mrs. 
Woodcot, with an air of much concern. "What dis- 
tresses you? You know you can cohfide all your little 
griefs to me." 



142 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"I fear I do not make you and grandpapa as com- 
fortable as I desire," replied May. **Is there any- 
thing I can do for you? Only teil me, and it shall 
be done." 

"You perfectly astonish me, my love. Surely your 
grandpapa has not been complaining? He sometime§ 
grambles without reason." 

'*No, aunty dear, he has not been complaining. 
But he does not seem quite satisfied with me, and I 
am sure I am most anxious to please him." 

"You must have misapprehended him, my love. 
What has he been saying to you?" 

"He says that people blame you and him for cil- 
lowing me to lead so retired a life, and that you ought 
to force me to go into society. Now society, as you 
know, dear aunty, is utterly distasteful to me. I am 
not equal to it. Not content with dragging me back 
to the World, he would have me marry." 

"I, too, would have you marry, my love," said 
Mrs. Woodcot. "And that before long." 

"Perhaps you would have me marry a nobleman. 
You think that rank would make me happy?" 

"No, I don't say that. Splendour, I know, has 
few attractions for you. Besides, your position is al- 
ready ensured, and your fortune so large that you re- 
quire no addition to it. Circumstanced as you are, 
the choice of a husband rests with yourself, and, to 
ensure your happiness, you ought to choose one whom 
you know to be devoted to you, with whose character 



HILARY ST. IVES. I43 

and disposition you are perfectly acquainted, and 
whose tastes are not dissimilar to your own." 

**Such a one as Oswald," remarked May, with a 
smile. 

"Exactly," rejoined Mrs. Woodcot. "Of all your 
adorers there is none truer to you than he. He sub- 
mitted to the sentence that you passed upon him with- 
out a murmur — but he never ceased to love. And 
now — with my permission — he ventures to come for- 
ward again." 

May uttered an exclamation of displeasure. 

"Forgive me, if I have done wrong, my love, in 
summoning him; but knowing there was likely to be a 
question of marriage, I could not help giving the poor 
fellow a Chance. Ah! he loves you dearly, May." 

"What do you mean by a question of marriage, 
aunt?" asked May, uneasily. 

"You will learn that soon enough," returned Mrs. 
Woodcot. 

"But I suppose a husband is not to be forced 
upon me!" 

"You are your own mistress, my love, and can do 
as you please. If you think I have presumed too much 
in regard to Oswcild, I will send him away at once." 

"No, don't do that, aunty. He doesn't trouble me 
in the least. I fear there is some one eise who cannot 
be disposed of so easily." 

"Pray don't ask me any more questions, my love. 
I have told you more than I ought. Thank you a 
thousand times for permjtting Oswald to remain." 



144 HILARY ST. IVES. 

**No thanks are due, for I cannot give him a hope. 
Teil him so, aunty. Ah! here he comes," she exclaimed, 
as the young man was seen advancing towards them 
along the terrace. 

May received him with unaffected kindness, and 
really appeared glad to see him, but after a little con- 
versation on general matters, she excused herseif and 
went into the house. 

"A very affectionate greeting from my fair cousin," 
observed Oswald, as soon as she was gone. "I hope 
I may draw a favourable conclusion from it. Have 
you Said anything to her?" 

"Yes, I have opened the business." 

"Well!" 

"You are allowed to remain — that's something." 

"Everything," he cried, exultingly. "With your 
help, mother, TU win her." 

"Don't be too sanguine, Oswald. We shall have 
to contend with them all. We shall see what effect 
your aunt Radcliffe produces with the Marquis of 
Hartlepool." 



HILARY ST. IVES. I45 



IV. 

A Secret Divulged. 

Later on in the day, a long interview took place 
between Mrs. RadclifFe and May, and when the former 
issued from the room in which she had been closeted 
with her daughter, she looked flushed and angry, and, 
in answer to her husband's inquiries, told him to gQ 
to the wayward girl, and see what he could do with 
her. Mr. RadclifFe at once obeyed the mandate. 

"Your mamma has sent me to you, my love," he 
Said, as he entered the room, "to reinforce the argu- 
ments she has used in favour of the splendid offer that 
has just been made you, but I wish you at once to 
understand that I shall leave you entirely to foUow the 
dictates of your own heart." 

"Thank you, dearest papa. This is only what I 
expected from you. Without reference to this particular 
proposal — the importance of which I feel as much as 
mamma or yourself — I wish to ask you a question: do 
you think I ought to marry?" 

"I have no hesitation in answering the question in 
the affirmative," he replied. "I think you ought. Your 
long and utter seclusion from society has given me, I 
will now confess, considerable uneasiness, and I shall 
rejoice at your restoration to the world. I shall rejoice 
still more to see you wedded to one deserving of you, 

/ftlary St. Ives. II. IQ 



146 HILARY ST. IVES. 

and on whom you can bestow your afFections. In the 
choice you may make, consult your own feelings, and 
do not be governed by our wishes. Much may be said 
in favour of the present oifer, and if rank and splendour 
weigh with you, accept the Marquis of Hartlepool. Bat 
I question whether you would not be happier with one 
of less exalted position. However, decide for yourself. 
You look as if you had something to say to me," he 
added, in a kind and encouraging tone. 

May remained silent. The colour mounted to her 
cheeks, but she soon became pale again. 

"Speak, my dear child — speak," he said. "You 
need have no Secrets from me.*' 

"I will make a füll confession to you, dearest 
papa," she rejoined. "I will let you know the exact 
State of my feelings. But I fear you will be displeased." 

"Have no such fear,'' he rejoined, kindly. 

Taking a small velvet tabouret, she knelt down upon 
it beside him, and looked up into his face. 

"You look like my child of former days! " he cried, 
presaing his lips to her fair brow. 

"I would go back to former days," she rejoined. 
"You may remember, dearest papa, that at first I was 
strangely insensible to Sir Charles's noble qualities and 
devotion. I was blinded by a feeling for another which 
had taken possession of me. Fortunately, I was able 
to crush it. But of late that feeling has revived, and 
unless I can conquer it as I did before, it will over- 
power my resolutions, and in spite of mysplf I shall 
love again." 



HILARY ST. IVES. I47 

" You are in love already, I perceive," he observed, 
smiling. "Well, who has resumed his mastery over 
your heart?" 

"I will have no concealment from you, dearest 
papa. The person whose image will recur to me in 
spite of all my efforts to banish it, is Hilary St. Ives — 
Colonel Delacombe's adopted son." 

"Ha!" exclaimed her father, as if a bullet had 
pierced his breast, while May, surprised and alaxmed 
at the extreme agitation he displayed, regretted having 
divulged her secret. 

"Have you seen him?" cried the agonised father. 
"Have you had any communication with him? Is he 
aware of the State of your feelings towards him?" 

"How is that possible, dearest papa? He has been 
abroad, as you know, for many months, and during 
the whole of that time I have neither heard from him 
nor written to him. He was never aware that I took 
the slightest interest in him." 

"Thank Heaven!" exclaimed Mr. Radcliflfe, greatly 
reüeved. "You must think of him no more, May." 

"Your Prohibition is strangely at variance with your 
late kind expressions. You said I ought to consult my 
own feelings." 

"But I never dreamed of this young man, or I 
should have wamed you against him. I warn you 
now," he cried, solemnly. "There are reasons why 
you can never marry him." 

"What are they, papa?" 

IG* 



148 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"I can enter into no explanation," he rejoined, 
with a sternness to which she was wholly unaccustomed. 

"But, dearest papa, teil me your objections to him. 
Perhaps they can be removed." 

"Never! — they never can be removed. Banish 
every thought of him. If you would not incur my 
serious displeasnre, May, you will never mention his 
name again." 

Then pushing her firom him, he arose, and muttered 
to himself, "What have I done to deserve this torture? 
— why should I be placed in this cruel Situation?" 

She watched him with alarm, unable to compre- 
hend the cause of his violent emotion, but confident in 
his love she came softly towards him, and took his 
hand. 

"There is something more in this than the circum- 
stances Warrant," she said, looking entreatingly at him. 
"Teil me, I beseech you, what it is." 

"I cannot," he replied, emphatically. "The subject 
is too painful to be further discussed. My sentiments 
have totally changed since our converse began. I am 
now of opinion that you ought to accept the splendid 
ofFer you have received." 

"But, papa, I do not love the marquis, and do not 
care for the title." 

"Love will come in time, and the title will gratify 
my pride. That ought to be sufficient for you. It is 
my wish that you should become Marchioness of Hartle- 
pool." 



HILARY ST. IVES. 14g 

"I have never disobeyed you, dearest papa " 

"Then obey me now." 

And he quitted the room, leaving her in a State 
almost of stupefaction at his inexplicable conduct. 



150 HILARY ST. IVES. 



V. 

Mrs. Sutton's Confession. 

That day May could not follow her ordinary oc- 
cupations. Her mind was unsettled, and it seemed as 
if she had quite lost the serenity which she had only 
recently regained. 

To one person only could she confide her griefs, 
and towards evening she went in search of her. 

Quitting the garden, where she had been Walking 
by herseif for some time, she entered the park, and, 
descending the slopes, tr9.cked a path which led her 
through a grove of chesnuts, and eventually brought 
her to a private gate, through which she passed out 
into the road. 

Descending the hill, she soon reached her destina- 
tion — a secluded little cottage, Standing by the road- 
side, covered by roses and eglantines. 

This humble dwelling was occupied by an old 
dame, one of ^her pensioners, but it was not to see 
Widow Perrins that she had come thither. Her ap- 
proach was perceived by some one inside, and as she 
drew near the door was opened by Mrs. Sutton, who 
expressed great pleasure at seeing her, and ushered 
her into a little room, which was furnished very simply, 
but looked extremely clean and tidy. 

"How very Viud oi ^om, ^^-sä^ \,q ^ome and see 



HILARY ST. IVES. I5I 

me,'* Said Mrs. Sutton, offering her a seat. **I have 
been expecting you all day. Dame Perrins is in her 
own room, and won't disturb us. You can talk freely, 
for, as you know, she is so deaf that she can't hear a 
Word we say. I perceive from your looks that you 
have something to teil me. If you want advice, be 
sure I will give you the best in my power." 

"I am very unhappy, Sutton," replied May — "very 
unhappy indeed. But I know that I shall obtain from 
my dear old nurse, who loves me as fondly as ever, 
the sympathy which every one eise denies me." 

And she then proceeded to relate circumstantially 
all that had occurred — describing her mother's dis- 
pleasure at her unwillingness to accept the Marquis of 
Hartlepool's ofFer, and her father's explosion of rage 
at her confession of a secret love for Hilaxy-^to all of 
which Mrs. Sutton listened with profound interest. 

"You will now understand why I am so unhappy, 
dear Sutton," said May, in conclusion. **I know not 
what to do. My desire is to live at Boxgrove quietly — 
but they will not let me rest. Whether I shall have 
strength to resist the combination against me, I cannot 
teil. I fear not. Papa, upon whose Support I counted, 
deserts me. As I have told you, he*authoritatively 
enjoins me to abandon all idea of Hilary. What can 
be his motive for the prohibition I cannot teil, but I 
am sure he is inflexible." 

"I will explain his motive," replied Mrs. Sutton, 
after a pause. ** There must be no further concealment. 
You will abhor me when you learn what I have doixe. 



152 HILARY ST. IVES. 

I am the cause of your father's antipathy to Hilary. I 
have poisoned his mind — made him believe that the 
young man is too nearly allied to you ever to be your 
husband — in a word, that his mother is your mother." 

Shocked beyond all expression, May could scarcely 
credit what sh^ had heard. For some moments she 
could not speak, but at last she exclaimed, 

"Oh, Sutton, if any one but yourself had told me 
this, I would not have believed it. What instigated 
you to such dreadful wickedness?" 

"Jealousy. I always hated your mother." 

May looked at her with amazement. 

"And you avow this to me, who know that mamma 
showed you nothing but kindness." 

"Her kindness increased my hatred. My natura 
is evil. Having the means of vengeance in my power, 
I used them as I have told you. The charge was falsa 
in every way — doubly false from me.'* 

"Why from you?" demanded May, appalled by 
her language and demeanour. 

"Because the young man in question is my own 
son," replied Mrs. Sutton. 

"Your son!" exclaimed May, horror-stricken, and 
sinking back in 1;he chair. 

"Oh! if you knew the terrible remorse I have falt 
for my crime, you would pity and perhaps forgive me," 
exclaimed the wretched woman. 

"Expect neither pity nor forgiveness from me," 
cried May, shuddering as she regarded her. "The in- 
caJculable misery yo\x Wn^ c-ax^^^ ^ouLd check any 



HILARY ST. IVES. 153 

such feelings. But answer me one question. You 
have declared that Hilary is your son. Were you 
married to his father?" 

"As Heaven shall judge me — yes! It was a secret 
marriage, and productive of nothing but misery both 
to myself and to him I had wedded. He thought me 
beneath him, and was ashamed of me. But he knew 
not, and knows not to this hour, that my family is 
better than his own. I would willingly draw a veil 
over this portion of my unhappy life. But I must refer 
to it. Not many months after my marriage my husband 
left me. I knew he would never return. I knew I 
had not his love. I knew he wished to get rid of me, 
for he had told me so, and I was just as anxious to be 
freed from him. I devised a plan which would liberate 
US from our fetters without scandal. It was to dis- 
appear from the world. My stratagem succeeded. He 
believed I was drowned in the Severn, and his belief 
remained unshaken tili we met again after many yearS, 
and he recognised in Mrs. Sutton, the housekeeper, the 
wife he had supposed long since dead.*' 

Astounded by the revelations made her, May re- 
mained silent for some minutes. 

"But you have not spoken of your infant son," she 
Said. "How could you abandon him? Had you no 
mother's feelings in your breast?" 

"The sufferings I have endured may, perhaps, serve 
to expiate my unnatural conduct," rejoined the wretched 
woman. "I knew the child was cared for by its father; 
but though I did not dare to make any dix^d v£vq^\t\sä 



154 HILARY ST. IVES, 

from the persons to whom it had been entnisted, I 
ascertained that it was well treated. I did more — but 
alas! not all I might have done. I left my poor child 
to strangers, but they were kinder to him than bis un- 
natural mother." 

Here her utterance was broken by sobs, and she 
was quite overcome by emotion. 

"You say that your family is better than that of 
Colonel Delacombe," observed May. 

"I have spoken the truth," replied Mrs. Sutton. 
**But what does that matter now?" 

"It matters much to your son," replied May. 

"He shall know all it may be needful for him to 
learn," rejoined the inscrutable woman, "but there are 
some things I cannot — will not teil him. I have for- 
feited the right to claim him as a son." 

"How so?" cried May, in fresh perplexity. 

Mrs. Sutton did not heed the question, but con- 
tinued almost fiercely, 

"Imagine the torments I experience when I know 
and feel that I am for ever debarred from a mother's 
Privileges. The ardent love I bear my son will never 
be gratified. When I have stood beside him the efFort 
to stifle my feelings has well nigh killed me. It has 
been said — said fieilsely — ^that the voice of nature will 
always speak out. In him it was mute. Once, when 
he slept, I pressed my lips to bis brow. That is the 
sole solace my mother's heaxt has known. I thought 
he could read my feelings in my looks — but no! no! 
he was utterly insensible. I would give the residue of 



HILARY ST. IVES. 155 

my life for a few words from him; but I shall never 
have it. I do not deserve it. It is retribution — 
retribution.*' 

She pressed her hands to her eyes, and when she 
uncovered her face, it was ghastly white. 

"I shall never know peace on earth," she exclaimed. 
"Life has become a bürden to me, and.the sooner it 
is ended the better. I am only in the way." 

Her utter despair excited May 's compassion, and 
she attempted to oifer some consolation, but the 
wretched woman refused to be comforted. 

Ere long, however, she mastered her emotion, and 
spoke more calmly. 

"I dare not advise you," she said. "Good counsel 
cannot proceed from lips like mine — but your life has 
been so pure and blameless that you are certain to 
meet your reward — just as I have met mine for my 
evil deeds. Obey your father — would I had obeyed 
mine! — obey him, I exhort you, as you would be 
happy, for disobedience will bring down a judgment. 
Teil him all I have told you. Hide nothing from him. 
If he then consents to your marriage with Hilary, all 
will be well. If he forbids it — yield!" 

While they had been thus occupied, evening had 
come on, and it was now almost dark. 

So engrossed were they that neither of them had 
remarked that a listener was outside, who had lost not 
a word of their discourse. A man , who looked like a 
gipsy, had watched May enter the cottage, and stealing 
up to the little lattice window, which, as we have 



156 HILARY ST. IVES. 

intimatedy was covered by creepers, and which un 
luckily was left partially open, had planted himself so 
that he could see and hear what was going on inside. 

What he heard interested him deeply, and he never 
quitted his post tili May, remarking that it was growing 
late, signified her intention of returning. 

He then crept oflf, but concealed himself among 
some tre^s on the opposite side of the road. 

Here he remained perdu tili May came forth with 
Mrs. Sutton, who had insisted on attending her to the 
hall, and he then cautiously followed them. 

Followed them through the gate into the park, and 
through the chesnut grove, where the shade of the 
trees made it sombre. 

May had no fears. But fancying she heard foot- 
steps, she grasped her companion's arm, and the lat- 
ter immediately stopped. They listened for a moment 
or two, but nothing occurring to alarm them, they set 
ofF again. 

Still the man followed. 

As they issued from the grove, the old mansion 
rose before them in all its grandeur, with a crescent 
moon hanging over its summit, tipping the vanes with 
silver. 

Even at that hour, and imperfectly seen, the park 
looked lovely, and as May looked down the long 
sweeping glade, she could just descry the branching 
antlers of the deer, showing where they were couched 
beneath the trees. 

In a very short space of time they had reached the 



HILARY ST. IVES. I57 

garden, and Mrs. Sutton's attendance being no longer 
required, she prepared to take leave. 

During the rapid walk she had scarcely made an 
Observation, but now she had evidently something to 
say, but profound emotion prevented her from giving 
utterance to it. 

"I must now bid you adieu, Sutton," said May. 
*'I feel certain papa will desire an interview with 
you; and if he does, you will not disappoint him, will 
you?" 

"If he wishes to see me I will come — if I can^* 
she replied, with stränge significance. 

" Banish these gloomy thoughts ! " cried May. " Much 
happiness, I trust, is yet in störe for you." 

"No," she replied, in a tone that sounded like a 
knell — "no chance of happiness for me on earth." 

And she hurried away. 

May gazed after her, and could just distinguish 
that shewaved her band, before she disappeared among 
the trees. 

As May hastened towards the house, a scream was 
heard, apparently proceeding from the chesnut grove. 
She listened intently, but there was no second cry. 

Just then a gardener came up. He had heard no 
scream, but instantly ran off to the chesnut grove. In 
less than ten minutes he came back with the assurance 
that her alarm was groundless. He had been as far 
as the gate, and had seen no one. 

Early next morning, May, who could not free her- 
seif from uneasiness, set out to make inquiries con- 



158 HILARY ST. IVES. 

cerning Mrs. Sutton. The morning was so exquisite 
that it might have tempted her forth, even if she had 
had no particular object in view. Everything wore a 
smiling aspect, the charming old-fashioned garden, 
with its smooth lawns, its variegated flower-beds, and 
its alleys — ^the park with its long glades, its clumps of 
trees and thickets. The deer were trooping down the 
slopes, the rooks cawing loudly in the trees, and the 
groves vocal with melody. The exhilarating feeling 
which such a morning always inspires did not fail in 
its eflfect on May. 

Heedless of the heavy dew upon the sward, she 
speeded towards the chesnut grove, but before reaching 
' it she was cheered by the sight of Mrs. Sutton, and 
quickened her pace to meet her. 

"Oh, Sutton," she exclaimed, "I am so glad to 
see you safe and well. After you left me last night, 
I heard a scream,* and fancied it might proceed from 
you." 

"Yes. A ruffian stopped me in the grove, and 
threatened me, but fled when I cried out for help. I 
have not yet recovered from the fright he caused me. 
The villain had been lurking near the cottage, and 
overheard what passed between us. His motive for 
stopping me was to extort money. I defied him, and 
he threatened me. But it will not be safe for me to 
remain longer here. I was Coming in search of you 
to teil you this. I thought I should find you in the 
garden." 



HILARY ST. IVES. 150 

"But what have you to fear from this villain, But- 
ton? He will not dare to molest you further/' 

"No, I cannot remain," she replied. "I dare not. 
I know not whither I shall go. I have no fixed plan. 
But I will write and let you know where a letter will 
reach me.'' 

"Come with me to the house now, and await 
papa's arrival. He will be here this morning. You 
can then give him the necessary explanation." 

"No, not now," she rejoined. "It would be 
hazardous for me to remain here." And she added, 
hastily, "I shrink from a meeting with your mother, 
and I could scarcely avoid encountering her." 

At this moment a blithe shout was heard. It pro- 
ceeded from Oswald, who had just issued forth into 
the park, and descried them. On seeing him Mrs. 
Sutton bade the young lady a hurried farewell, and 
plunged into the grove. 

-Luckily Oswald had not recogriised Mrs. Sutton. 
Besides, he was too eager to take advantage of the op- 
portunity now ofFered him to waste a moment in idle 
discourse. 

Poor fellow! he went over the old ground — made 
the same protestations of undying affection that he 
made a year ago, and with pretty nearly the same re- 
sult — the only difFerence being that May did not laugh' 
at him as she used to do formerly, but, on the con- 
trary, looked grave. 

Still he would not be discouraged, but implored 
her so earnestly and so humbly to accord him a fev( 



l6o HILARY ST. IVES. 

days' grace, and not reject him summarily, that she 
assented. 

"Give me a week," he cried. "At the end of that 
time, if you do not change your mind, I will retire for 
ever. But promise not to accept any one eise in the 
interim/' 

"You have no right to ask for such a promise, 
Oswald," she replied. "Nevertheless, I give it." 

Transported with delight, he took her hand, and 
would have kissed it, if he had dared. 

"You must not presume upon my good nature, 
Oswald," she said, coldly. "I do not give you a 
hope." 

Hp did not hazard a reply, lest he should mar bis 
prospects, which he thought were brightening. 



HILARY ST. IVES. l6l 



VI. 

The Marquis of Hartlepool. 

Mrs. Radcliffe's letter (as perhaps was intended 
by the writer) was forwarded by Lady Richborough to 
the Marquis of Hartlepool , accompanied by a litüe 
billet from her ladyship, recommending him to go down 
to Hazlemere, and carry on bis suit in person, and 
assuring him that the Radcliffes would be delighted to 
see him. 

The marquis acted upon the advice, and, having 
previously written to announce bis Coming, was re- 
ceived by Mr. Radcliffe with all the consideration due 
to bis high rank. Of course, preparations had been 
made for him, and a few of the best people in the 
neighbourhood were invited to meet him at dinner. 

From her previous acquaintance with the marquis's 
character, Mrs. Radcliffe had been rather alarmed at 
the idea of having him as a guest, but he soon set her 
at her ease. All prejudices against him on the score 
of coxcombry were speedily dispelled. No longer 
hau^ty and supercilious, bis manner was almost cap- 
tivating; while bis personal appearance seemed also 
improved, and Mrs. Radcliffe wondered how she could 
ever have thought him otherwise than handsome. 

Mr. Radcliffe, who had certainly no predilection 
for him, was not proof against the charm of bis man- 

HiUry st Ives. II, II 



102 HILARY ST. IVES. 

ner, but confessed to Mr. Thomton that he was most 
agreeably surprised. 

But the marquis's most signal triumph was over 
Oswald ,' who dined that day Hazlemere, and was forced 
to admit that bis noble rival was a most agreeable 
person. It is true that the marquis paid him particular 
attention, and flattered bis vanity. 

Lady Richborough had arrived just before dinner, 
having received a telegraphic message from Mrs. Rad- 
cliffe begging her to come down, and though she had 
engagements in town, she good-naturedly gave them 
up, and complied. 

One person, however, successfuUy resisted the 
marquis's fascinations, and viewed bis conduct with a 
jaundiced eye. Miss Woodcot feit angry with Oswald 
for allowing himself to be seduced by bis rivaFs man- 
ner, and prepared to give him a severe lecture for bis 
foUy when they were alone. 

Needless, we tbink, to State that May was not pres- 
ent. No persuasions could indüce her to join the 
dinner, but she reluctantly consented to receive the 
marquis on the following day at Boxgrove. 

After dinner the marquis had a long tete-ä-tete 
with the lady of the house, Bnd told her how passion- 
ately enamoured he was of her daughter. Mrs. Rad- 
cliffe gave him every encouragement in her power, and 
almost ventured to answer for May. With the prestige 
of bis high rank, bis charming manner, and genuine 
passion, she thought he must prove irresistible. 

Girandpapa was in a State of perfect beatitude as 



HILARY ST. IVES. 163 

he drove back that night to Boxgrove, and could not 
find terms sufficiently strong to express his admiration 
of the marquis. 

Mrs. Woodcot ventured to differ with him, but was 
put down instantly, and Oswald was bidden to hold 
his tongue, unless he could say something to the 
purpose. 

"I won't hear a word against him," cried Mr. 
Thornton. "He is the best specimen of a noblefnan 
I ever met with. May is the luckiest girl alive to have 
secured him, and I shall be the proudest old fellow in 
England when I am grandfather — as I soon shall be — 
to the Marchioness of Hartlepool — -ha! ha! ha!" 

It will be Seen that our convivial old friend had 
not neglected the claret. 

So far everything seemed propitious to the marquis. 
The aflFair was in excellent train, and promised a most 
satisfactory result. Never had Mrs. Radcliffe been in 
better spirits than at breakfast on the following morn- 
ing. She had almost reached the height of her ambi- 
tion, and could scarcely contain her delight. Her 
great desire now was that May should be married 
without delay. 

About noon, an open carriage conveyed the whole 
party to Boxgrove. The day was singularly auspicious, 
and the park could not possibly have been seen to 
greater advantage. 

The marquis was enraptured by its beauty. He 
had two large parks of his own, but neither of them 
could be compared to this magnificent domain. Lady 

II* 



164 HILARY ST. IVES. 

Richborough, who was with Mrs. Radcliffe in the 
barouche, excited his enthusiasm by pointing out the 
Chief beauties of the place, and drew his attention to 
some of the oldest trees. 

They were still slowly mounting the steep hill, 
when May, who was taking her exercise in the park, 
accompanied by Oswald and grandpapa, rode towards 
them, and with infinite grace and courtesy welcomed 
her visitor. 

The marquis was a little disconcerted by this un- 
expected meeting, having prepared himself for a more 
ceremonious reception, but he did not allow his dis- 
appointment to appear. 

Unluckily the fine Speeches he intended to deliver 
had to be postponed to a more fitting opportunity, and 
he was obliged to confine himself to commonplace 
observations. However, he rattled away in a very 
lively manner, and if he did not interest May, he 
amused her. 

The young lady rode by the side of the carriage 
as far as the gates, and then left her noble suitor to 
the care of grandpapa, and continued her exercise in 
the park; nor did she reappear tili the gong had 
sounded for luncheon. In his eflforts'to please her, the 
marquis was materially aided by Myrtilla, but though 
he exerted himself to the utmost, he feit that he had 
not made much progress. 

Both Mrs. Radcliflfe and Lady Richborough were 
convinced that May would not grant him the tete- 
ä-t^te he so ardently desired, and they therefore agreed 



HILARY ST. iVES. 165 

to contrive it. But Oswald was on the alert to defeat 
their object. 

After luncheon, Myrtilla suggested that they should 
Visit the gallery, the marquis having expressed a wish 
to See the family portraits. Of course May assented, 
and they all repaired thither. 

Naturally familiär with the histories of her ancestors 
and ancestresses , Lady Richborough described several 
of the portraits, but seizing an opportunity when May 
was engaged in conversation with the marquis, she 
made her escape, and left them together. 

The precious moment was not lost. Instantly 
changing his discourse, the marquis began to plead his 
suit in impassioned terms, but before he had ended, 
Oswald joined them, and, regardless of the annoyance 
which he evidently caused his noble rival, remained. 



166 HILARY ST. IVES. 



VII. 

An unexpected Arrival. 

While the little incident just narrated took place 
in the portrait-gallery, a stranger had arrived at the 
mansion. 

A tall, dark-complexioned, good-looking young 
man, well-dressed, and of distinguished appearance. 
He inquired for Lady Richborough, stating that he had 
been to Hazlemere, but not finding her, had walked on 
to Boxgrove. He then gave Mr. Dancer, the butler, a 
letter, requesting him to deliver it to her ladyship, and 
say that the bearer, Mr. Hilary St. Ives, begged the 
favour of an interview with her. 

Mr. Dancer bowed most respectfuUy, and conduct- 
ing him to the library, left him there, and proceeded 
on his errand. 

Now it chanced, at the moment Mr. Dancer entered 
the gallery, that Lady Richborough was engaged in 
conversation with the marquis, and not wishing to 
disturb her, the butler did not immediately go forward, 
and while thus stationed attracted May's attention. 
Fancying he wanted to speak to her, she went towards 
him, and on hearing his errand hastened down to the 
iibrary, without staying to make any excuses to the 
marquis for her suddeiv ^Y^'a.^^^'arÄXÄÄ. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 167 

She found Hilary Standing near the open if'rench 
window, looking out upon the smooth lawn and the 
lovely parterres. He bowed formally as he advanced 
to meet her. 

"I am aware that you expected to see Lady Rich- 
borough, Mr. St. Ives," she said, saluting him. "I 
have hurried down before her because I have some- 
thing to say to you." 

"I feel much flattered," he replied, again bowing 
gravely. "I did not suppose that I lived in your re- 
coUection." 

"I never forget those I have known and at all 
cared for," she rejoined; "and there are circumstances 
connected with your brief stay at Hazlemere which 
will always make me take an interest in you. I hope 
you bring good accounts of Colonel Delacombe." 

"Alas! no, I am sorry to say," he replied, sadly. 
"He is detained in Paris by a fresh attack of the low 
fever which he caught at Rome. He is most anxious 
to retum to England, but his physician will not allow 
him to move at present. He has, therefore, despatched 
me to transact some business for him, and amongst 
other things has charged me with a letter to Lady 
Richborough, which must plead my excuse for my 
present intrusion." 

"May I ask if the letter you have brought relates 
in any way to Mrs. Sutton? You can speak freely to 



me. 



"I am not acquainted with its exact Contents, but 
I know it refers to some important itvforavaXvöw ^\ä.^ 



i 



l68 HILARY ST. IVES. 

the colonel hopes that her ladyship may be instrumental 
in obtaining from Mrs. Sutton." 

"Are you aware that Mrs. Sutton has left Hazle- 
mere?" 

"Yes. But Colonel Delacombe thinks that Lady 
Richborough, or your mother, may enable me to dis- 
cover her retreat." 

"Neither of tbem can enable you to discover it," 
rejoined May. v 

"Then my object is frustrated," he cried, with a 
look of deep disappointment. 

"Perhaps I can help you to find her/' said May. 
" But do not let me raise your hopes too highly. There 
are difficulties in the way, as you will perceive. I must 
teil you in confidence, that for some weeks Mrs. Sutton 
has been living in absolute retirement in a secluded 
little cottage near the park — with my consent and with 
my knowledge. But she intended to leave yesterday. 
She had a motive for her sudden departure, and re- 
fused to teil me whither she was going; but I think 
she will write to me soon." 

"Possibly she may not yet have left," cried Hilary, 
eagerly. "It is important that I should see her without 
delay. Will you direct me to the cottage?" 

"Readily. It is situated on the skirts of the park, 
close to the large chesnut grove on the left, which you 
can see from this window, and is occupied by Widow 
Perrins. You must teil the old dame that I have sent 
you, or you will learn nothing from her," 



HILARY ST. IVES. lÖQ 

"I will return immediately," said Hilary. "Pray 
make my excuses to Lady Richborough." 

Passing through the open window, he stepped out 
upon the lawn, and gained the terrace, when a loud 
halloo checked him, and turning he perceived Mr. 
RadclifFe. 

"What the devil are you doing here, sir?'' voci- 
ferated that gentleman. **Stop, and give an account 
of yourself." 

Though disinclined to obey, Hilary nevertheless 
halted. 

"Lady Richborough or your daughter will acquaifit 
you with my business here, sir," he remarked, 
haughtily. 

"Ah, indeed! Pray have you seen Miss Rad- 
cliffe?" 

"I have had that honour, sir," replied the young 
man. "I must beg you to excuse me just now. I 
am in haste. On my return, I shall be at your dis- 
posal." 

"You must not return, sir. I cannot allow you to 
see my daughter again. I cannot allow you to re- 
enter the house. Am I sufficiently explicit? — or must 
I warn you of the premises?" 

"Warn me ofF the premises ! " cried Hilary, fiercely. 
"You now efFectually prevent my departure. I do not 
propose to leave at your bidding. Till this moment I 
was under the impression that Miss Radcliffe was 
mistress of Boxgroye, but it seems that you exercise 
paramount authority here/' 



170 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"As Miss Radcliffe's father, I am the best judge of 
those whom she ought to receive. I disapprove of 
you, sir, and therefore peremptorily forbid your return. 
With my sanction you should never have entered the 
house." 

"Mr. Radcliflfe," said Hilary, sternly, "I cannot 
believe you capable of acting in this extraordinary 
manner without some provocation. Having given you 
none, I seek in vain for a motive for your excessive 
rudeness, but as a gentleman you owe me an explana- 
tion, atid shall render it." 

"Pörhaps I have spoken too strongly," replied the 
other, moderating bis tone. "Let me, then, say that 
your presence here is calculated not merely to cause 
me annoyance, but great pain." 

"I understand it now," thought Hilary. "He has 
discovered the terrible secret." 

All anger at once disappeared from the young 
man's countenance, and gave place to profound sym- 
pathy. 

"You have said enough, Mr. Radcliffe," he ob- 
served. "I will obey you. When you leam my motive 
for Coming here from Lady Richborough, you will not 
blame me. Let me assure you — since it may be a 
satisfaction to you to know it — that I did not seek an 
interview with your daughter. It was by accident 
that I saw her, and the few words that passed between 
US referred to Mrs. Sutton, of whom I am in search.'' 

"You are in search of Mrs. Sutton!" cried Mr. 
JRadclifFe, quicWy . "^SiCa ^V^\. Oo^e^^'l" 



HILARY ST. IVES. l^I 

"Pardon me, sir. I cannot satisfy your curiosity." 

"Have you heard from her? Do you know where 
she is?" 

"I have come here for information respecting 
her." 

"We know nothing of her. She has left Hazlemere 
several months ago. I have made many fniitless 
attempts to find her." 

"Perhaps I may be more fortunate," said the 
young man, raising his hat. "I wish you good day, 
sir." 

Mr. Radcliflfe did not attempt to stop him, for at 
the moment May and Lady Richborough issued forth 
from the library window. 

"What have you done with Mr. St. Ives, sir?" said 
her ladyship, as she came up. "He has brought me a 
letter which requires an answer." 

"He will be back presently," observed May. 

"I don't think he will," said Mr. Radcliffe. "I 
shall be very much surprised if he toakes his appear- 
ance here again." 

"What have you said to him, papa?" cried May, 
in consternation. 

"Quite enough to prevent his return," remarked 
Mr. Radcliflfe, drily. "I have a decided objection to 
the young man. Besides, his appearance .at this 
juncture is excessively inopportune." 

"Yes, I quite admit that," observed Myrtilla. "And 
perhaps it is as well he is gone. He might have 
caused some unpleasantness. You must really take 



lyZ HILARY ST. IVES. 

your daughter to task, Mr. RadclifFe. She has behaved 
infamously, and if the marquis were not the most 
amiable creature alive, and devotedly attached to her, 
he could not fail to have taken offence." 

"What have I done?" said May. 

"Everything in your power to defeat our plans. 
Your almost show the marquis that you are indifferent 
to him. You will not grant him a t^te-ä-tete. You 
allow that grand brouillon, Oswald, to interrupt him, 
just as he is making a declaration; and when I have 
set matters straight you run away from him alto- 
gether.*' 

"My excuse is that I wished to speak to Mr. St. 
Ives," replied May. 

"Will your ladyship now blame me for dismissing 
the young man so unceremoniously?" cried Mr. Rad- 
cliflfe, 

"Far from it. I think you acted very properly — 
very judiciously. Really, my love, we have had rather 
too much nonsense this morning. It is time to be a 
little sensible. Perhaps you may not have any very 
strong liking for the Marquis of Hartlepool — nor is it 
absolutely necessary that you should be in love with 
him — but you must allow that he is very agreeable, 
and if not positively handsome, is the next thing to it 
He has a thousand recommendations, which I could 
enumerate if I had time, but they may be all summed 
up in the fact that he has the power of making you a 
marchioness. We all desire the alliance — papa, mamma, 
grandpapa, myself — we all urge it — and if you prove 



i 



ÖILARY ST. IVES* I73 

rebeliious, we shall insist — yes, insist upon compliance 
with our wishes. Have I said more than I ought, Mr. 
Radcliffe?" 

"Not a Word," he rejoined. "I hoped that a very 
diflferent reception would have been given to the mar- 
quis," Then turning to May, he added authoritatively, 
"If you refuse him, I will never forgive you." 

DisregEirding her entreating looks, he walked away. 

"You must extricate me from this dilemma, Myr- 
tilla," cried May. "I will not be forced into a marriage 
against my inclinations." 

"Don't expect the slightest sympathy from me, my 
love. I am dead against you. You are in no di- 
lemma. Your course is perfectly clear; and every- 
body, except Oswald and his mother, will blame you 
if you do not take it. But here comes the marquis. 
Attend to what your papa has said to you." 

Presently, the Marquis of Hartlepool came up äc- 
companied by Mrs. Radcliffe and Mr. Thornton. May 
was obliged to ofFer some apologies for quitting him 
so abruptly in the portrait-gallery, and though annoyed 
by the treatment he had experienced, he was easily 
appeased. 

Resolved to bring the affair to an immediate issue, 
Lady Richborough suggested an extension of their 
promenade, and they stroUed on in the direction of 
the yew-tree alley. 

To prevent May's escape Myrtilla took her arm, 
and very soon engaged the marquis in a lively dis- 
course, which enabled him indirectly to renew his siöt^ 



174 HILARY ST. IVES. 

They were left to themselves, for Mrs. RadclifFe and 
grandpapa, who comprehended Myrtilla's tactics, dis- 
creetly kept back. 

Unquestionably there is something in a dim yew- 
tree alley favourable to utterances of love, but the pres- 
ence of a third person is not calculated to heighten 
their efFect. This marquis's protestations being inter- 
cepted by Myrtilla, failed to move May, and though 
her silence might have been construed into assent, 
her looks betrayed her indiflference. They had nearly 
reached the further end of the alley, when a tall dark 
figure suddenly appeared before them. Recognising the 
unwelcome intruder, Lady Richborough endeavoured 
to get rid of him. 

"Pray go to the house, Mr. St. Ives," she cried. 
"I will join you almost immediately, I want to talk to 
you about the coloneFs letter." 

"Your ladyship must excuse me," he said. "After 
what has passed between Mr. RadclifFe and myself, I 
cannot re-enter the house." 

"Have you seen her?" inquired May, in a low 
tone. 

"No," he replied. "I merely returned to let you 
know that my search has been unsuccessful." 

"I am so sorry I cannot aid you further," she re- 
joined. "But you must not go tili I have had some 
explanation with papa." 

"You are very kind. I cannot remain longer." 

And he turned to depart, but was arrested by the 
ll^quis of Hartlepool. 



HILARY ST. IVES. I 75 

"Stop! stop, my dear fellow," cried the latter. 
"You shall not go without shaking hands with me. 
Not expecting to see you here, I did not recognise you 
at first. How are you, and how is my worthy friend, 
the colonel?" 

"Do you know Mr. St. Ives?** exclaimed May, sur- 
prised. 

"Kjiow him! I ought to do. He is my preserver." 

"Your preserver! What do you mean, marquis?*' 

"Yes, I repeat, my preserver. He saved my life 
last winter at Rome. I will teil you the story in two 
words." 

"Not now, I beg," said Hilary. 

"Yes, now," cried Myrtilla. 

"Thus it happened. One moonlight night, duiing 
a Visit to the Coliseum, I was set upon by brigands, 
who had concealed themselves in the passages. My 
dastardly valet-de-place abandoned me, and I should 
certainly have been assassinated but for the gallant 
assistance rendered me by Mr. St. Ives. There were 
three of them — three athletic ruffians — and he had only 
a stout stick against their stilettoes. But he beat them 
oflf tili the arrival of the sentinel." 

" You greatly overrate the Service, my dear marquis," 
said Hilary. 

"Impossibleto overrate it," replied the other. "You 
have laid me under an etemal Obligation. But you 
have not answered my inquiries about the colonel. 
Where is he?" 

** Still in Paris. I shall have good news for him 



176 HlLARY ST. IVES. 

when I ga back. It will deligbt him to hear of the 
alliance you are about to form. Accept my congratula- 
tions." 

"Would I were in a position to accept them," re- 
plied the marquis, glancing at May. 

"I fear I have been indiscreet," observed Hilary 
to Lady Richborough. 

"A little so, perhaps," she rejoined. "Your ap- 
pearance was rather mal ä propos. But the affair may 
be considered settled." 

"I am glad to hear it," said Hilary. "Adieu, my 
dear marquis. I need not wish you success, for I 
know your cause is won." 

And bowing around, he departed. 



HILARY ST. IVES. I 77 



VIII. 

How Hilary found the Person he sought, 

HiLARY did not leave the neighbourhood of Box- 
grove. After a little debate with himself, he returned 
to the cottage, and asked the old dame whether she 
could accommodate him for the night, At first she 
hesitated, but at length said he might have the room 
which had been occupied by her late lodger, and took 
him to it. It was very simply furnished, but scrupulously 
clean. In one corner there was a ehest, which im- 
mediately caught his eye, and he feit sure it belonged 
to Mrs. Sutton. On questioning the good dame as to 
the State of her larder, he found that it would be ne- 
cessary to seek a meal elsewhere. Luckily, this was 
easy of accomplishment. Within half an hour's walk, 
there was a well-known inn, much resorted to by visitors 
from town on account of its picturesque Situation , and 
at this comfortable hotel he knew from former ex- 
perience he could get a good dinner. Accordingly, 
he set out thither. 

Having dined very satisfactorily , he came forth, 
and was Standing at the door of the inn, conversing 
with the landlord, when a well-appointed barouche 
came in sight. It was Mrs. Radcliffe's carriage, and 
with her were Lady Richborough and the Marquis of 
Hartlepool. 

Ift/ary SA Ives. II, ^'^ 



178 HILARY ST, IVES. 

No sooner did the marquis descry Hilary than he 
stopped the carriage, and beckoning to him, said, in a 
low voice, as the young man came up, 

"You may now really congratulate me. The thing 
positively is settled." 

We are not sure that the announcement did not 
cause a sharp pang in the breast of the hearer, but he 
forced a smile, and declared he was delighted. 

"I owe everything to Lady Richborough," pursued 
the marquis. "She has won me my bride." 

''Expedited matters a little, that is all, my dear 
marquis," observed Myrtilla. "The wooing might have 
been more tedious without me." 

"And might not have ended as it has done," cried 
the marquis. 

"Her ladyship has a vast deal more influenae with 
May than I have, so I would not interfere," observed 
Mrs. Radcliffe. 

"Well, I am quite willing to take all the credit 
you give me," said Myrtilla, smiling. "Don't you 
think I have reason to feel proud of my success, Mr. 
St. Ives?" 

"Indeed I do," he replied. "But I did not sup- 
pose the marquis required any advocacy." 

"You are very much mistaken, my dear fellow," 
cried the other. "I almost began to despair, when 
Lady Richborough put in a word, and all difjQculties 
vanished as if by magic." 

"Her ladyship must be an enchantress — I have al- 
ways thought so," remarked Hilary, gallantly. 



r 



HILARY ST. IVES. 17^ 

"1 am so sorry we can't take you on with us to 
Hazlemere/' remarked Mrs. RadclifFe. "Nothing would 
have given me greater pleasure than to see you there, 
had circumstances permitted/' 

"Don't say another word, I entreat," rejoined the 
young man. "I am overjoyed by the intelligence I 
have just received, and hope, ere long, to have some 
good news to communicate to you in return. Mr. 
RadclifFe's prejudices against me will soon, I trust, be 
removed." 

With this he bowed and retired, and the carriage 
went on. 

In asserting that he \^as overjoyed, Hilary had 
belied his feelings. The intelligence had greatly dis- 
turbed him. He had not recovered when Mr. Malham 
drove up in his gig, and, alighting, greeted him cor- 
dially. 

"What, are you come to look at us again, Mr. 
St. Ives?'' Said the surgeon. "We have had many 
changes since I saw you last, and more are likely to 
occur, We have lost your excellent nurse, Mrs, Sutton." 

"So it seems. Can you teil me what has become 
of her?'' asked Hilary. 

"I wish I could. But I have no idea where she is 
gone. I never could understand why she left Hazle- 
mere, but the house has not been like itself since. 
Mrs. Trapp, the present housekeeper, is not to be 
compared to her. Mrs. Sutton, as you may remember, 
had quite the air of a lady. It was her own fault, Vm 
persuaded, that she didn't marry well." 

12* 



i80 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"Yes, Fve heard so," remarked the landlord, who 
was Standing by. "She was certainly a superior wo- 
man." 

"Superior? Yes, I believe you. She was superior 
to any one in this neighbourhood. I'm afraid we shall 
never have her back/' 

"Tm by no means sure that she ain't back ah-eady," 
remarked the landlord. 

*'What do you mean, Crowder?" demanded the 
surgeon. 

.**Why, Frank Mowatt, one of the Boxgrove keepers, 
who was here just now, told me he saw her this very 
morning, soon after daylight, near the park, and other 
folks have seen her," 

"Not likely, that," cried Mr. Malham, incredulously. 
"Mr. RadclifFe would have heard of her return, and so 
should I, if there were any truth in the report." 

"Well, Mowatt declared he saw her, that's all I 
know," remarked Crowcier. 

"Send him to me," cried the surgeon. "I'll give 
him a guinea if he can satisfy me she has come back." 

Nodding to Hilary, he then entered the house with 
the landlord. 

Having already paid his reckoning, the young man 
walked away at a leisurely pace, meditating upon the 
Information he had thus accidentally obtained. 

The Fox and Hounds, where Hilary had dined, is 

situated at the foot of a hill which forms part of the 

same ränge as Boxgrove, being divided from the latter 

by a lovely valley, 1\vtom^ ^\a.Oö.^xww^ a celebrated 



HILARY ST. IVES. l8l 

fishing-stream. The Valley abounds in fine timber of 
various kinds, and on the banks of the river, and close 
to an old stone.bridge that Grosses it within a bow- 
shot of the inn, grows a row of tall Lombardy poplars. 

Viewed from this bridge the scene, which com- 
prehended the woody heights of Boxgrove and the an- 
cient mansion that crowned them, was perfect. The 
noble park and the stately mansion had a stränge 
fascination for Hilary. While sketching in the park, 
he had familiarised himself with the locality, and 
stamped its beauties so forcibly on his memory that 
they had ever afterwards haunted him. As he now 
gazed upon the enchanting prospect from the little 
bridge, the temptation to revisit these fair sylvan scenes 
was irresistible. 

Descending from the bridge to the meadows, and 
following the course of the river for a few hundred 
yards, he Struck into a footpath, which brought him to 
the outskirts of the park, and Clearing the pales, he 
was presently in the midst of the thicket that clothed 
this side of the hill. 

Familiär with the spot, he knew where to seek to . 
strike towards the path that led to the uplands, and 
pushed on without the slightest misgiving. The thicket 
had charms of its own that might have delayed him 
had he not wished to reach the brow of the hill before 
the shades of evening, now rapidly Coming on, should 
obscure the beauties of the view. It was an object 
with him, therefore, to gain the footpath as expedi- 
tiously £is possible, but he failed in his desi^u^ fox: 1\sä 



l82 HILARY ST. IVES. 

intricacies of the wood were more difficult than he 
imagined, and when at length he extricated himself it 
had become almost dark. Still he went on, and scaled 
the' hill-side with rapid steps. The uplands were quickly 
reached, bnt the beauties of the view were shrouded in 
gloom, The ancient mansion was distinguishable, but 
only as a dark mass. He walked on in that direction, 
but though sorely tempted did not enter the garden. 
However, he remained for a short time in the vicinity 
of the house, as if spell-bound. 

Lights gleamed from some of the Windows. Was 
May there, or had she joined the party at Hazlemere? 

Suddenly he heard footsteps, and perceived a female 
figure moving quickly along the terrace. His heart beat 
violently at the thought that it might be May. With- 
out considering the consequences he hurried towards 
the garden-gate, and reached it at the very moment 
that it was opened by the person he had seen, 

The person was Mrs. Sutton. 

She knew him, and did not manifest the surprise 
that might have been expected at so stränge a meet- 
ing. 

She would not allow him to enter into any ex- 
planation, but bidding him follow her, speeded towards 
a clump of trees that crowned a knoll at some little 
distance from the garden-gate. On arriving there, she 
stopped, and thus addressed him: 

"I know all — why you are in search of me — what 
passed between you and Miss RadclifFe this morning, 
and what subsequently occurred, I know where you 



HILARY ST. IVES. 183 

will lodge to-night, and concluding I should find you 
ht Dame Pemns's cottage I was going thither to speak 
to you." 

"Why give up your purpose? Let us go there at 
once/* Said Hilary. 

"No," she replied. "I have little to say now, and 
I would rather say it here, beneath these trees, where 
the ^loom shrouds my features, than in the cottage. 
The ';ime is not yet arrived when we can talk freely 
togethsr — when we can look each other in the face. 
You hive to leam who and what I am — and tili you 
have acquired that knowledge, a meeting like the 
present, where the darkness befriends me, is best for 
both of ts." 

"If you have a secret to reveal to me, this is a 
fitting oppDrtunity for its disclosure," said Hilary. 

"Not low," she rejoined. "Though I earnestly 
desire to ttll you all, I shrink from the task. You 
must not — pu cannot learn the secret from my lips. I 
should die in the efFort to reveal it to you." 

"Must I 'hen remain in ignorance of a matter 
which is of ntal importance to me to learn?" he 
asked. 

"No," she -ejoined. "Nothing shall be withheld 
from you. I hive written down a Statement, which 
would have been delivered to you after my death , but 
which you can now read. You will find it in the ehest 
which you may hive noticed in my little Chamber in 
the cottage. Here is the key. When you have read 
the Story of my lif«, you will know what to think of 



184 HILARY ST. IVES. 

me, and as you think of me, can act. We may meet 
again, or we may not. Do not be influenced by anj 
feeling of pity for me. I do not want pity. I waiit 
love — ^yes, love! If you detest me, as you may <io 
after you have learnt the truth, let us never meet agän 
on earth. I will shun you, and you must shun ne. 
But if you will feel that, in spite of all my errors, you 
can love me, come here to-morrow night at this hour." 

"I will come," cried Hilary, earnestly. 

"Make no rash promise," she rejoined. "You 
have not yet read my story. I am staying wilh May 
RadclifFe — but you must not come to the hou;e. At 
nine to-morrow night you will find me beneah these 
trees. Farewell!" 

And without waiting for any reply, she huTied back 
to the garden. 

Greatly perplexed and agitated, Hilary riade no at- 
tempt to follow her, but after a while t(?ok bis way 
through the chesnut ^ove to the cottage. 

When he was gone, two men, who hld been lurk- 
ing behind the trees during the interview, came from 
their hiding-plac^. 

"Shall we knock him on the headas we did once 
afore, and get the key of the ehest?" observed one of 
them. ^ 

"Tut! that would spoil all," cri^ his companion. 
"We don't want the papers. We c^ frighten Madam 
Sutton without 'em. We shall find ier here to-morrow 
night. Let us go and reconnoitre /he cottage." 



\ 
\ 

\ 



HILARY ST. IVES. 185 

And they moved ofF slowly in the ditection that 
Hilary had taken. 

Dame Perrins was in no very good humour. She 
had been long expecting her guest, and wondered he 
should stay out so long. It was not more than nine 
o'clock, but the old dame kept good hours. Her little 
tea equipage was on the table. The kettle was sing- 
ing on the hob, and she set about preparing a cup 
of tea. 

AU at once she suspended her task, and look- 
ing at him mysteriously, and nodding her head, re- 
marked: 

"Mrs. Sutton has been here." 

"I know it," replied Hilary. "I have just parted 
with her. She has given me the key of her ehest.'* 

"In that case, it be all right," observed the old 
dame. "She told me she wanted to see you to-night, 
and I thought she might come." 

Having m^de her guest as comfortable as she could, 
and finding he had no further occasion for her Services, 
the old dame locked and bolted the door, bade him 
good night, and retired to an inner room. 

Left to himself, Hilary spent some little time in re- 
flection. Though bis curiosity was greatly excited, and 
though he could gratify it immediately, he hesitated, 
because he feit assured, from the terms in which Mrs. 
Sutton had spoken, that some painful revelation was 
about to be made to him. 

At last he took a candle, and mounted to the little 
Chamber. How quiet it looked, and the neat little bed 



l86 HILARY ST. IVES. 



« 



seemed to invite him to rest, but he had no thoughts 
of sleep. With a hand trembling with excitement, he 
unlocked the ehest. 

It contained several documents, bundles of old 
letters tied together, with other matters, but the first 
thing that caught his eye was a packet sealed with 
black wax. 

Not doubting for a moment that this was intended 
for him, he took possession of it, and, descending to 
the little parlour, sat down and broke the seals. 

The manuscript which then met his gaze was penned 
in a firm, bold, almost masculine hand, and showed 
no traces of the anxiety under which the writer must 
have laboured. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 187 



IX. 

Mrs. Sutton's History. 

As this sad story will not be perused by him for 
whom it is narrated until the unhappy writer is no 
more, she implores bis pity and forgiveness. Willingly 
would she spare him these painful details, but he 
ought to know them, and she cannot depart in peace 
without lightening her breast by a füll confession of 
her crimes. ' 



Would I had died when I was quite young. How 
many years of bitter remorse should I have escaped. 
When I look back to that season of innocence and 
happiness, I can scarcely believe that so fair a child 
can have become the wretched, despairing woman who 
now pens these lines. Yet even in that child's breast 
there were seeds of evil, which, not being crushed, 
ripened into poisonous fruit. Excitable, wayward, 
capricious, not devoid of generosity, not unforgiving, 
but passionate — such was I as a young girl. 

My mother died while I was almost an infant. She 
was very beautiful, and rendered my poor father ex- 
tremely jealous, and I fear I must have inherited some 
of her qualities, for she was passionate in the extreme, 
and vindictive as passionate. 



I 



r88 



HILi 



,RY ST. IVES. 



itiibled herbat least, 



Personally, I believe. 
when I was very young- 
beautiful than I could ever pri 
this resemblance that made 
fond of me— so blind to my faulS^j. ^^^^^^ 
a child, I became unmanageable as I 
womanhood, and my father perceived 
sequences of bis excessive indulgence to me wl 
late. 

I was born in Jamaica — at Kingston. My motl 
was a native of the Island, but of English extractio; 
my father was of an ancient family, and brother of 
baronet. He was a West India merchant, but did nc 
prosper. He was indolent, and not a man of busi- 
ness — very hospitable, and very extravagant. He left 
me to the care of my nurse, Bonita, an Octaroon, who 
was devotedly attached to me, and supplied the place 
of a mother. 

Nursed in luxury, I had scarCely a desire uü- 
gratified. My father studied every whinK and I wa^ 
treated by those around me as if I had oben a little 
princess. My education was neglected, bul I was 
quick enough, and learnt many things that I ou^lit not 
to nave done. In short, I was very badly brought up, 
ds could not fail to be the case under such circum- 
stances. 

In that warm climate young persons arrive earb 
maturity, and before I was sixteen, my charms- 
as they were — were sufficiently developed to 
many admirers, and I received several ofFers o 




HILARY ST. IVES. i8q 

>ons of rieh merchants and planters, but 

1 to none of them. I could not foresee the 

should have married then. 

h I did not know it at the time, my father 

Jficulties. His large plantations and his veiy 

iice were mortgaged to a wealthy merchan^ 

i^^ed Osborne. A widower, but without family, and 

iv-^arly as old as my own father, Mr. Osborne was 

Wently enamoured of me, and determined to make 

rmori his wife. I detested him, and did not scniple to 

r^ctiojfw my dislike, but he did not mind that. He gave 

ot' father clearly to understand that my band was to 

iJd^^Hhe price of his forbearance towards him. But 

lü^'fügYi menaced by the seizure of all his property, and 

'^^^^hre that Osborne, if thwarted, was quite capable of 

"''iy vindictive measures, my father would not sacrifice 

iie thus. He had written home, and had some hopes 

of obtaining from his brother the means of relieving 

himself from the frightful position in which he was 

placed. But in the interval Mr. Osborne became im- 

patient, and declared he would not brook longer delay. 

In va«" my father urged that he must first gain my af- 

fections. He treated the Suggestion with contempt, 

i\nd my poor father, driven to his wit*s ends, was 

vfüiged to appeal to me. 

Then for the first time I comprehended his posi- 
JCn, and saw my own peril. But my detestation of 
Mr. Osborne was increased, and I declared I would 
ather die than wed him. With tears in his eyes, my 
x\ither besought me to have some consideration for 



%. 



IQO HILARY ST. IVES. 

him, but I remained inflexible. However, in order to 
gain time, I consented to permit Mr. Osborne's ad- 
dresses, and gave him some slight show of encourage- 
ment. This was a hard task to one of my impetuous 
nature, but I fulfiUed it with tolerable success, consol- 
ing myself with the thought of the scom with which I 
would requite him anon. 

At last the mail, so anxiously expected, arrived, 
but it did not bring the hoped-for assistance from my 
uncle. He could not, or would not, help my father — 
at least, to the extent required. But he sent out a 
young man, who had been a clerk in a mercantile j 
house, to assist him in winding up his aflfairs. 1 

John Bromley, the young clerk, was very shrewd 
and intelligent, and, moreover, very handsome. He 
pleased me better than any one whom I had seen in 
Jamaica. On being made acquainted with the exact 
State of my father's aflfairs, which was worse than he 
had been led to anticipate, Bromley evinced great 
alarm, and at once stated that the only chance was 
an arrangement with Mr. Osborne. My father than 
explained to him the condition exacted by his cred- 
itor, and that no other arrangement was possible. I 
was present at the time, and the young man glanced i 
at me before making an Observation. Reading my re- 1 
pugnance to the plan in my looks, he shaped his an- > . 
swer accordingly. | 

"It is quite clear you are in Mr. Osborne's power, f cj 
sir," he said to my father; "but were I in your place, 1 i>| 



l 



HILARY ST. IVES. IQI 

I would let him do his worst, rather than yield my 
daughter to him." 

"I cannot help it," was the reply, accompanied by 
a groan. "I must yield to circumstances." 

"Before you take any decisive step, sir," said 
Bromley, "let me consider the matter, and see if I 
cannot discover some remedy." 

My father shook his head, but as I appealed to 
him, he agreed to wait. As the young man quitted 
the room, he said in a low tone to me, "I will save 
you, if I can." 

In the few days that followed I saw a good deal 
of young Bromley , and soon found that he had fallen 
desperately in love with me, nor did I disguise from 
him that he had excited a corresponding feeling in my 
breast. He implored me in the most passionate terms 
not to surrender myself to the hateful man, who would 
purchase me as he would a slave, but to resist my 
father's commands, and, if he remained obdurate, to 
fly. I half promised assent, but had no serious inten- 
tion of complying. 

Seeing no chance of escape, I consulted Bonita. 
After hearing all I had to say, she reflected, and then 
declared there was but one means of liberation, but I 
might not like to have recourse to it. I eagerly caught 
at the Suggestion. Be it what it might, I would adopt 
it. With a look that frightened me, but did not shake 
my purpose, she then said that she would apply for a 
charm to an Obeah woman. I knew what that meant, 
but did not forbid her. 



192 HILARY ST. IVES. 

I have now arrived at a period of my history on 
which I cannot look back without horror and the 
deepest remorse. I ean ofFer nothing in extenuation 
of my guilty conduct, but I am amazed at it. 

Accompanied by Bonita, I paid a stealthy visit to 
the hut of the terrible woman who had promised me 
deliverance, and she told me that her most potent 
charms would be ineffectual against my persecutor. 
Only in one way could I free myself from him, and as 
she Said this she held up in her yellow, skinny band a 
small phial, adding that a few drops, mingled with 
wine, or any other drink, would do the business. I 
did not wait to question her further, but, giving her 
my purse, which she thrust into her pouch with a 
fiendish grin, hurried away with Bonita. I allowed 
myself no time for reflection. My blood seemed on 
fire, and fierce thoughts agitated my breast. My visit 
to the Obeah woman's hut seemed to have changed 
my nature. Had she dealings with evil spirits, as 
was asserted, and had one of them taken possession 
of me? 

Mr. Osborne was at the residencia that night. He 
had dined with my father, and I left them sipping 
their claret in the verandah, while I paid my stolen 
visit to the Obeah woman. Bromley was with them. 
My absence had not been noticed, but he had been 
aware of it, for he knew my errand. He regarded me 
anxiously as I re-appeared, and I knew what bis looks 
meant to convey. Little doubt indeed was left me oti 
the subject, for Mr. Osborne rose from his seat, and, 



l 



HILARY ST. IVES. I93 

with a triumphant look, told me that I should söon be 
his bride. He would have embraced me, but I thrast 
him back with loathing, and any lingering hesitation I 
might have feit was then removed. He was greatly 
enraged, and vented his displeasure on my father. I 
took advantage of this moment to whisper a few 
words to Bromley, who turned very pale, and, to hide 
his trepidation, walked to a little distance in the 
cpurt. My father and Mr. Osborne had just lighted 
their cigars, when our black servant, Diego, brought 
in coffee and liqueurs, leaving me to serve them, as 
was my custom, and I went into the room for that 
purpose. 

Now was my opportunity. Into the cup of cofFee 
which I designed for Mr. Osborne, unperceived by any 
one, save Bromley, who was watching my movements 
from the court, I poured a few drops from the phial. 
I then handed the cup to Mr. Osborne, but he was 
still angry with me, and declined it. He was not 
destined to die thus. Fate had elected another victiiti. 
My father bade me give him the coflfee. I would have 
retreated, but he snatched the cup from me. 

Horror of horrors ! he had swallowed the poisonous 
mixture ere I could prevent him. 

I screamed and fainted. Bonita rushed into the 
room, and, ^midst the utmost confusion, bore me off 
to my own Chamber. They thought I had trodden on 
a snake. When I recovered, I sought for the phial, 
but it was gone. Bonita had removed it, or I would 
have endpd my anguish at once. No discovery had as 

Hilary St. Ives. //, ^3 



194 HILARY ST. IVES. 

yet been made. Mrs. Osborne had departed, stating 
that he should come betimes on the morrow with the 
marriage contract. My father had retired to rest, but 
I was resolved to see him, and make a füll confession 
of my guilt, and, in s^pite of all Bonita's attempts to 
dissuade me, I repaired to his Chamber. He was re- 
clining on his couch, reading. I flung myself on my 
knees before him, and implored his forgiveness. At 
first he thought me distracted, but the truth soon forced 
itself upon him. Overcome for the moment, he feil 
back on the bed, and I was rushing out for assistance, 
but he detained me. 

"I know the effect of this poison," he said, with a 
composure that astonished me. "There is no remedy; 
but the effect will not be immediate, and will give time 
to make arrangements for your safety, for on my death, 
which is inevitable, suspicions are certain to attach 
to yo^." 

I told him I would not survive him, but he stopped me. 

"Do not add another crime to that which you have 
unintentionally committed," he said. "My sole con- 
solation will be that you will escape. I have prayed 
for death, but I did not wish it to come in this way. 
A packet sails for England to-morrow. You must sail 
by it." 

"And leave you? Impossible!" 

"You must go," he said, solemnly and sternly. "I 
must be obeyed now. Your presence would double 
the pangs of death. Seek not to move me with en- 
treaties. I am inflexible, Bromley will take Charge of 



HILARY ST. IVES. I95 

» 

you. I intended to send him back by this packet, 
though with very difFerent tidings. Bonita shall also 
go with you. Make your preparations to-night. You 
must be ofF before Mr. Osborne can learn anything of 
the plan." 

Again I besought him to allow me to stay. Again 
he sternly refused. 

"As you hope for my forgiveness you will obey 
me," he seid. "You have the night before you. 
Employ it, so that you can go on board at daybreak. 
I shall not feel easy tili you are gone. Then I can die 
in peace." 

I wept — I prayed — I clung to him — I bedewed his 
hands with my tears — but I could not move him. 

All was done as he enjoined. How he passed the 
night after I quitted him, I know not, but when I 
tapi>ed at his door, an hour before daybreak, to teil 
him all was ready, he was fully attired. At that trying 
moment, when I feit ready to sink from the weight of 
anguish, he was perfectly composed. His countenance 
was serene in expression, though deathly pale, for he 
had already begun to feel the effects of the poisonous 
draught. But he bore himself so firmly and manfully, 
that I feit ashamed of my own weakness, and strove 
to Imitate him, though I thought my heart would burst 
with the effort. * 

Never had I loved him so d^rly as then. To say 
that I would have willingly died for him is simply to 
repeat the supplication I had addressed a hundred times 
that night to Heaven. His firmness never deserted him 

13* 



IQÖ HILARY Sr. IVES. 

■N 

tili the parting moment came. He had pardoned me — 
had blessed me — had bade me an eternal farewell, and 
I was about to leave the room, when I saw him reel 
and fall back on the couch. I rushed towards him, 
but he motioned me away. 

"Gol .go!" he exclaimed. **It is nothing. It will 
pass. Farewell for ever!" 

Many months afterwards, when I had reached 
England, I leamt that he was found lifeless by his 
bedside. 



Before proceeding, I must State that Colonel Dela- 
combe is even now, as far as I am aware, wholly un- 
acquainted with the portion of my history which I have 
just related. 

I suffered much during my passage to England, 
but more in mind than body, and never ceased to re- 
proach myself with the crime I had committed. But 
for Bonita's watchful care I believe I should havedied. 
Bromley, also, strove to mitigate my distress. We were 
constantly together, and his passion for me increased. 
But mine had declined, for I began to fear him. He 
wished to marry me immediately on our arrival at 
Southampton, but to this proposition I would not listen, 
and he became angry and suspicious, declared that I 
was trifling with him, and hinted that I was in his 
power, and must comply. • This menace changed any 
lingering feeling of regard into positive aversion. But 



t 



HILARY ST. IVES, igj 

1 avoided a quarrel, and resolved to get rid of him 
when we landed. 



f How I escaped from him at Southampton I need 

[ not relate, but I got to London with Bonita. Then I 
i was safe. I had previously resolved not to make myself 
known to my uncle, and if he heard of my arrival in 
England, Bromley could not teil him where to find me. 
But I had no apprehensions on this score, and though 
Bromley made diligent search for me, it was not tili 
long afterwajds that he was successful. 

For some months I lived in obscure lodgings in 
Kensington. Bonita passed as my mother. 

Tired of this life, which appeared wretched indeed 
after the luxurious existence I had led in Jamaica, I 
^ould have presented myself to my uncle, had I dared 
to do so. But I thought the haughty baronet would 
cast me ofF, and Bonita was of the same opinion. How- 
ever, I emerged from my seclusion, and one day when ' 
Walking in the Park, accompanied by Bonita, I attracted 
the attention of a very handsome young officer. He 
made some excuse for addressing me, and though I 
received his advances very coldly he would not be dis- 
missed. Having ascertained where I lived, he contrived 
to meet me again. 

Other meetings followed, and Seymour Delacombe 
— for he it was — became desperately enamoured of me 
— so desperately, that he proposed marriage, though he 
supposed my condition far inferior to his own. Sub- 
sequently, when the violence of his passion had ab^.t^d^ 



198 ^ILARY ST. IVES. 

he reproached me with having duped him, but it is 
needless to say the accusation was false. 

When Bonita, whom he believed to be my mother, 
told him in a decided tone that our intimacy must 
cease, he became half frantic, vowed that his intentions 
were honourable, and that he meant to wed me. 

He kept his word — though not without hesitation 
and delay — and we were privately married. 

Alas ! the union was fraught with misery. No sooner 
was the step taken than he repented it. I had left 
London by his desire, and resided at a little cottage 
in the neighbourhood of Bath. Bonita was always with 
me. Ashamed of me, irritated with himself for having 
made — as he deemed — such a dreadful m6salliance, 
my husband visited his anger on me. 

I bore his reproaches at first with patience, but my 
pride soon took fire, and painful scenes occurred be- 
tween us. When he taunted me with my lowly origin, 
I could have retorted that my family was better than 
his own, but I forbore, as it wpuld necessitate other 
explanations, and I would not allow Bonita to reply. 

Our quarreis grew more frequent — more fierce. 
After the first few months he rarely came near me. 
My life was now a burthen. But I had a hope of 
brighter days. I expected to become a mother. 

It was about this time, when I was driven into a 
State bordering upon frenzy, that my evil genius again 
appeared before me. By dint of constant inquiries 
Bromley had traced me out. He had learnt that I was 
married, and Nvas a'^^.ie ol m^ >$tesent unhappiness. 



iqLARY ST. IVES. ^ IQQ 

He came under the pretence of oflfering me advice and 
assistance, and I was foolish enough to give him wel- 
come. Bonita warned me of my danger, but I would 
not listen to her counsel; 

Bromley took up his abode at Bath, in order to be 
near me, and spent almost every evening at the cot- 
tage. Utterly neglected by my husband, and having 
no other society, he helped me to pass the weary 
hom-s, but I did not foresee — as I ought to have done 
— how my conduct would be misconstnied. 

Mischief-makers reported what was going on to 
Seymour. 

One evening he arrived unexpectedly and found 
Bromley with me. Thrusting him indignantly from the 
house, he tumed his fury upon me; heaping upon me 
every opprobrious epithet that his rage dictated. He 
charged me with having dishonoured him with a man 
who had been my paramour before marriage. 

Stung beyond endurance by his galling words, and 
no longer mistress of myself, I snatched up a knife, 
and should have plunged it to his heart, but, thank 
Heaven! I was spared that crime. Bonita flung her- 
seif between us, and tried to obtain a hearing, but in 
vain. He was deaf to her entreaties. 

After such a scene reconäiliation was impossible; 
and I was not surprised to receive a letter from my 
husband, informing me that he was going to Ireland 
with his regiment, and would see me no more. At 
the same time he enclosed a sum of money, stating 
that the like amount would be paid me quarterly. 



200 HILARY ST. IVES. 

I wrote to teil him that he had wronged me by his 
suspicions, but he did not deign to answer my letter. 
Perhaps he had heard that I had been indiscreet 
enough to continue my intimacy with Bromley. 

I will pass over several wretched months. I would 
fain blot them from my memory. My child was born, 
and I gave him my father's name of Alberic. I wrote 
to Seymour imploring forgiveness for his son's sake. 

My letter, like the one I had formerly written, re- 
mained unanswered, but he sent a confidential agent 
to me — a certain Mr. Courtenay. This person's manner 
was kindly, and he displayed much feeling. He told 
me his instructions were to remove the child, and that 
if I refused to deliver it up to him no further allowance 
would be made me. He gave me a solemn assurance 
that the child would be well cared for, but added that 
I could not be allowed to see it. I rejected the pro- 
position. But alas ! I was weak and wicked enough to 
yield to Bromley 's persuasions, and suffered my Utile 
Alberic to be taken from me. 

The punishment of my heartless and unnatnral 
conduct was not long delayed. Bonita was absent at 
the time, but when she returned she bitterly reproached 
me. From that moment she conceived a violent anti- 
pathy to Bromley, and sought to drive him from the 
house. 

Such an existence, as I then led, embittered as it 
was by Bonita's ceaseless reproaches, was unsupportable. 
Bromley, who thought his life in danger, urged me to 



HILARY ST. IVES. 20I 

Üy with him, and the fatal influence he had now ac« 
quired over me, compelled me to assent. 

Step by Step I went downward. 

Before roy departure I wrote a few hurried lines to 
Bonita, bidding her farewell, and enclosing her a sum 
of money. 

No fixed plans. No precise destination. Our journey 
soon came to an end. 

We were crossing the Sevem in the ferry-boat from 
the Old Passage to Chepstow. A gale was blowing at 
the time. The boat was upset, and all within her 
perished except myself. I escaped by miracle, but none 
knew that I had escaped. 

My marvellous preservation from a watery grave 
suggested a plan to me, and I resolved to act upon it. 
Lost to the World — believed to be drowned, I would 
begin life anew, under a new name. 

Perhaps I might have retumed to poor Bonita. But 
my letter had killed her. 

When she found that I had abandoned her, she 
had done with life. She had brought the phial of 
poison with her from Jamaica, and the moment was, 
come to have recourse to it. 



In the part I had resolved to enact, I ran no risk 
of detection. Few knew me in England, and the few 
who did were unacquainted with my real history. My 
uncle had never seen me. I had no fear of my hus- 



202 HILARY ST. IVES. 

band. He would not doubt that I had perished, when 
he read the account of the disaster in the Severn. To 
one of my temperament there was a stränge satisfac- 
tion in having severed all ties. Freed from Bromley — 
divorced as if by death from a husband who hated 
me, I rejoiced at my deliverance. But, on the other 
band, I had lost the tniest and best friend I had on 
earth. I had also lost my child. 

For good or ill, the step was taken. I conld not, 
and would not, retreat. 

I took the name of Button, and described myself 
as a widow. 

How my pride revolted against the humble Situa- 
tion I was compelled in the first instance to accept. I, 
who had had a dozen servants to wait upon me, whose 
slightest look was obeyed — I, the niece of one of the 
proudest men in England — to become nurse to the 
children of a woman whom I feit to be my inferior in 
every respect! I could scarcely submit to the degrada- 
tion. Yet I discharged my duties so well, that I kept 
the Situation for nearly three years, and pleased my 
mistress so much, that she recommended me to Mrs. 
Radcliflfe of Hazlemere, into whose service I next 
entered. 

I was then two-and-twenty, but I looked five years 
older. Such beauty as I once possessed had fled. My 
manner likewise was changed. All my natural gaiety 
had forsaken me. From the first my new mistress took 
a great fancy to me, and was curious to learn my his- 
tory. I told her I was a widow, and that my married 



HILARV ST. rVES. . 203 

life had been unhappy, but I avoided entering into 
detailSj and she was considerate enough not to press 
me further. 

Mrs. Radcliffe was in delicate health, threatened 
with consumption , and I nursed her with so much 
care, that I may venture to affirm that I saved her 
life. I had now become indispensable to her, was 
promoted to the post of housekeeper, and the entire 
management of the establishment devolved upon me. 
Weak, vain, indolent as she was, it was not difficult to 
gain an ascendancy over Mrs. Radcliflfe. 

My authority in the house became almost absolute, 
for Mr. Radcliflfe, the best-hearted and kindest of men, 
but also one of the easiest, never interfered with me. 

Having acted as nurse to May, I had won the 
aflfections ofthat charming child, and her attachment 
to me helped in some measure to fill up the terrible 
void in my heart. 

Thus my position was completely assured, and I 
might have been happy, if I could but have obliterated 
the past. But the undying worm gnawed incessantly 
at my heart. Though hidden from the world, I could 
not fly from myself. My rest was broken by dreadful 
dreams. I saw my father with a stern reproachful 
look — ^Bonita — Bromley — but Strange to say! for a time 
I thought not of Seymour or of my little Alberic. 

Though Mrs. Radcliflfe's weak and frivolous char- 
acter always inspired me with contempt, I entertained 
a certain regard for her, tili one day she confidentially 
informed me that she nourished a secret aflfection for 



204 HILARY ST. IVES. 

one who ought to have been her husband, and she 
showed me some of his letters. 

Judge my surprise — ^judge my consternation — when 
I found these letters were from Seymour Delacombe. 
A Strange feeling of jealousy was aroused. Though I 
knew that when Seymour made love to Esther Thorn- 
ton, he deemed himself released by death from his 
marriage ties, my jealousy of her, my anger against 
him, were not lessened by that consideration. 

And these feelings were kept alive — nay, increased 
— because, having enlisted my sympathy, as she deemed, 
Mrs. RadclifFe constantly talked to me of her old lover. 
He had given her his miniature, which she now pro- 
duced, and hung it above the chimney-piece in her 
boudoir. There it was constantly before me. 

I did not alter my demeanour towards her — I con- 
trived to maintain a semblance of respect — but I was 
often on the point of betraying myself by an explosion 
of jealous rage, and I resolved to have revenge for the 
torture she unconsciously inflicted upon me. 

It would not be true to say that the feelings that I 
once entertained for Seymour were revived by this 
constant reference to him, but it brought him to my 
mind, and awakened my maternal affections, which 
had so long lain dormant. I could not rest tili I had 
ascertained what had become of my little Alberic. 
From inquiries, which I caused to be made, I leamt 
that he was with Mr. Courtenay at Exeter, and satisfied 
that he was well cared for I was perforce content. 



HILARY ST. rVES. 20$ 

Time went on, and for mäny years nothing occurred 
to disturb my fancied security. 

All apprehensions of detection had long since 
ceased, when one day I received a letter that fiUed me 
with cdarm. It was from an eider brother of Bromley, 
whom I had never seen, but whom I had heard described 
as unprincipled and unscrupulous. Daniel Bromley 
knew my unhappy story, for John had been imprudent 
enough to reveal it to him. 

At the time of the disastrous accident on the Severn, 
Daniel Bromley had just sailed for America, and I think 
it was John's Intention to jöin him there. Hearing öf 
his brother's death, Daniel went on to San Francisco, 
and lost all the money he gained in gambling and low 
dissipation. 

After a prolonged absence, and many disreputable 
adventures, he retm-ned to this country in a wretched 
plight. 

From the newspaper report of the accident he had 
been led to believe that I had perished at the same 
time as his brother, but on making inquiries on the 
spot he discovered that the body had never been found, 
and his suspicions being aroused he made further in- 
vestigations that eventually led to my discovery. 

No sooner did the villain satisfy himself on this 
point, than he wrote the letter I have mentioned, and 
threatened to reveal all the details of my early life, 
with which he had become acquainted owing to John's 
indiscretion, my unhappy marriage, and every sub-» 



206 HILARY ST. FSTES. 

sequent incident of my caxeer, unless he was paid 
handsomely for his silence. 

I had no alternative but compliance, and his ex- 
tortionate demands being incessant, I could no longer 
supply them. 

Rendered desperate I defied him, and he then in- 
formed me that he should go to Mr. Courtenay, and 
deposit with him a sealed packet containing certain 
documents, to be despatched to India for Colonel Dela- 
combe, if not reclaimed within three months. I dis- 
believed this menace, but it proved to be correct, for 
the packet eventually feil mto my own hands. 

It contained fearful evidences against me. I found 
within it all the letters I had written to the villain him- 
self, together with a Statement which he had drawn up, 
charging me with parricide. He endeavoured to sub- 
stantiate the horrible accusation by letters from his 
brother John, and extracts from old Jamaica news- 
papers, in which mention was made of the suspicious 
circumstances under which my father died, as well as 
of my sudden disappearance. 

The faJse villain likewise accused me of poisoning 
Bonita. 

Death at last liberated me from the relentless ex- 
tortioner, and I was allowed some years of comparative 
tranquillity. With such a heavy load of guilt on my 
soul, I could not have a tranquil mind, but I was no 
longer in constant dread of detection and disgrace. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 20^ 

Let me now turn to May RadclifFe. 

Sweeter creature never breathed. Loving her as I 
did with infinitely more afFection than her own mother, 
I i)ecame jealous of her as she threatened to deprive 
me of my power. I despised myself for the unworthy 
feeling, but I indulged it nevertheless. A perpetual 
conflict was going on in my breast between love for 
the dear girl, and dread of the sway she was sure to 
gain over her father, and which might be exercised to 
my disadvantage. 

My secret aim was to get her early married, and I 
therefore encouraged an attachment that appeared to 
be springing up between her and her cousin Oswald. 
But I was foiled, for though Oswald was passionately 
enamoured of her, she was quite indifferent to him. 

I was deliberately pursuing this plan, when an event 
occurred that turned my thoughts into an entirely different 
Channel. 

One night a young man, who had been attacked 
by robbers, was brought to Hazlemere. He was almost 
insensible from the injuries he had received, and was 
committed to my care by Mr. Radcliffe. While I was 
watching over him that night, he became light-headed, 
and amid his ravings frequently repeated the name of 
Courtenay. Already I had been Struck by his remark- 
able resemblance to Seymour Delacombe, and the 
mention of this name confirmed my suspicions. A 
mark on the young man's Shoulder convinced me that 
he was my son. 



208 HILARY ST. IVES. 

Yes, he was indeed my son — my Alberic — whom 
I had not beheld since he was an Infant. 

Oh! with what rapture I gazed upon bis features. 
The fiood-gates of my heart were burst open , and the 
long, long repressed tide nished in. 

My transports of delight were soon succeeded by 
emotions of terror. I had found my son — my dearest 
treasure on earth — but I should lose him again as soon 
as found. I dared not teil him I was bis mother. He 
would spurn me from him if he knew all. Oh! the 
agony of that thought. A thousand extravagant notions 
passed through my brain. Nothing I would not attempt 
to keep my Alberic near me. Mrs. RadclifFe might be 
induced to aid my plan. She still loved Seymour, and 
would befriend Seymoiu-'s son. But this was the mere 
beginning of my wild scheme of which the consummation 
was to be Alberic's marriage with May. This scheme 
presented itselfsovividlytomy Imagination, and seemed 
so feasible, that I resolved to act upon it. Nor was it 
so mad as it would appear. Mrs. Radcliffe was a mere 
puppet in my hands. I could move her as I pleased. 
May's heart was disengaged, and I thought her sus- 
ceptibilities could be excited in favour of the handsome 
youth. 

Success in the first instanc^ attended my design. 
Mrs. RadclifFe, as I anticipated, took the liveliest interest 
in the young man, when convinced that he was the son 
of her old lover, and a strong and lasting impression 
was produced on May by Alberic's good looks and 
romantic chatactei. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 2ög 

But all my combinations were destroyed by the 
unexpected retum of him I most dreaded on earth. 
Fate, that had brought Alberic to Hazlemere, brought 
bis father there likewise. Flight alone seemed left me, 
but I would not fly. The conflict was unequal, but I 
did not shrink from it. I knew that Colonel Delacombe 
feared me more than I feared him. 



//f'Jlary S/. /vft, / ^^ 



210 HILARY ST. IVES. 



X. 

The Portrait 

That night, about eleven o'clock, May was in her 
dressing-room. Seated beside her was a woman, more 
than double her own age, whose pale features bore 
traces of affliction. All at once their discourse was 
intemipted by a tap at the door. May's companion 
Started up, and made a quick exit by a side-door 
communicating with the adjoining bedchamber. 

Scarcely had she disappeared than Lady Rich- 
borough entered by the other door, bearing a taper. 

May expressed great surprise at beholding her. 

"I thought you meant to pass the night at Hazle- 
mere," she observed. 

"I have come back purposely to have a talk with 
you, dear," replied the other, putting down the candle, 
and seating herseif. "I hope you don't feel very 
sleepy, for I have a great deal to say." 

"I don't feel at all sleepy," replied May. "I almost 
fancy you have come to teil me that the marquis has 
thought better of it, and desires tö be released from 
his engagement." 

"No such thing. You have made him the happiest 
of men, and depend upon it, he will hold you to your 
promise. You will see him here to-morrow. How- 
ever, it is not ot X\v^ xcäxqjjcä 'Qöa^ l desire to speak, 



HILARY ST, IVES. 211 

but of Colone! Delacombe. I am ashamed to saj that 
I read bis letter very burriedly this moming, and the 
most important part of it escaped me. What he 
mentions is so curious that I could not rest tili I had 
imparted it to you, so I retumed to-night with Mrs. 
Woodcot." 

"You excite my curiosity very much," cried May. 
"What can the colonel have told you?" 

"Have a moment's patience. I must first make 
you acquainted with a Strange tragical event connected 
with my own family, or you will not understand the 
motive of the coloneFs inquiries. My father, Sir Um- 
fraville Dminster, had a younger brother, who became 
a West India merchant, and settled in Jamaica. My 
uncle Alberic married a Jamaica lady, by whom he 
had one child — a daughter — named Barbara. My aunt 
died about two or three years after her marriage. I 
never säw my uncle, but I believe he was very amiable, 
though unfitted for business. There was not a good 
understanding between him and my father, and they 
had ceased to correspond for some years, when Sir 
UmfravÜle received a very urgent letter from his brother, 
who it appeared had got into difficulties. Without 
immediate assistance, my uncle declared he should be 
ruined, änd his daughter sacrificed to a man she de- 
tested. My father, I am sorry to say, was insensible 
to this appeal, and contented himself with sending 
out a Clerk to Jamaica tcT assist in winding up his 
brother's afFairs. 

*'The events I am reläting occurred about fbur- 

14* 



512 HILART ST. tVES. 

and-twenty years ago. My cousin, Barbara üminster, 
was then very young, but to judge from her portrait, 
which was sent to my father, she must have been ex- 
tremely beautiful. My uncle's chief creditor, Mr. Os- 
bome, a planter , demanded her band, and as he 
could not be refused — though Barbara hated him — the 
marriage was arranged. But just as it was about to 
take place; my uncle died suddenly. Whether he 
sought deliverance from bis troubles by suicide, or was 
poisoned, has never been ascertained. 

^'A terrible accusation was brought against my 
Cousin Barbara. It was hinted that she administered 
the poison. But I do not believe the monstrous tale. 
If she had poisoned Mr. Osborne, who would have 
forced her to become bis bride, I could understand it 
— but her father, who doted upon her — no! I cannot 
credit the accusation. 

"Some colour, however, was given to the charge, 
because she left Jamaica, quite suddenly, in a packet 
that sailed a few hours before my uncle's death. But 
against this it was urged that her father had enjoined 
her abrupt departure in order to get her out of Mr. 
Osborne's way. Another circumstance has yet to be 
mentioned which raises grave doubts. She was ac- 
companied in the voyage by her nurse, and Mr. Brom- 
ley, the young clerk, whom my father had sent out to 
Jamaica. On landing at Southampton, Barbara and 
her nurse unaccountably disappeared, and have never 
been heard of since." 

**A terrible and mysterious story indeed," observed 



HILARY ST. IVES. 21 S 

May, who had listened with great interest to the nar- 
ration. "It seems Strange that I never heard it be- 
fore." 

"Sir Chcirles and I agreed not to mention it to 
you. It is one of those family histories that are best 
buried in oblivion, as it reflects little credit on our 
family. Sir Umfraville never spoke of bis brother or 
his niece. Perhaps he reproached himself with bis 
conduct. Had he sent the money to Uncle Alberic — 
as he might have done — as he ough^ to have done — 
this dire caJamity — perhaps other calamities — might 
have been averted. Heaven only knows!" 

**Though circumstances are against ,her, I do not 
believe in Barbara's guilt," observed May. "What be- 
came of her portrait, which you say your uncle Alberic 
sent to your father?" 

"I have not seen it for years," replied Myrtilla. 
"But I think I can find it. Let me consider. Yes. 
It was put out of the way by Sir Umfraville, but I 
know he concealed it in a secret drawer of the old 
cabinet in your room. I dare say it is there still. Let 
US see." 

"Some other time," said May, with evideiit uneasi- 
ness. "Not now." 

But Myrtilla would not be stayed. "I want to look 
at it myself," she cried. 

And snatching up the taper, she passed through 
the side door into the bedchamber. 

As she entered, the person who Vi^.d ^x^c^^^^XvKt 



214 HBLARY ST. IVES. 

hastily concealed herseif behind the hangings of the 
bed. 

May foUowed, and became reassured as she glanced 
around. It was a large, gloomy-looking Chamber, 
panelled with black oak, partially hung with faded 
arras, and furnished with a large canopied bed, having 
tall, twisted posts, and tarnished brocade hangings. 
Against the waJl, flanked by a couple of high-backed 
chairs, stood the antique cabinet. The taper scarcely 
illuminated the sombre room. 

Giving the light to her companion, Myrtilla un- 
locked the cabinet, and touching a spring at the back, 
a secret drawer flew open. 

As she anticipated, the portrait was there. The 
features, depicted by an artist of no mean skill, were 
those of a young girl of great beauty — the eyes large, 
dark, and füll of fire, the complexion clear though 
pale, the hair dark and silky. There was an undefin- 
able expression in the countenance. 

Myrtilla gazed at the miniature for a few mo- 
ments, and then, handing it to May, said, with a 
Singular look: 

"Have you ever seen that face before?" 

"Seen it! How should I? Ha!" she exclaimed, 
as she regarded it more narrowly. "Is this your consin 
Barbara Ilminster?*' 

"Yes.'' 

"Why, I trace a likeness — ^a strong likeness to 
Mrs. Sutton." 

"Barbara Hirnivälex ^.xA '^x^, ^xj&'^sv^ are the same 



HILARY ST. IVES, ^15 

Pierson," replied Lady Richborough. "That is what 
Colonel Del^combe's letter iixformed me, Thal; is 
what I came to teil you." 

May's exclamations of astonishment were inter- 
Eupted by the sudden appearance of the woman, who 
was concealed behind the hangings of the bed. 

"Yes," cried this person to Myrtilla, who was 
petrified with astonishment. **Th(sre is no longer any 
necessity. for concealment. In me you behold your 
cousin Barbara — the wife of Seymour Delacombe, and 
the mother of his son Alberic, whom you have hitherto 
known as Hilary St. Ives. You wonder to see me 
here, in your father's house, which I could never have 
entered during his life-time," continued the unhappy 
woman, still addressing Lady Richborough; "and 
never at any time under my own name. But I am 
here almost against my will. I have striven to fly, but 
a power, that I could not resist, has detained me. An 
asylum has been offered me by May, and I could not 
refuse it. I shall not need it long." 

There was a brief pause, which was broken by 
Myrtilla. 

"Whatever errors you have committed," she said, 
in a sympathising voice, "I am sure you have atoned 
for them." 

"Heaven only knows how much I have suflfered," 
rejoined Barbara. "But my troubles are Coming to an 
end* I have had enough time for repentance — and I 
kave repented." 

"I fear you have still some bürden on your soul 



2l6 HILARY ST. IVES. 

which would be relieved by confession," said Myrtilla. 
"Open your heart to us, and rest assured of our sym- 
pathy. We will oflfer you every consolation in our 
power." 

"I have written down the particulars of my sad 
history for my son. He will recount them to you 
when I am gone." 

"You seem to have a presentiment of some im- 
pending calamity," observed Myrtilla. 

"I have," replied Barbara. "In all that has oc- 
curred lately I discern the band of fate, and the final 
event cannot be far oflf. I have struggled against my 
destiny. My desire is to find a retreat where I can 
hide my sorrows, and die unknown." 

"You have found a refuge here, and you must live 
for your son," said May. 

"If he bids me live, I will live," cried the un- 
happy woman. "I have appointed to meet him to- 
morrow night, but before then he will have learnt my 
history, and may not come. In that case nothing will 
be left me but despair." 

"Do not alarm yourself thus needlessly," said May. 
"Be sure he will keep the appointment But open 
your heart to us. You need fear no severe judgment, 
atid you will feel easier for the confession." 

Barbara yielded. They repaired to the dressing- 

room, where each having taken a seat, she commenced 

her relation, to which her hearers listened with the 

deepest attention. TYvey loaÄfc t^ö \^\xxark, though 



HILARY ST* IVES. 2 1 ^ 

now and then they could not help exchanging a 
glance. 

"I know you must condemn me,'* said Barbara, as 
she brought her story to a close, "and you will con- 
demn me justly, for my conduct is utterly indefensible, 
but I may perhaps be shown mercy hereafter, on ac- 
count of my sincere contrition, and the agonies of re- 
morse I have endured. 

"You now know what a wretched, guilty thing I 
am, but you do not know, and never can know, what 
I have suffered, because I cannot, dare not, attempt 
to describe to you my sleepless nights, when my pillow 
has seemed stufFed with thorns, and when I have been 
driven to the verge of madness by despair. No stings 
so Sharp as those of a bad conscience. I have not ex- 
aggerated my sufFerings to excite your commiseration. 
I want words to describe my mental anguish. I shall 
find no peace — no rest — except in the grave. Perhaps 
not there." 

"Be comforted," cried May. "After so much 
gloom brighter days must be at band. You have a 
son to love." 

"If I feit sure of his love, I should wish for life," 
rejoined Barbara. "But I believe I am doomed." 

"Doomed!" exclaimed both her hearers. 

"Yes. I need not remind you that there is a 
superstition connected with this house. Poor Sir 
Charles Ilminster was warned of his approaching death« 
I, too, have had a waming." 



2l8 HILARY ST. IVES. 

The solemnity of her manner made both her hearers 
shudder. 

**0n returning to-night from the meeting with my 
son in the park, I passed through the library, the 
window of which had heen left open, and hurried up 
the great staircase without Interruption of any kind. 

I had gained the portrait-gallery, and was hastening 
along it, when a dark figure seemed to detach itself 
from the wall, and bar my way. Fear nailed me to 
the spot. A pale phosphoric glimmer showed me the 
features of my father, but white as those of a corpse 
— and the look he fixed upon me was inexpressibly 
moumful. My tongue clove to my palate, or I would 
have spoken. As I still gazed at the apparition in 
speechless terror, the ghostly glimmer died away, and 
the figure melted into the darkness. How I gained 
my room I know not." 

Amid the profound silence that ensued, the pendule 
on the mantel-piece Struck twelve. Warned by the 
strokes, Barbara rose to retire, and Lady Richborough 
arose at the same time. 

"Think over what I have told you, my dear,** ob- 
served Barbara, as she bade good night to May ; "and 
if you deem it best that I shoidd not remain longer 
here, I will depait to-morrow." 

"Oh, no! you must not go!" criad May. "Dedde 
on nothing tili you have seen your son." 

"Well, I will trespass on your kindness tili then. 
Good night!" 

She had neai\y ie^c5afii^\Ä\ cy^x^toom, which was 



HILARY ST. IVES. 219 

at the further end of the corridor, when she.heard 
quick footsteps behind, and seeing Lady Richborough 
ha3tening towards her, she immediately stopped. 

"It is very late, but I must keep you up a Kttle 
longer," said Myrtilla. "I have something to say to 
you that I could not mention before May." 

"Come with me, then," rejoined Barbara. **I 
shall not sleep, so it matters not when I seek my 
couch." 



1 



220 HILARY ST. IVES. 



XI. 
A Vision. 

The Chamber assigned to Barbara was not so large 
as May 's, but similarly furnished. 

On their entrance, the room looked so dark, owing 
to the black oak panels and the dusky hangings of the 
bed , that Bcirbara lighted a couple of wax candles on 
the dressing-table. 

Since she had resumed her own name, a notice- 
able change had taken place in this remarkable woman's 
demeanour. Her manner was prouder than it had been 
as Mrs. Sutton. Seeing Lady Richborough gaze at her 
steadfastly, she drew herseif up haughtily. 

"I now recognise my cousin Barbara," said Myr- 
tilla; "and the wonder is that I did not recogifise you 
before. I am sorry you have not had a better welcome 
to my father's house." 

•*I have had a better welcome than I deserve," re- 
joined Barbara. "Pray be seated. You want to talk 
to me. Put any questions you think proper. I will 
answer them truthfully. I have nothing to conceal. I 
cannot darken myself in your estimation.*' 

"I have no questions to ask," rejoined Myrtilla, "I 
do not want to talk to you of the past, but of the future." 

"The futurel" exclaimed Barbara, gloomily. "I 
have nothing to do mX\i \5öä lM\.\Ä^r 



HILARY ST. IVES. 221 

"Yes — ye^— you must have some plans. Let us 
discuss them." 

"Where would be the use? Till I have seen Alberic 
I can have no plans." 

"I See you do not give me credit for the deep 
interest I take in you, Barbara," rejoined Myrtilla. 
"You may be sure I am making no idle professions, 
when I say that I will serve you, if I can, and you 
will let me." 

"I thank you much, Myrtilla, but I want nothing 
— except rest. But you may serve my son." 

"It is too late to serve him in the way you mean. 
Had I known your secret, I might have acted other- 
wise. But May is now engaged to the Marquis of 
Hartlepool." 

"I am very sorry for it, and you will one day 
regret that you have been instrumental in bringing 
about that union. She will not be happy with the 
marquis." 

"Why not? He is devoted to her." 

"Maybe; but she cannot give him her heart. That, 
is already bestowed upon my son. This is no idle * 
assertion. She told me so herseif." * 

" Had I known this before, the mischief might have »^ 
been prevented. But it is now too late. The match 
cannot be broken off. The Radcliifes desire it, and 
are pledged to it," 

"Better their pledges should be broken than May 
rendered miserable." 

"None can know better than yourself that Mr. Rad- 



222 HILARY^T. IVES, 

cHffe's Word is his bond. His promise will never be 
retracted." 

"A promise made in error is not binding," said 
Barbara. "When Mr. RadcliiFe is told of my marriage 
with Seymour Delacombe, and learns that the so-called 
Hilary St. Ives is our son, his objections will vanish, 
and he will rue his promise to the marquis." 

"Still, he will consider himself botmd by it, and 
most assuredly the marquis will never release May from 
the engagement." 

"Not for my son's sake — not for mine, but for 
May 's sake, I implore you to prevent the marriage. 
You can prevent it, if you will." 

"Impossible. I am too far committed." 

"You will not, you mean," cried Barbara, almost 
fiercely. "Mark what I say. If ill comes of the mar- 
riage*— es it wiH— ^the sin will Me at your door." 

"You cannot alarm me,'' rejoined Myrtilla, with 
affected indifference, though not without uneasiness. 
"But let US dismiss the subject, since it is utterly im- 
possible I can interfere ha the matter, even if disposed. 
Is there any chance of efFecting a reconciliation be- 
tween you and Colonel Delacombe?" 

"None," replied Barbara, in a decided tone. 

"I think otherwise. For his son's sake he might 
be content to overlook the past. A material change 
has taken place in his sentiments since he has as- 
cerfaified tiiat you belong to our family. ShaH I read 
70U what he says in his letter to me?" 

"I do not caxe lo V^ax \\." x^xpincd Barbara, 



HILART^ ST, IVES. 22^ 

coldly. "I have wronged him too deeply ever to hope 
for forgiveness. He may forgive me when I am gone 
— but not tiB then. With Alberic it is different. He 
may overlook my errors — may love me — may ponr 
balm into my bniised heart. Heaven grant it! Heaven 
grant it! Oh! with what fear and trembling I look 
forward to om- meeting. Surely he will not cast me 
off! Yet he mayl — he may!" she added, with a look 
of inexpressible agony. "What will happen to me 
then?"^ 

The Bpectacle of her anguish was nnsupportable, 
and Myrtilla prepared to quit the room. 

"Heaven be merciful to you, my unhappy couÄin/' 
she ejaculated, as she went forth. 

Barbara did not notice her departure, so intense 
was her affliction; but at length, becoming aware that 
she was alone, she fiung herseif on her knees, and 
prayed long and fervently. 

Somewhat comforted, she disrobed herseif, -and, 
being completely exhausted, soon sank into a heavy 
slumber. 

A Vision, for it seemed more vivid than a dream, 
arose before her, and she beheld, bathed in gforious 
sunshine, and suironnded by a sea blue as the (ieep 
bitte sky, the lovely Island where she first drew brealh. 

Once more she inhaled an atmosphere laden with 
the scents of tropical flowers and trees. Once more 
she feit the heat of the flaming smi, which, fierce as 
were its beams, seemed to exhilarate her. Once more 
she beard the ceaseless screams and chatter of the 



224 HILARY ST. IVE9. 

parrots mingled with the screams and chatter of the 
negroes. Once more her eye ranged over plains 
stadded with dazzlingly white habitations, long savan- 
nahs fringed with groves of cocoa-trees, and thickets 
of cactus, plantations of sugar-cane and cofifee. Once 
more she gazed on those bays of unequalled beauty 
where she had often sailed, and those blue mountains 
which she had often longed to climb. The whole 
scene was before her, with its fervid atmosphere, its 
fierce sunshine, its tropical beauties, and its delights. 
She seemed to have grown young again — ^to have be- 
come once more an innocent child. Her sad heart 
beat with pleasurable emotions, and she echoed the 
light laugh of her nurse Bonita. Yes, her dear de- 
voted Bonita was alive again, smiling upon her as of 
yore, and bringing her cates and fruits. Suddenly she 
heard a voice. It was her father's. He was calling 
for his dear little Barbara. She flew to meet him. He 
clasped her in his arms, and kissed her brow. But 
his lips seemed icy cold, and with a Start she awoke. 

Was she really awake, or still dreaming? Her 
father seemed to be bending over the couch, but the 
expression of his countenance was changed, and was 
now radiant. As she stretched out her arms the ap- 
parition vanished. 



HILARY ST. IVES. Z2S 



XII. 

Father and Son. 

Alberic Delacombe, as we shall henceforth style 
him, remained for several hours occupied with the 
history of his unhappy mother. 

There was more of the confession than we have 
deemed it necessary to lay before the reader, but the 
latter portion was chiefly explanatory of the motives 
that had led her to quit Hazlemere. An insane desire 
to disappear from the world, of which she was utterly 
weary, had again beset her, and her precautions had 
been so well taken that she might perhaps never have 
been heard of more, if her strong maternal feelings 
had not overpowered her resölution and brought her 
back to Boxgrove. 

Nothing ästonished Alberic Delacombe more than 
to learn, as he did from the concluding lines of his 
mother's sad story, that she belonged to the Ilminster 
family. 

Utterly unprepared for this revelation he could 
scarcely credit it, and any satisfaction he might have 
derived from the discovery was marred by reilections 
that could not fail to occur to his mind. 

For more than an hour after he had finished the 
perusal of the painfol story, he remained !jotid«tva% 

jyüüry S/. Ives. II. ^\ 



i2& HILART ST. IVES. 

upon its details. Greatly shocked, greatly distressed, 
he still pitied his mother. Though unable to absolve 
her, he could not condemn her. 

At last he sought his couch, but excitement banished 
slumber. Rising at an early hour from his sleepless 
pillow, he partook of a slight breakfast^ and telling 
Dame Perrins that he should certainly retum in the 
evening, set oflf for the nearest railway Station, and 
proceeded to town. Restless, over-excited, and uneasy, 
he could not otherwise employ the interval of time. 

On aniving at the Langham Hotel, where he was 
staying, a fresh surprise awaited him. His father had 
just arrived by the night mail from Paris, and Alberic 
immediately repaired to his room. 

TTie colonel, who was still in bed, being a good 
deal fatigued by the journey, told him he had started 
contrary to the injunctions of his physidan, but he feit 
so unaccountably anxious that he would not delay his 
departure. 

"I was resolved to Start, coüte qui coüte," he 
cried; "and I do not think I am the worse for the 
journey. But what news do you bring me? Have you 
Seen Mrs. Sutton?" 

The young man replied by placing in the coloners 
hands the packet containing his mother's history. 

"That will teil you all," he said. "When you have 
read it, summon me." 

And he quitted the room. 

More than an hour elapsed, and receiving no sum- 



HILARY ST. IVES. 227 

mons, Alberic became uneasy, and went up tö bis 
father's room. 

He tapped at the door, but all remained silent 
within, and bis uneasiness increasing, be entered tbe 
room, and found tbe colonel fully dressed and seated 
near a small writing-table. 

Before bim lay tbe manuscript wbicb be bäd been 
reading. His bands were clasped against biä brow, 
and be was so absorbed tbat be appeared quite un- 
consdöus of bis! son's presence, tili Alberic touebed 
bim. He tben uncovered bis face, wbicb was ghastly 
pale. 

Tbe colonel was greatly cbanged- — sbaken and 
enfeebled by illness. His splendid frame was emaciated. 
His bair was blancbed, but bis dark brows and mous- 
tacbes contrasted forcibly witb tbe älmost cädaverous 
bue of bis countenance, as did tbe large cicatrix witb 
wbicb bis cbeek was marked. 

Alberic gazed at bim anxioüsly, alarmed by tbe 
expression of bis countenance, for it was easy to per- 
ceive tbat a terrible struggle was passing witbin. 

Tbe colonel made a vain eflfort to speak, but bis 
accents were broken and unintelligible, and, rising from 
his cbair, be flung bis arms round bis son'ä neck, and 
gave way to an access of emotion. 

Very sbortly, bowever, be recovered, and, as if 
asbamed of tbe display be bad made, endeavöured tö 
assume a cold expression. But bis lips still quivered, 
and tbe voice was busky in wbicb be bade Alberic be 
seated. 



528 HILARY ST. IVES, 

"You have read this confession/* he said, laying 
bis hand upon the papers, but keeping his searcfaing 
eye on his son as he spoke. *'What do jou think 
of it?" 

''Do not ask me to pass judgment on my mother, 
sir," rejoined Alberic. 

<*Well, if you evade my qnestion," rejoined the 
colonel, stemly, "I will put another. What wonld yon 
have me do?" 

"I dare not ask you, — yet I would it were in your 
power to forgive her." 

A flush dyed the coloneFs pale cheek, and his eye 
blazed fiercely. 

"Alberic," he cried, "I would do much for you — 
but not that." 

"Father," rejoined Alberic, "have you read that 
confession attentively ? " 

"Most attentively." 

"And does it not move you?" 

"Deeply." 

"Shall I describe its eflfect on me? Shall I say 
how much those cries, which evidently proceed from a 
broken heart, have touched me? A fatal mistake has 
led to frightful consequences. But there was a time 
when she was guiltless — guiltless, at least, towards you 
— and when all this misery might have been spared. 
I would bring you back to that time." 

" Yes, I am not free from blame," said the colonel 
^*Had I knowTv vjVvo she was I might have acted 
differently." 



HILARY ST. IVESi 22^ 

"The past is irreparable. But I would try to save 
you from further self-reproach. If my unhappy mother 
has not expiated her errors by a life of penitence, she 
has suffered much. By those suflferings — by your 
former love— I would intercede for her." 

"Heaven, I hope, will forgive her," said the coJoneL 
"But do not urge me further now," he added, with a 
movement of impatience. "Hereafter, I may feel dif- 
ferently." 

"Your forgiveness must not be delayed, if it is to 
be of ävail. I am sure she has not long to live ! " 

"Why do you think so?" demanded the golonel. 

"The impression was produced upon me last night. 
I cannot divest myself of it." 

"I do not think I shall live long myself," muttered 
his father. 

"Then I would the more earnestly exhort you to 
forgive her — and without delay," urged his son. "Go 
with me to Boxgrove to-night. You will see her. 
Console her with a word — one word will suffice. You 
will make me happy, and she will die in peace. Listen 
to me, I implore you." 

And he would have flung himself at his father's 
feet, but the colonel checked him. 

"You have conquered, my son," he said. "I will 
do as you desire. I will go with you to-night. I feit 
I had something to do when I could not rest in Paris. 
I now discover what it is." 

"Some good power inspired your return," cried his 



i^JÖ HIL4RY ST. IVES. 

son. "Had you delayed a few days, it might have 
been too late." 

"Trae," ejaculated the colonel, solemnly. 

He then locked up the packet in his travelling case. 
This done, he went down with his son to the coflfeer 
room. 



HILARY ST. IVES, 2^1 



XIII. 

Further Explaoations. 

The colonel ordered breakfast, and Alberic, who 
had eaten nothing since he had left the cottage at an 
early hour, was well disposed to join him, and did far 
more justice to what was set before them than bis 
father did. 

They had just finfshed their repast, when who 
should come into the cofFee-room, which happened to 
be empty at the time, but Mr. Thornton and Mr. Rad- 
cliffe. On seeing them the colonel immediately arose> 
and his son followed his example. 

"God bless my soul, colonel, is that you?" ex- 
claimed Mr. Thornton, hurrying towards him, and shak- 
ing him cordially by the band. "Just returned from 
Paris, I suppose. Charmed to see you back. Can't 
say you're looking very well, though." 

"I am very far from well, my dear friend," replied 
the colonel. "But I trust I shall soon come round." 

He then addressed himself to Mr. Radcliffe, who 
returned his salutation with great stiflfness and formality. 
After a few matter of course observations, the colonel 
drew Alberic forward, and said, 

"I am glad of this opportunity of presenting my 
son to you, gentlemen. You have known hira ker^to-^ 



iii HILARY St. IVES. 

fore as Hilary St. Ives. Pray know him now as Alberic 
Delacombe." 

"I am very glad indeed to know Mr. Alberic Dela- 
combe/' said Mr. Thornton, shaking hands with the 
young man. 

Mr. Radcliffe bowed yery stiffiy, and merely re- 
marked, 

"I have been told that you had adopted Mr. St. 
IveSy colonel, but I was not aware that you had ac- 
corded him your name.'' 

"He bears the name to which he is lawfülly en- 
titled," replied the colonel, hatightily. "He is my 
son, sir." 

"Born in wedlock?" observed Mr. Radclifie, with 
a half sneer. 

"Hear me, Mr. Radcliffe," said the colonel, "and 
let what I say remove all your doubts. He is my son 
by my marriage with the only daughter of Mr. Alberic 
Ilminster, of Jamaica." 

"Is this the fact, colonel?" cried Mr. Radcliffe, 
astounded. . 

"The fact, sir! Do you doubt my word?" 

"Heaven forbid! Only I am so much astonished." 

"No wonder you are astonished," cried Mr. Thom- 
ton. "So am I. Why, Alberic Ilminster, of Jamaica, 
was the younger brother of Sir Umfraville Ilminster of 
Boxgrove, consequently your wife, colonel, must have 
been poor Sir Charles's ürst cousin.' 



>f 



HILARY ST. IVES. 2^ 

"Perfectly correct, sir." 

"I presume she died many years ago?" 

"You are mistaken, sir. She is alive now." 

"Zounds! you have conttived to keep her in the 
background in a very extraordinary mannet, " cried the 
öld gentl^nah, winking at Mr. Raddiffe. "We never 
heard of her." 

"Never tili this moment," echoed the other. 

"Again you are mistaken, sir. Both you aiid Mr. 
Radcli£fe know her> and have seen her repeatedly." 

"Pray explain the riddle," cried Mr. Thomton, 
with a ptizzled look, which, however, changed to a 
cunning smile, as he exclaimed, "Aha! I have it! — 
Mrs. Suttön— eh?" 

Colonel Delacombe nodded assent. 

"Is Mrs. Sutton this young man's mother?" de- 
manded Mr. RadcUffe, eagerly. 

"My wife and Alberic's mother," rejoined the 
colonel. 

The worthy gentleman looked inexpressibly relieved. 

"Would I had known this before," he exclaimed. 

"I always thought Mrs. Sutton a very superior 
woman," observed Mr. Thornton. "But I little dreamed 
who she was." 

As the coffee-rootn began now to fill, they ad- 
journed to a private room, where they could continue 
their conversation without interruption. 

By this time an extraordinary change had become 
manifest in Mr. Radcliffe's demeanour towards Colonel 
Delacombe and his son, especially towards the latter* 



234 HILARY ST. IVES. 

He was now just as friendly with Alberic as he had 
previously been cold and reserved, and strove to make 
amends for the rudeness he had shown the young 
man. More than once he repeated, "Oh, that I had 
known this before!" 

When the topic on which they had been engaged 
was dismissed, Mr. Thornton alluded to the engage- 
ment that had just been entered into between the 
Marquis of Hartlepool and May, and the colonel of 
course ofFered his congratulations to the old gentleman 
and Mr. Radcliffe. 

"I know the Marquis very well," he said. "My 
son and I saw a good deal of him in Rome, and liked 
him. He is not very brilliant, but he is amiable, and 
— a marquis." 

" Yes, yes, it is a splendid match," cried Mr. Thorn- 
ton, rubbing his hands with delight. **We are all an- 
chanted with it — eh?" he added to Mr. Radcliffe, 
who did not, however, respond very warmly to the 
appeal. 

"It is a very important alliance, no doubt," he 
Said; "but I think it has been entered into rather pre- 
cipitately. May has scarcely had sufficient time for 
consideration." 

"Why, what's this? You insisted upon an im- 
mediate decision, and I think you were perfectly right," 
cried Mr. Thornton. "Don't you agree with me, 
colonel?" 

"With most girls there would be none, that I own," 
rejoined the coloneV. ""ä\ä '^^^ BAdcliffe is not an 



HILARY ST. IVES. ^35 

ordinary girl. I did not think she was Ukely to be 
dazzled by rank and splendour." 

"Nor is she," replied Mr. Radcliffe. "I won't say 
she sacrificed her own feelings, but she consented to 
obKge US all — that's the fact." 

The colonel slightly shrugged his Shoulders, but 
made no remark. 

"She cannot fall to be happy, for the marquis will 
let her have her own way in everything," observed Mr. 
Thomton. "We mean to have the marriage celebrated 
with as little delay as possible, and, in fact, it is on 
business connected with it that we have come up to 
town to-day." 

To Alberic the subject under discussion was ex- 
quisitely painfui, and dreading lest he should betray 
his feelings, he got up, and moved to a window. He 
appeared to be watching the carriages in Portland^ 
place, but he scarcely noticed them, when Mr. Radcliffe 
came up to him, and, patting him in a friendly manner 
on the back, said, in a low voice: 

"Ah ! if I had only known as much yesterday as I 
do now, a very different arrangement migbt have been 
made — not so splendid, but more satisfactory ^p me.'* 

"I could not enter into any explanation then, Mr. 
Radcliffe, even if you would have allowed me," rejoined 
Alberic. "And now it is too late." 

Here a slight cough from the colonel recalled Mr, 
Radcliffe. 

"1 must Claim your attention for a few minutes 
more, sir," remarked the colonel. "You are acquainted 



s 



236 HILARY St. IVES. 

with the painfiil and pecuUar circumstances connected 
with iny marriage. You are acquainted with my wife's 
sad Story. You have known her intimately for many 
years, and can jtidge of her condnct during that 
term." 

"Her conduct, ever since I have known her, has 
been irreproachable," said Mr. Radcliflfe, emphatically. 

"Take my testimony to the same effect, colonel," 
cried Mr. Thornton. 

"For my son's sake," pursued the colonel» "I have 
resolved to forget the past. And though others may 
censure me, I do not think you will blame my deter- 
mination." 

"On the contrary, I applaud it/' .cried Mr. Rad- 
clifife. "And I can assure you it will sincerely gratify 
me to convey the joyful iAtelligence to your wife." 

"I thank you, sir," said the cokmel. "But she 
must teceive her forgiveness fix>m no otber Ups than 
mine." 

" Then return with me to Boxgrove to-^ighi, colonel," 
cried Mr. Thornton. "See her without delay," 

"It»was my Intention to run down for that purpose 
with my son," replied the colonel. "I gladly accept 
your invitation. You shall precede tis>" he added to 
Alberic. "Meet your mother as äppointed,' and. teil her 
all that has occurred. That will obviate the neces- 
sity of further explanation, and when I see her, it 
will be with less painfhl emotion either on her part or 



mine." 



HILARY ST. IVES. ZSJ 

In pursuance of the arrangement, Alberic set ofF 
for Boxgrove Park by himself , leaving the colonel to 
the care of his friends. 

The three gentlemen dined at the Langham, and 
did not take their departure tili late in the evening. 



i 



238 HILARY ST. IVES. 



XIV. 

The Thunderstonn. 

Alberic had returned to the cottage. 

He was all impatience to see his mother, and 
convey to her the joyful intelligence of which he was 
the bearer. The minutes seemed to pass slowly, but 
at last the appointed hour drew near, and he was pre- 
paring to set out for the place of rendezvous in the 
park when a violent thunderstorm came on, accom- 
panied by a deluge of rain. 

He waited, therefore, for a few minutes, expecting 
that the fury of the storm would abate, but as no im- 
provement took place, he started, in spite of all Dame 
Perrins's attempts to dissuade him. The good cid 
dame thought he must be mad to venture forth on 
such a night. The rain was Coming down in torrents 
at the time, and the blue forked flashes nearly blinded 
him, but he dashed across the road, and was soon in 
the thick of the chesnut-grove. 

Here an appalling incident occurred. A loud peal 
of thunder rattled overhead like a discharge of artillery. 
A holt feil, and a large tree was Struck within fifty 
yards of him — one of its huge arms shivered, and the 
bark stripped from the side of the trunk. 

Stunned by the dreadful concussion, he was unable 



HILARY ST. IVES. 239 

to move for a few moments, and when his powers 
returned, he almost thought of turfiing back, as it was 
not likely his mother would brave such a stonn — ^but 
he went on. 

Not without great difficulty, and frequent Interrup- 
tion, did he get out of the grove, and then not at the 
point he expected. But for the incessant blaze of 
lightning the night would have been pitch-dark. How- 
ever, he descried the clump of trees, and strode on 
in that direction as rapidly as the slippery turf would 
allow him. 

Still, the thunder rolled awfuUy, the lightning 
flashed, and the hissing rain descended in torrents. 

Suddenly, he underwent a new alarm. Amid the 
silence that followed a loud crash, he heard a piercing 
scream, and feit convinced that it proceeded from his 
mother. 

Was she in danger, or merely alarmed by the 
thunder? Another scream followed, though scarcely 
distinguishable amid the din of the storm. 

Füll of terror, he hurried on, and was nearing the 
group of trees when two rußianly-looking men burst 
forth. The foremost was armed with a heavy bludgeon, 
^ but the other grasped a weapon, which, seen by the 
lightning, looked like a long, sharp-pointed knife, and 
seemed dripping with blood. 

The countenances of the miscreants almost pro- 
claimed the murderous deed on which they had been 
engaged. Alberic recognised them at once as the two 
villains who had robbed and maltreated him on Wootton 



240 HILARY ST. IVES. 

Heath; and coupling thdr presence on the spot with 
the screams he had just heard, fearful apprehensions 
were roused. 

Perhaps they had assassinated his mother. 

Maddened by the thought, with a fierce cry he 
rushed upon them, regardless of any consequences to 
himself. He was whoUy unarmed, but rage suppKed 
him with superhuman strength, and made him a match 
for his antagonists, though both were athletic men. 
Closing with the foremost ruffian, and catching him 
by the throat before he could strike a blow with the 
bludgeon, he hurled him backwards against his com- 
rade. 

In falling the wretch was seriously hurt by a stroke 
of the knife intended for the young man, who was 
thus released from one of his assailants. The next 
moment he was in possession of the bludgeon, and a 
smashing blow with it caused the other ruffian to drop 
his knife. 

Both villains then fled, but the one who was 
wounded had not gone more than a hundred yards 
when he feil to the ground exhausted by loss of bloodi 
There he lay, vowing, with horrible oaths, that he 
would hang the comrade who had abandoned him. 

Alberic, however, thought no more of either of 
them. A half-stifled cry directed him to the spot where 
his unfortunate mother was lying, and he instantly 
flew towards her. The lightning gave a livid hue like 
that of death to her pallid features, her eyes were 



HILARY ST. IVES. 24 t 

closed, and but that she still breathed, or rather gasped 

' for breath, he might have thought that life was extinct. 

But the life-blood was flowing fast from a deep 

-> wound in her side, and he strove in vain to stanch 

the crimson stream. 



Hilary Si. Ives. //. 



\^ 



2^2 HILARY ST. IVES, 



XV. 

A Retrospect. 

How the unhappy Barbara came by her fate must 
now be related. 

The last day she was ever destined to see was 
spent in perfect seclusion. May and Myrtilla passed 
several hours with her, but could not induce her to 
converse with them. Her thoughts were elsewhere. 
She was told that Mr. Malham was in the house, and 
wished to see her, but she declined. She also refused 
to see Mrs. Radcliffe, alleging that she was not equal 
to an interview with any one. 

"Beg your mother to excuse me," she said toMay. 
"If all is well I will see her to-morrow. Pray let me 
be undisturbed to-day." 

It was evident that she had not been able to 
conquer her antipathy to her former mistress. But her 
manner towardsMay was most tender and affectionate, 
and when they.^ were alone together she expressed a 
truly maternal solicitude for her happiness. 

"I wish I could persuade myself that the engage- 
ment you have entered into will make you happy," 
she said. "But I know you can never give the marquis 
your heart. On nö account, however, break ofF the 
engagement, unless your father permits you to do so. 
Teil him all, aivd be gvjiÄfed b^ Vvvs counsel. The sole 



HILARY ST. IVES. ^43 

desire of my life would have been gratified if you 
could have been united to Alberic, but fate seems 
against it, and we must bow to its decrees. Whatever 
betide, may you be happy!" 

"The marquis has been here all day," said May; 
"and he must be blind indeed if he does not perceive 
that I dislike him." 

Barbara regarded her compassionately. 

"You have been persuaded to take a foolish step, 
my dear child," she said. "But your father will never 
allow you to be sacrificed if you teil him the tnith. 
Hide nothing from him." 

"He is gone to London with grandpapa, or I would 
have spoken to him to-day. I will never wed the 
marquis." 

After this the unhappy woman begged to be left 
entirely to herseif for a few hours. 

How she passed the time was not known, but when 
May entered the room she found her on her knees, 
and her eyes were red with weeping. However, she 
was perfectly calm, and almost cheerful, and continued 
so until eveniilg. But as the hour approached when 
ishe was to meet her son, she became nervously ex- 
cited. 

As there were indications of the terrible storm we 
have described, her companions endeavoured to dis- 
«uade her from going forth, but she would not be 
turned from her purpose. '^ 

May and Myrtilla went with her to the library- 
They took no lights, and as they hastily traversed the 



^44 Hn.ARY ST. IVES. 

I 

gallery, a dazzlingly vivid flash momentarily iUumined ^ 
the long line of portraits, while a clap of thunder shook 
tho mansion. 

"I must meet Alberic," she cried. "I most leam 
my fate." 

Fearful of being detained, she resolved to set out | 
at once. 

"Do not go, 1 beseech you," cried May, greatly 
terrified. "Stop tili the storm has passed." 

But Barbara hurried on. 

They had descended the great staircase, and reached 
the library without being perceived. Barbara paused 
for a moment only to strain May to her bosom, and 
whisper a word in her ear. 

Just as the window was opened another vivid flash 
of lightning drove them back, and almost blinded 
them. 

When the others regained their sight Barbara was 
gone. But they beheld her upon the terrace, speeding 
to her destination, unappalled by the terrors of the 
storm. 

"Heaven preserve her!" ejaculated May, fer- 
vently. 

Heaven's support was needed by the unhappy 
woman. Her hour had well-nigh come. 

She had gained the park, and though the storm 
had increased in violence, though the rain beat against 
her brow, and the lightning played arotind her, she 
went on. 



HILAJIY ST. IVES, 2^$ 

"I shall find my son tbere," she exclaimed. "He 
will not fail me." 

She did not find him. But she found others whom 
she did not expect. 

As she entered the woody ring, two savage-looking 
men who had watched her approach, as shown by the 
lightning, burst upon her. One of them seized her 
roughly by the arm to prevent her flight, and, brandish- 
ing a knife, threatened her with instant death if she 
nttered a cry. 

"We knew you would come, in spite of the storm," 
cried the niffian, in a jeering tone. 

The unfortunate woman glanced around, vainly 
hoping that her son would appear. 

"Ay, you may look round, madam," cried her cap- 
tor. "You'll See nothin' on him to-night." 

"You lie, villain!" she exclaimed. "My son will 
rescue me." 

"Don't be too sure of that, madam. What money 
have you got about you?" 

"None. I have neither money nor valuables. Re- 
lease me at once, ruffian." 

Both men laughed derisively. 

" We ain't a-goin' to part with you like that, madam," 
Said the other robber. "You ought to have known 
better than to come out on an errand like this, with- 
out purse, or pocket-book, or rings. But since youVe 
been so careless, you must come along wi' us, and I'd 
recommend you to come quietly." 



24^ HILARY ST. IVES. 

''I will not stir from this spot," she cried, re- 
solutely. 

They seized her and attempted to drag her off, but 
she caught hold of the branch of a tree, and screamed 
kmdly for hdp. 

"Hold your tongue!" cried one of the man 
with a terrible imprecation, "or I'U make you keep 
silence." 

Bat she struggled to get free, and continued her 
ontcries , hoping they would reach the ears of her son. 
But for the rattling of the thunder he would have heard 
them. 

The struggle continued for a minute longer. Then 
giving utterance to a sharper cry, she feil back into 
the arms of one of her assailants. 

"Why, thou'st killed her, Seth Cooper!" cried this 
ruffian, aghast at the dreadfiil deed. 

"She forced me to do it, curse her!" cried Seth. 

They were debating what should be done, when, 
to their great alarm, they became aware of Alberic's 
approach, and laying down the body of their still 
breathing victim, they rushed to meet him. The result 
has been already narrated. 



HILARY ST. IVES. ^47 



XVI. 

How Barbara was brought back to Boxgrove. 

Alberic raised the dying woman tenderly, and 
subduing the emotion that threatened to overpower 
bim, Said, 

"Do you not know me, mother? It is youf 
son." 

The words seemed to recal her to life. 

With a cry of delight she flung her arms round his 
neck, and kissed him repeatedly. 

But the eifort was too great. Her hold relaxed. 
Her head dropped, and a shiver passed through her 
frame , prelusive of death. 

"Speak to me, dear mother! speak to me!" cried 
Alberic, greatly alarmed. 

"You have read my history. Yöu know all?" she 
rejoined faintly. 

"AU." 

"And you forgive me?" she asked, with trembling 
eagemess. 

"Dearest mother, I have nothing to forgive. But 
I bring you my father's forgiveness." 

"Is he here?" she cried. "Bring him to me." 

"Alas, I cannot!" rejoined her son. "He is on 
his way to you." 

"But he will not arrive in time. I knew we should 



248 HILARY ST. IVES. 

never meet again on earth. Bid him farewell for me, 
and say " 

Here her voice became inaudible. 

Alberic placed his ear close to her Ups, but could 
not catch the words. Her eyes, however, wäre 
fixed upon him, and did not quit him tili they grew 
dim. 

Another shudder, and all was over. 

He gave way to no unavailing transports of grief, 
but continued to hold her in his arms and gaze at her 
rigid features, which, seen by the lightning, sometimes 
looked as if life had returned tothem. 

From this State he was roused by shouts pro- 
ceeding from some men who had descried him from 
another part of the park, and were hurrying towards 
him. 

Laying down the body, he answered their shouts, 
and the men soon afterwards Coming up proved to be 
Frank Mowatt, the head gamekeeper, and two of his 
subordinates. All three had guns, and were attended 
by a couple of large hounds, and the latter began to 
growl as they approached the scene of the murder. 

"Why, what's this?" cried Mowatt, horrified by the 
spectacle that met his gaze. "Who has done the 
foul deed? Thou?" he added, levelling his gun at 
Alberic. 

"Keep your shot for the right man," rejoined the 
other, stetnly. "One of the assassins is not far off, 
and the other must be in the park, and may be cap- 
tured if you don't waste time." 



HILARY ST. rVES. 249 

His manner caused the keeper to lower his gun, 
while instant proof of the truth of the assertion was 
afForded by the hounds, who, having discovered the 
fallen wretch, were threatening to worry him, and had 
already given him a taste of their sharp fangs. The 
two underkeepers hurried to the spot, called oflf the 
dogs, and secured the terrified caitifF. 

"Leave this villain to our Charge," cried Alberic, 
who came up the next moment with Mowatt, "and go 
in search of his accomplice. You cannot fail to track 
him with these hounds." 

"Ay, they're on his trail already," rejoined one of 
the keepers. **Must we go, Master Mowatt?" 

"Ay, to be sure, Paul, and bring him back dead or 
alive," rejoined the head-keeper. "Fll take care of 
this chap, and shoot him if he gives any trouble." 

"Sarve him right, too," cried Paul, as he hurried 
after his mate. 

The hounds had evidently got on the scent, and 
led them towards the thicket at the bottom of the 
park. 

While Alberic and Mowatt were considering what 
it would the best to do under the circumstances, the 
head-keeper thought he could discover some persons 
in the neighbourhood of the mansion, and in order to 
attract their attention, he not only shouted lustily, but 
fired of one of the barreis of his gun. 

The Signal was quickly attended to. The persons 
whom the keeper had seen were some of the men- 
servants, who had been sent by May and Lady Rich- 



\ 



Z$0 HILARY ST. IVES. 

borough to look for Mrs. Sutton. With them was Mr. 
Malham, the surgeon, who chanced to be at the house 
at the time. 

Gfuided by the shouts and the report of the gnn, 
the whole party were soon on the spot, and fiUed with 
consternation on learning the dreadful occurrence. 
Mr. Malham was profoundly affected. A glance at the 
body showed him that life was extinct, but still he 
knelt down to examine the wound. 

By his direction a hurdle was brought, and on it 
was carefuUy laid the body, which he covered with his 
own ample cloak. Alberic was too much overcome to 
take part in the melancholy proceedings, and remained 
looking sadly on, with his arms folded upon his 
breast. 

The little procession then moved slowly towards 
the mansion, the rear being broaght up by Frank 
Mowatt and two' grooms, who had Charge of the 
prisoner. 

Here we mention that Seth Cooper was captored 
by the two keepers in the thicket, and being taken by 
them to the hall, was lodged with his partner in guilt 
in an outbuilding until the arrival of the officers. 

Meanwhile, Colonel Delacombe had arrived at Box- 
grove, and was still in the entrance-hall with Mr. Rad- 
cliffe and Mr. Thornton. They had just been joined 
by May and Mrs. Woodcot, when the principal door 
was thrown open, and Mr. Malham came in, followed 
by the bearers with their ghastly burden. Behind them 
appeared Alberic. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 251 

Covered from head to foot by the cloak, as with a 
pall, the body was laid by the bearers on an antique 
carved oak table in the centre of the hall, above which 
hung a lamp. 

As the body was brought in, Oswald came forth 
from the drawing-room , which opened upon the en- 
trance-hall, and was immediately foUowed by Mrs. 
Radcliflfe, Myrtilla, and the Marquis of Hartlepool. 

Astonishment and horror kept the throng of spec- 
tators mute, but the climax was reached when Colonel 
Delacombe stepped forward and drew aside the cloak 
that shrouded the pallid features of his wife. 

Uttering a sharp cry, he would have fallen to the 
groundy if he had not been caught by the surgeon. 



252 HILARY ST. FVES. 



XVII. 

An eventful Evening. 

There months had elapsed. 

The ill-fated Barbara had found a resting-place in 
the faitiily vault of the Ilminsters, and her murderers 
had paid the penalty of their crime. 

Colonel Delacombe was still at Boxgrove. The 
teirible shock he had undergone had well-nigh proved 
fatal. At last he rallied, but was for several weeks 
confined to his room. 

A large State Chamber was assigned him by Mr. 
Thornton, fitted up with antique fumiture, and having 
bay Windows that afforded him a view of the gardens 
and the park. There he sat in an easy chair, looking 
very pale, very thin, very feeble, but still very hand- 
some; read the newspapers or a novel; dictated his 
letters to his son, or chatted with his visitors, of whom 
he had plenty. 

For more than a month Alberic had been in con- 
stant attendance upon his sire, but since then he had 
been frequently in town. Mr. Thornton, who, as we 
know, played the part of host at Boxgrove, made him 
feel quite at home, and he went and came just as he 
liked. 

May's engagement to the Marquis of Hartlepool 



HILARY ST. IVES. 253 

Still subsisted. Owing to recent events the marriage 
had been postponed— indefinitely, it seemed, for no 
entreaties on the part of the marquis or Lady Rich- 
borough could induce the young lady to fix the day. 
Thoroughly impressed with the importance of the al- 
liance, Mrs. Radcliffe prevented any positive rupture, 
though she could not bring about the consummation 
she desired. Mr. Radcliffe was secretly averse to the 
matchy but would not withdraw the promise he had 
given to the marquis. 

At length, the colonel came down-stairs, and a 
few drives in the open carriage completely restored 
him. A dinner-party was given to celebrate his re- 
covery. It was a tolerably large party, but not at all 
formal, and comprised the Rev. Nisbet Jones and Mrs. 
Jones, Mrs. Clifford and her fair daughter Gwendoline, 
Mr. Brooke of Sandhills and his daughter Jessie, two 
or three young men, and most important of all, 
though we have placed him last in the Ust, the Marquis 
of Hartlepool. The marquis was staying at the time 
at Hazlemere. The members of the family consisted 
of Oswald and his mother, the Radcliffes, and, of 
course, Mr. Thornton, who did the honours for his 
grand-daughter. 

May did not always dine with her guests — perhaps 
we ought to call them grandpapa's guests — but she 
favoured them on this occasion. Lady Richborough 
was likewise present, and Alberic. 

The dinner was excellent, as the dinners always 
were at Boxgrove, and passed off very pleasantly. 



* £54 hilarV st. ives. 

Everybody was delighted to see Golonel Delacombe 
down-stairs again , and the colonel himself was in very 
good spirits, and ventured upon a glass of Champagne, 
which he had not tasted since his illness. 

But the Marquis of Hartlepool was really the life 
of the party. Placed between May and Myrtilla, he 
not only managed to amuse them both by his plea- 
sant sallies, but contributed materially to the general 
gaiety. 

After dinner, the ladies stroUed out into the garden 
to enjoy the delicious summer evening, and the young 
men, who did not care for the claret and still less for 
the old port, so dear to Mr. Thornton and Mr. Rad- 
cliffe, sallied forth to join them. Alberic, however, 
soon separated himself from the merry party on the 
lawn, and withdrew to a more secluded part of the 
garden. He was seated on a bench near a bosquet, 
wrapped in thought, when he was roused from his 
reverie by May. 

"I have come to look for you," she said. "You 
must not desert us thus." 

"I shall not contribute to your amusement," he 
replied in a melancholy voice. "I am out of ^irits 
this evening, and cannot for the life of me shake off 
my despondency." 

"I thought you looked extremely duU at dinner," 
she rejoined, "and wondered what was the matter. 
But come with me. We will soon chase away your 
g-loom." 



HILARY ST. IVES. 255 

"Grant me a few moments," he cried, detaining 
her. "I have something to say to you." 

"What is it?" she asked, taking a seat beside 
him. 

"You will not be surprised at my sadness when I 
teil you that I have come to the resolution of bidding 
you farewell. To-morrow I shall leave Boxgrove — 
not to return. You cannot be unaware of the hope- 
less passion that oonsumes me. I have made every 
eflfort to conquer it — but in vain. Nothing is left me 
but to withdraw from the influence of an attraction 
that I find irresistible. I ought to have fled long ago,» 
but I could not tear myself away. I jshall suffer ten 
times more from the Separation, which must now takei 
place, tban I should have done at an earlier period, 
I must, therefore, go while I have strength enough for 
the effort." 

"No, Alberic," she replied. "I will not allow you 
to depart." 

"You are very cruel. If you knew the torture I 
endure you would not bid me prolong it. Blissful as 
it is to be near you, the ever-recurring thought that I 
must lose you poisons my happiness, while the con- 
viction that you will soon become the bride of another 
almost drives me mad." 

"You must bear the torture a little longer." 

"To what end?" he cried, bitterly. "There can 
be no hope for me. You are plighted to the marquis." 

"He will give me back my word." 



256 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"Do not think it. He is resolved to make you 
his bride. Except your father, all the rest of your 
family, including Lady Richborough, are most aiudous 
for the marriage. You have made a rash promise, 
and must perforce keep it." 

"But I won't keep it!" exclaimed May, resolutely. 

"Your father considers himself bound by his pro- 
mise. The Obligation is equally great on you." 

"I will speak to the marquis to-night. I will 
appeal to his good feelings — ^to his generosity, to 
liberate me from a promise that was in reality extorted 
from me." 

As she arose, two persons unexpectedly appeared 
before her. 

The two persons were the marquis and MyrtiUa. 

"When you have confidential matters to discuss 
you should not talk quite so loud," observed the 
marquis. "Lady Richborough and I have unwittingly 
heard all that has passed, and of course I am aware 
of the appeal you intended to make to me. On one 
condition, and one only will I release you from your 
promise." 

"What is the condition?" cried May, eagerly. 

"I do not think you will consider it very hard," 
he rejoined, with a smile. "The condition I exact is 
that you bestow the band which you have promised 
to me on my friend, Alberic Delacombe. You have 
already, it appears, given him your heart." 

Nothing could equal the astonishment of his hearers. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 257 

"My dear marquis!" exclaimed Alberic, Irans- 
ported with delight. "This generosity " 

"Is qmte «nexpecfed, I know. But you are rather 
mistaken in me. I am not altogether devoid of grati- 
tude. Remember that you laid me under an everlast- 
ing Obligation by saving my life at Rome. I am now 
able in part to requite it.'* 

"You have requited it a thousand fold, my dear 
marquis," cried Alberic. "You have made me the 
happiest of men — that is, if the condition is accepted," 
he added to May. 

"Very little doubt about that," said the marquis. 
"Still, to make sure, let us have a precise answer." 

"There is my band," cried May, giving it to Al- 
beric, who pressed it to bis lips. 

"So the gipsy's prophecy will be fulfilled after all,'* 
said Myrtilla. "You recollect what she told you at 
Ascot. But what will papa and mamma say to this 
sudden transfer of their daughter without Consulting 
them? Above all, what will grandpapa say? I, too, 
have never been consulted, and I do not at all like 
losing the dear marquis." 

"You may still keep him if you choose," said the 
marquis. 

"Still keep him?" 

"Yes. You promised to help me to a wife, and 
may still do so, if you are so inclined." 

"Take care what you say, marquis," rejoined 

miary St. Ives. II. 17 



% 



■^....- 



258 HILARY ST. IVES. 

Myrtilla. **I might constnie that pretty speech into an 
offer." 

'^It is so meant. And I here, in piain terms, re* 
peat it." 



^^ 



mLARY ST. IVES. 2^9 



XVIII. 

Sequel to the previous Chapter. 

By this time the elderly gentlemen, who had re- 
mained rather longer over their wine than their Juniors, 
had come forth upon the lawn, where the assemblage 
was broken up into little groups. Mr. Radcliffe and 
Mr. Thornton were discussing some political questions 
with the vicar, and Colonel Delacombe was expatiat- 
ing on the beauty of the evening to Mrs. Radcliflfe, 
when the marquis and the others were seen approach- 
ing. 

"The marquis looks as if he had something to com- 
municate/' remarked the colonel. **I shouldn't wonder 
if the wedding-day were fixed." 

"High time it should be," replied Mrs. Radcliffe. 
"I am quite tired of so much delay." 

"Mrs. Radcliffe," said the marquis, stepping for- 
ward before the others, "I have to inform you that 
within the last few minutes a slight change has taken 
place in my arrangements with your daughter." 

"A change!*' exclaimed the lady. "You alarm me, 
marquis." 

"No occasion for alarm, my dear madam," he re- 
joined, reassuring her with a smile. "But perhaps 
your husband ought to hear my communication." 

17* 



1 






260 HILARY ST. rSHES. 

"Mr. Radcliffe, your presence is required," cried 
the colonel. 

**And mine, too, I suppose," said Mr. Thornton, 
whose curiosity was aroused. 

"Shall I retire, marqms?" asked the colonel. 

"On no account," replied the other. "You are 
an interested party. Mr. Radcliffe, " he pursued, ad- 
dressing that gentleman, who had come up with Mr. 
Thornton, "I will State to you in as few words as pos- 
sible what I have to say. I cannot have the honour of 
becoming your son-in-lawl" 

"Oh! marquis, I did not expect this," almost 
screamed Mrs. Radcliffe. 

"I presume, marquis, that you have some reasons 
for your withdrawal?" said Mr. Radcliffe, who did not 
look as discomposed as his wife. 

"My reasons are not to be disputed," replied the 
marquis. "I have just discovered that your daughter 
entertains a preference for my friend, Alberic Dela- 
combe, and I have therefore at once retired in his 
favour. You cannot oblige me more than by bestow- 
ing her band üpon him." 

"My lord marquis," said Mr. Radcliffe, much moved, 
"I cannot sufficiently express my admiration of your 
conduct. It is worthy of you." 

"Then you consent?" cried the marquis. 

"What says Colonel Delacombe?" asked Mr. Rad- 
cliffe. * 

"Nothing would please me more," he rejoined, 
"I have long been aware of Alberic's attachment to 



HILAJIY SX. IVES. 201 

your daught^r, and discouraged it because I considered 
it hopeless; but now that there is no obstacle I will 
ask your consent, and that of Mrs. Radcliife, to the 
match." 

"You have mine, colonel," replied Mr. Radcliffe. 

"Am I dreaming?" cried Mrs. Radcliffe. 

"No, my dear madam," repKed the marquis, laugh- 
ing; "both you and I have been dreaming for some 
time, but we are perfectly awake now. Make your 
daughter happy." 

"Must I consent?" said Mrs. Radcliffe, appealing 
to Mr. Thornton." 

"To be sure," replied the old gentleman. "Since 
things have taken this turn we must all consent." 

The matter being thus satisfactorily settled, the 
young couple came forward and received the general 
felicitations of the assemblage. 

"What a charming scene!" observed Lady Rieh- 
borough to the marquis. 

"Well, you have acted admirably, marquis," said 
the colonel, coming up. "But though my son is the 
gainer, I can't help feeling sorry for you." 

"Spare your pity, my dear colonel. I am not so 
unlucky as you suppose. I have rather gained than 
lost, as I am sure you will admit when I inform you 
that Lady Richborough has promised me her band." 

"Then, indeed, you are to be envied, marquis, and 
I oflfer you my sincere congratulations. I almost 
wonder that her ladyship was not your original choice," 



262 HILARY ST. IVES. 

"The fault is Myrtilla's, not mine," said the 
marquis. 

"How is the fault mine?" she asked. 

"ELave you not told me scores of times that you 
would never marry again?" 

"Not since you were Marquis of Hartlepool. That 
makes all the diflference. As a younger brother you 
know " 

"Predsely. I ought to have taken that into con- 
sideration. But I didn't. However, it's all right now." 

Great was the astonishment of the assemblage when 
it was buzzed about that an engagement had just beeu 
entered into between the marquis and Lady Rich- 
borough, and a good deal of merriment was excited 
among the young people, who hardly knew whether to 
treat the matter seriously or not. When convinced of 
the truth of the announcement, they thought that the 
whole thing must have been planned, and indeed it 
looked like it. 

When Colonel Delacombe looked for his son he 
had disappeared. May also was gone. They had 
wandered together towards the most secluded part of 
the garden, where they could pour out their thoughts 
without restraint, and interchange their vows. . But the 
boundless love that each feit for the other found but 
feeble and inadequate expression in words. Alberic 
could only teil May that he loved her better than life 
^ — that he had always loved her — and should never 
cease to love her, while life lasted. And with this as- 
furance she was content.' 



[ 









HILARY ST. IVES. 265 

. Nothing half so sentimental passed between the 
Marquis of Hartlepool and Lady Richborough. They 
had a long t6te-ä-t^te, it is true, but they did not talk 
of love. The marquis made no protestations of undy- 
ing affection, nor did he indulge in common-places of 
any kind which he knew very well she would not care 
to hear; but he spoke about his plans for the autumn, 
for the winter, and for the spring, and quite satisfied 
her that it would be a very charming thing to be Mar- 
chioness of Hartlepool. 

It is almost needless to say that the change that 
had occurred was a great disappointment to Mrs. Rad- 
cliffe and Mr. Thomton. They had looked forward to 
the alliance which was to reflect so much splendour 
upon themselves as a matter of certainty, and now that 
there was an end of it, their yanity underwent a severe 
shock. There was some slight consolation in reflecting 
that the marquis was not altogether lost, since Myrtilla 
had secured him. 

However, before the end of the evening the old 
gentleman's thoughts were turned into another Channel. 
Almost all the Company had retumed to the drawing* 
room, where music was going on, when Mrs. Woodcot 
asked for a song from Jessie Brooke, who had a charm- 
ing voice. The young lady, however, was still on the 
terrace with Oswald. Mr. Brooke called his daughter 
in, but when she came, she begged Mrs. RadclifFe to 
excuse her from singing, pleading a slight cold. Mr. 
Thornton had some suspicions of the truth, and they 



./ 



x' -rt^r 



264 HILARY ST. IVES. 

were soon confirmed by Oswald, who took him aside, 
and Said: 

"Well, sir, IVe been and done it." 

"Been and done what?" 

" Folio wed your advice, sir. You told me to pro- 
pose to Jessie Brooke." 

"I don't recoUect telling you so." 

"Yes, sir, you did. You told me she would ac- 
cept me, and you were right. You added — and I 
thought it extremely considerate on your part — that you 
would make a handsome settlement upon her, and a 
liberal allowance to me. I hope you'U be as good as 
your Word." 

"Well, I suppose I must have made the promise, 
though Fve quite forgotten it," replied the old gen- 
tleman, with a comical look that quite satisfied his 
grandson. "TU go and talk the matter over with Mr. 
Brooke, and ascertain what he'll do." 

"You are the best of granddads," cried the grate- 
ful youth. 

This is the last event we have to record of that 
eventful evening, when an engagement was no soöner 
broken off thah two others were formed, and a t^d 
entered into immediately afterwards. "^ 



'J^.-^ 



HILARY ST. IVES* 265 



XIX. 

How thc Gipsy's Prophecy was fulfilled. 

Never sure was man happier than Alberic. Fortune, 
that so long had frowned upon him, had now bestowed 
her choicest favours — had given him a name, an ex- 
cellent social position, and for a bride, the loveliest 
and wealthiest girl in the connty. Not a wish was 
ungratified. 

And May was just as happy. We have shown that 
she did not care for rank and splendour, and had she 
been condemned to such a life would have been 
wretched. Even. Mrs. Radcliflfe and Mr. Thornton 
came to this conclusion after they had got over their 
iirst disappointment, and feit that things had been 
much better ordered by fate than they could have 
ordered them. 

As to Colonel Delacombe, he was almost as happy 
^ his son. If he cduld have selected a wife for Alberic 
he would have chosen May, but he deemed the prize 
^unattainable. 

Let US here State that the marquis had no reaspn 
%o regret that he had yielded to his generous impulses. 
Ith his tastes and with his mode of existence, it is 
irfectly clear that May would not have suited him, 
id would very soon have been neglected and un- 



\ 



r 



266 HTT..ARY ST. IVES. 

happy. Bat Myrtilla had every qualification for the 
brilliant pari which she was called upon to play. As 
Marchioness of Harttepool she speedily eclipsed all 
her competitors in the world of fashion, and reached 
the pinnacle of her ambition, 

Nor has she been dethroned. No parties so splendid, 
so attractive, as hers. Her toilettes are perfection — 
her equipages the most elegant in town, Wherever 
she appears, the haughty marchioness dazzles all be- 
holders. Her süperb beauty excites universal admira- 
tion. Yet with all her pride she is populär, for she is 
good-natured, and cau be condescending when she 
pleases. Not without reason is the marquis proud of 
her. Not without reason does he congratulate himself 
on his choice of a consort. If he has ennobled her, 
she has materially heightened his influence and im- 
portance. 

It only remains to conduct Alberic and May to the 
altar. Preparations for the marriage were made as 
expeditiously as possible, and cäused a busy time both 
at Boxgrove and Hazlemere. Some little delay oc- 
curred, since it was arranged that the marriage of Os- 
wald with Jessie Brooke should take place on the saine 
day. 

At last, however, all preUminary arrangements were 
completed. The Settlements were made, and were 
entirely satisfactory to those principally concemed. Mr. 
Thomton behaved very liberally to his grandson, and 
settled upon the young lady, whom Oswald had chosen, 
a sum equal to that given her by her father. 



HILARY ST. IVES. 267 

The two marriages were celebrated, under the most 
auspicious circumstances, at Wootton Church — the 
ceremonies being performed by the vlcar. 

Bright sunshine gladdened the hearts of those col- 
lected in the precincts of the ancient fabric to witness 
the arrival of the wedding parties. All the bridesmaids 
were extremely pretty, and charmingly dressed, and 
Jessie Brooke looked remarkably well, but an irre- 
pressible murmur of admiration burst from the throng 
as May stepped from the carriage, and was led by her 
father towards the antique porch, along a path strewn 
with flowers. 

How exquisitely beautiful she looked in her bridal 
attire! And her beauty was of a kirid to produce the 
greatest efFect upon those who pressed forward to gaze 
upon her. They were charmed by the sweetness of 
her looks, as well as by her rare loveliness. Audible 
wishes for her happiness in her married liffe accom- 
panied her in her progress. 

Amid these expressions of heartfelt interest, which 
could not fail to move her, she entered the sacred 
building, and, still led by her father, passed along the 
crowded aisle — crowded with kindly faces — to the altar, 
where a large assemblage was already coUected. 

A wedding in a country church is always a pretty 
sight, if there is any interest in the bridegroom and 
bride, but the double wedding we are now describing 
formed one of the prettiest pictures imaginable. 

No handsomer couple than Alberic and May ever 
knelt before the altar; and our stalwart friend Oswald 



x,.-y^ 



^^^ HILARY ST. IVBS. 



and hia fair young bride were also noticeable for their 
good looks. A bevy of as lovely bridesmaids as could 
well be brought together surrounded them. Among the 
pnncipal ügtires was Mr. Raddiffe, who stood beside 
bis daughter, and who se^ed much affected. Near 
jum was Mrs. Radcliffe. On the otber side were Mrs. 
^oodcot and Mr. Thomton. But by far the most 
strüäi^ng personage in the group was Coloiael Dela- 
combe,Xwhose tall, thin, militaiy Üguie towered above 
those aroni&d him. 

As the newly^iKqarried couples returned to the car- 
riages that were waitilW for them at the gates, amid 
the joyous peaUng of theT)eft«is^ there was quite a tumult 
in the churchyard. Alberic theri^v. ^^nie in for his share 
of admiration, and ev^rybody declär^Qd ^hat he was 
worthy of his lovely bride. *^ . 

There were.great festivities that day at Hazl»*.^^^^ 
The wedding-breakfast was splendid, the long table» ^ 
being decorated with flowers and choicest fruit. There 

iras the usual speech-making, by far the best speech 

►eing made by the worthy vicar. 

After the repast, a couple of carriages, each having 
four horseSy drew up near the hall-door. In the fore- 
most Alberic and his bride set out for Tunbridge Wells, 
en route for Como; while the other conveyed Oswald 
and his bride to Dorking, whence they intended to 
proceed to Scotland. 

After a delicious sojourn of a couple of months at 
Bellagio, Alberic and his wife returned to Boxgrove. 



^-..^ 



HILARY ST. IVES. 269 

Though they had nev6r tired of the scenery of the 
lovely Itallan lake, they were not sorry to get back. 



f Boxgrove had charms for them that no other place 
I could offer, and they would not quit it again during 

the ensuing winter or spring, though tempted by re- 
^> peated invitations froin the Marquis and Marchioness 

of Hartlepool. 



•^6 reOP46v,> . 



270 HILARY ST. IVES. 



L'ENVOY. 



LiTTLE more has to be recorded. 

The Radcliifes still reside at Hazlemere, which is 
kept up as well as ever. Mr. RadclifFe is not quite so 
active as he u^ed tcy be,.but otherwise in good case. 
MrSrf Radcliife still describes herseif as an invalid. 

Mrs. Woodcot ha6 left Boxgrove, and resides with 
Oswald and his wife in .the* neighbourhood of Chester, 
where grandpäpa has botight them a very pretty place. 

Mir. .Thornton himself, who is still very hearty, and 
can get through a bottle öf port after dinner without 
ifeeling any inconvenience from it next moming, passes 
his time between Hazlemere and Boxgrove, thoügh he 
sometimes pays a visit to his grandson. 

Colonel Delacombe, we regret to say, is gone. He 
died in India, whither he had returned. 

The most important change remains to be mentioned. 
By the influenae of the Marquis of Hartlepool, and in 
consideration of the large landed property he has derived 
by his marriage, our fortunate hero has been elevated 
to the dignity of a baronet, and has assumed the name 



^ 



HILARY ST. IVES. 2jl 

of the ancient family to which he belongs on his mother's 
side. He is now Sir Alberic Delacombe Ilminstek, 
Baxt., of Boxgrove. 



THE END. 






F.»- 



PRINTINO OFFICE OF THE PUBLISHEB. 



Fl 

i * 



<*. 



IM, 









la 



:^;rf 



■.t;u:i 



.'xa 






r<JS 






■>8 






Tu? 



'dvx< 



-.JÖ 





